                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE MARKET RISK PREMIUM FOR UNSECURED CONSUMER CREDIT RISK

                                     Matthias Fleckenstein
                                     Francis A. Longstaff

                                      Working Paper 28029
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28029


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




Matthias Fleckenstein is with the University of Delaware. Francis A. Longstaff is with the UCLA
Anderson School and the NBER. We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Adair
Morse, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Antoinette Schoar. All errors are our responsibility. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Market Risk Premium for Unsecured Consumer Credit Risk
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 28029
October 2020
JEL No. G12,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

We use the prices of credit card asset-backed securities to study the market risk premium
associated with unsecured consumer credit risk. The consumer credit risk premium has
historically been comparable to high yield corporate bond spreads, but has increased dramatically
since the financial crisis. We find evidence that this increase is primarily due to balance-sheet
costs imposed by recent changes in regulatory capital requirements which have effectively
placed credit card securitizations back onto issuer balance sheets. These changes in capital
regulation may have added hundreds of basis points to the cost of unsecured household credit.


Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                            1. INTRODUCTION


Why is the cost of unsecured household borrowing so high? For example, the
effective annual rate for consumer credit card debt--which represents one of the
largest components of unsecured household debt--averaged nearly 20 percent
over the past 20 years.1 The widely-held industry view is that these high rates
simply reflect the large potential credit losses associated with unsecured consumer
credit. In reality, however, actual credit card charge-off rates averaged less than
six percent over the same period. Thus, expected credit losses are unlikely to
fully explain the high cost of unsecured consumer debt.
     Could these high borrowing rates then be at least partially due to the pres-
ence of a large market risk premium for unsecured consumer credit risk? The
challenge in answering this question is that relatively little is known about the
size and nature of household credit risk premia. One reason for this is that con-
sumer lending typically occurs in private transactions between households and
financial institutions. Thus, market prices of consumer debt contracts are gener-
ally not directly observable in the secondary capital markets, making it difficult
to measure how financial markets value unsecured consumer credit risk.
     The key innovation of this paper is the use of market prices of credit card
asset-backed securities (ABS) to measure the risk premium for unsecured con-
sumer credit card risk. An important advantage of our approach is that the
prices of credit card securitizations are determined purely by the actual credit
risk of consumer cash flows faced by secondary market participants. This aspect
allows us to directly identify the consumer credit risk premium.2
1
 The effective credit card APR (including both fees and card interest) averaged
19.37 percent from 2000­2020 (for the subset of issuers with available data).
Recently, however, the effective APR has been increasing. For example, the
effective APR averaged 20.82 percent in 2018, and 21.75 percent in 2019. For
other examples of the high cost of unsecured household borrowing, see Morse
(2011) and Melzer (2011).
2
 In contrast, non-price-based approaches such as attempting to infer the risk
premium from the accounting margin between credit card and charge-off rates
can confound the risk premium with other factors such as the economic rents
earned by lenders or asymmetries in the bargaining power of consumers and
lenders.

                                        1
     We find that the market incorporates a substantial risk premium into the
prices of credit card ABS. In particular, the difference between the implied risk-
neutral charge-off rate and the actual charge-off rate averages 522 basis points
during the 2000­2020 sample period. This spread is almost the same as the
spread on high yield corporate debt over the same period, with the unflattering
implication that the market views the typical consumer credit card borrower as
the equivalent of a "junk bond."

      Perhaps the most striking result is that there appears to have been a major
repricing of unsecured consumer credit risk beginning in 2010. The average
consumer credit risk premium increased dramatically from values of about two
to five percent during most of the 2000s, to more than ten percent during the past
decade. Surprisingly, this dramatic increase in the consumer credit risk premium
occurred as credit card charge-off rates actually declined significantly following
the peak of the financial crisis.
     What explains the large increase in the consumer credit risk premium since
2010? A strong possibility is the impact of major changes in the regulation of
financial intermediaries following the financial crisis. Foremost among these was
the requirement for issuers to reconsolidate credit card securitizations back onto
their balance sheets at the beginning of 2010. Since most credit card issuers are
large financial institutions subject to strict regulatory capital requirements, their
securitizations now required regulatory capital. Upon reconsolidation, issuers'
capital ratios declined significantly, which suggests that they faced tighter capital
constraints and new costs for meeting regulatory requirements ("balance-sheet
costs"). Two other major changes were the "skin-in-the-game" risk-retention
requirement of the FDIC Securitization Safe Harbor Rule of 2010 and the Dodd-
Frank Act which required issuers to retain a specific fraction of the credit risk of
the assets underlying their securitizations.
     To explore the relation between the consumer credit risk premium and the
balance-sheet costs and capital constraints faced by financial intermediaries, we
conduct a number of analyses. First, we rule out the possibility that the increase
in the consumer credit risk premium simply reflects the pattern of credit spreads
in other markets during the post-financial-crisis period. In particular, we find
that while changes in the consumer credit risk premium are significantly related
to changes in other credit spreads, they are also driven by additional factors that
may be unique to the securitizated consumer credit markets.
     Second, we find that the consumer credit risk premium is significantly higher
at quarter-ends (when regulatory capital ratios are reported) relative to other
months. This result is consistent with Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), Fleck-
enstein and Longstaff (2020a), and others, and provides evidence that interme-
diary balance-sheet effects play a role in the pricing of consumer credit risk.

                                         2
     Third, we use a panel regression framework to examine the relation be-
tween the consumer credit risk premium and the required risk-retention ratios
for the pool of credit card receivables underlying the revolving master trusts of
the individual issuers in the sample. We find that there is a strong positive rela-
tion between the consumer credit risk premium and the required risk-retention
ratio. This provides additional evidence that the capital constraints faced by
intermediaries impact asset prices. We also find that the consumer credit risk
premium becomes much more sensitive to realized charge-off rates during the
post-financial-crisis period. This is consistent with the increased incentives that
recent capital regulation has created for intermediaries to manage their risk ex-
posures more aggressively.
     Fourth, we test whether the average consumer credit risk premium is related
to exogenous measures of the costs of intermediary balance-sheet space and cap-
ital constraints. In particular, we examine the relation between the consumer
credit risk premium and the He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) measure of inter-
mediary leverage, the aggregate Tier 1 capital ratio for broker-dealers, and the
Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020a) turn-of-the-year measure of the cost of in-
termediary balance-sheet usage. Our results show that changes in the consumer
credit risk premium are significantly related to changes in these measures of in-
termediary constraints. Furthermore, the consumer credit risk premium tends
to increase as intermediary constraints tighten.

     Finally, we make use of a natural experiment created by a major exogenous
shock in the accounting/regulatory environment to study the relation between
the consumer credit risk premium and intermediary constraints at a more funda-
mental causal level. As discussed earlier, financial intermediaries were required
to reconsolidate their ABS back onto their balance sheets as of January 1, 2010
for both accounting and regulatory capital purposes. Since the credit card ABS
issuers in the sample disclosed the financial impact of the reconsolidation event on
their retained earnings and capital ratios, we can directly measure the marginal
cost of adding an additional dollar of assets onto their balance sheet. Using this
measure as an instrument for the relative intensity of balance-sheet usage across
issuers, we estimate a panel regression and find that the consumer credit risk pre-
mium is directly related to the interaction between the amount of balance-sheet
usage that securitization activity requires and the cost of balance-sheet usage.

     In summary, these results have a number of important implications for the
pricing of consumer credit risk. The results indicate that there is a substantial
risk premium associated with unsecured consumer credit risk. This risk premium
may represent a large component of the interest rate that consumers are charged
on their credit card balances. Furthermore, this risk premium has increased sig-
nificantly during the past decade even while credit card charge-off rates have


                                         3
declined. The results suggest that much of this increase may be due to the addi-
tional balance-sheet costs and capital constraints that intermediaries now face in
the post-financial-crisis period. In particular, recent capital regulation may have
added hundreds of basis points to the overall cost of obtaining unsecured con-
sumer credit in the credit card market. Finally, these results can provide useful
historical perspective about the pricing of unsecured household credit risk.


                       2. RELATED LITERATURE


This paper is related to several important literatures. First, this paper con-
tributes to the household finance literature on consumer payment behavior, credit
risk, and borrowing costs. Important examples of this literature include Ausubel
(1991), Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt (2007, 2010, 2016), Elul, Souleles, Chom-
sisengphet, Glennon, and Hunt (2010), Vissing-Jorgensen (2016), and Keys and
Wang (2019). Examples of papers that focus specifically on the cost and/or
risk premia associated with secured household debt (mortgages, home equity
loans, auto loans, 401(k) loans, etc.) include Schwartz and Torous (1989, 1992),
Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007), Li and Smith (2010), Mian and
Sufi (2011, 2012), Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012), Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and
Madrian (2012), Assuncao, Benmelech, and Silva (2014), Campbell and Cocco
(2015), Corradin and Popov (2015), Chernov, Dunn, and Longstaff (2017), Diep,
Eisfeldt, and Richardson (2020), and many others. Papers that focus on the
costs of unsecured consumer credit (credit card debt, payday lending, personal
lines of credit, etc.) include Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009), Norden and
Weber (2010), Morse (2011), Melzer (2011), Han and Li (2011), Alan and Lo-
ranth (2013), and Stango and Zinman (2016). We extend this literature by being
the first to provide estimates of the risk premium associated with unsecured
household borrowing.

     Second, this paper is related to the rapidly-growing literature on interme-
diary asset pricing studying the impact of the frictions and constraints faced by
intermediaries on the assets in which they make markets. Key examples of this
literature include Chowdhry and Nanda (1998), Xiong (2001), Kyle and Xiong
(2001), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Krishnamurthy (2003, 2010), Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2009), Adrian and Shin (2010), G^    arleanu and Pedersen (2011),
He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013), Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014), Kondor
and Vayanos (2014), He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), Duffie (2018), and Ander-
sen, Duffie, and Song (2019), Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020a, 2020b), Lewis,
Longstaff, and Petrasek (2020), and many others. We contribute to this liter-
ature by providing evidence that intermediary constraints impact the required
premium for unsecured consumer credit risk in financial markets.

                                        4
     Third, this paper extends the literature on the role of securitization and
the impact of changes in the regulatory and economic environment on finan-
cial markets and asset prices. Important examples of this literature include
Calomiris and Mason (2004), Ayotte and Gaon (2011), Faltin-Traeger, Johnson,
and Mayer (2011), Levitin (2013), Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013), Gen-
naioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2013), Lemmon, Liu, Mao, and Nini (2014), Dou,
Ryan, and Xie (2018), Tian and Zhang (2018), Furfine (2018), Flynn, Ghent,
and Tchistyi (2019), and Daley, Green, and Vanasco (2020).


            3. CREDIT CARD ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES


In this section, we begin with an overview of the credit card ABS market. We
then describe some of the key characteristics and properties of credit card ABS.
The Internet Appendix provides full details about the credit card ABS market.

3.1 The Credit Card ABS Market
The credit card ABS market started in the late 1980s and has since grown to
become a major sector of the ABS market. As of year-end 2019, there was more
than $127 billion in credit card ABS outstanding.

      Credit cards are the primary source of revolving unsecured consumer credit.
As of March 2020, there was over $1 trillion in revolving consumer credit out-
standing, with credit card banks holding about 92% ($926 billion out of $1.01
trillion).3 Credit cards are extensively used by consumers. The Federal Reserve
reports in the Survey of Consumer Finances that about 70% of families had at
least one credit card in 2013. In 2016, consumers made more than 34.3 bil-
lion transactions, amounting to a dollar volume of more than $3.1 trillion using
general-purpose credit cards.4

     The general-purpose credit card market in the U.S. is concentrated, with the
top-ten issuers holding over 80% of the outstanding credit card balances, and the
top-three issuers controlling more than 60% of the market. Cards issued on the
Visa and Mastercard networks accounted for nearly 85% of about 544.5 million
general-purpose credit cards in 2016. American Express and Discover accounted
for another 99 million general-purpose cards in 2016.5

3
 Federal Reserve Board, G.19 Release on consumer credit at https://www.fede-
ralreserve.gov/releases/g19/Current.
4
    See, HSN Consultants, Inc. (2017), Nilson Report, no. 1104 (February).
5
    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on

                                         5
3.2 Securitizing Credit Card Receivables
The underlying collateral of a credit card ABS consists of receivables generated
when consumers make charges on their credit cards to purchase goods and ser-
vices. From the credit card issuer's perspective, credit card receivables are in
effect short-term unsecured loans.6 The issuer pools the receivables and transfers
them to a separate entity (master trust), which issues series of notes to investors.
The master trust receivables are not segregated by series. Instead, the pool of
receivables supports all outstanding series.

     To illustrate, an issuer would transfer say $1 billion of card receivables from
one million accounts to a master trust, which then issues notes (certificates).
The issuer can transfer additional receivables to the master trust as consumers
pay off their card balances, and also issue additional series of securities. Each
series has different "classes" that differ in their seniority of receiving cash flows.
A typical series includes a senior A class, a mezzanine B class, and a junior C
class. Each class (or tranche) has an attachment and a detachment point relative
to the total credit card receivables balance. The attachment point represents the
percentage of the receivables pool balance that can default before the tranche
experiences first losses. The detachment point represents the level of credit card
defaults that leads to total loss of the tranche.

     The process by which cash flows are allocated to investors has two distinct
periods: revolving, and controlled amortization (in some cases, controlled accu-
mulation). If there are no losses, the two-period structure mimics a traditional
bond in the sense that interest is distributed every month and principal is paid
in a single "bullet" cash flow on the maturity date.

     Specifically, upon issuance, a credit card ABS begins the "revolving period,"
during which investor coupon cash flows are paid from finance charge collections
on the credit card accounts, and principal collections are used to purchase new
receivables. Any residual cash flows after paying investor interest and write-offs
is referred to as "excess spread" and, depending on the master trust, serves as
credit enhancement or is released to the seller.
     The revolving period continues for a predetermined length of time, and then
the controlled amortization (accumulation) period begins where principal collec-
tions are distributed to investors. For instance, a credit card ABS with a five-year
expected maturity might revolve for 48 months and then enter amortization for
the Profitability of Credit Card Operations of Depository Institutions, June 2017.
6
 Consumers pay back either the full principal of this unsecured loan or make
partial payment. In the latter case, the issuer finances the remaining balance
and earns interest (finance charges).


                                          6
the final 12 months. In the case of controlled amortization, principal cash flows
are distributed in equal installments, for instance one-twelfth of the invested
amount every month for twelve months. In the case of controlled accumulation,
principal cash flows are deposited into a collection account (principal funding
account) every month and then paid out as a single cash flow at the end of the
accumulation period.
      Sustained defaults or write-offs on the pool of credit card accounts trig-
ger early amortization, independent of whether the credit card ABS is in the
revolving period or in controlled amortization (accumulation). Typical early
amortization trigger events include collateral performance deterioration (e.g. the
three-month average excess spread falls below zero, or the collateral balance falls
below the investor invested amount), seller/servicer problems (e.g. seller interest
falls below the required minimum level, the seller fails to transfer new receivables
into the trust when necessary), but also legal issues (e.g. breach of representation
or warranties by the issuer, or default, bankruptcy, and insolvency of the seller
or servicer).7 Early amortization is in some sense similar to a default, and the
credit card ABS immediately starts to amortize with principal balances being
paid to investors according to their seniority.


                                 4. THE DATA


We collect data for the credit card ABS of the ten largest U.S. credit card issuers
from the Bloomberg system for the period from January 2000 to January 2020.8
We also collect credit spreads and regulatory capital ratios for all issuers from the
Bloomberg system and Capital IQ. Table A1 in the Internet Appendix describes
7
 The issuer must maintain an ownership interest in the trust (seller's interest).
The minimum required seller's interest for most master trusts tends to be in the
4% to 7% range of outstanding receivables. If the seller's interest falls below
this threshold, the seller must add receivables or early amortization is triggered.
Since the minimum seller's interest is always at least as high as Dodd-Frank
risk-retention requirements for the issuers in our sample, we use both terms
interchangeably.
8
 We select these ten issuers for two primary reasons. First, these issuers hold
80% of the outstanding credit card balances (Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Report to the Congress on the Profitability of Credit Card
Operations of Depository Institutions, June 2017). Moreover, our data cover
more than 80% of total U.S. credit charge card volume. Second, using these ten
issuers, our data span two decades, allowing us to study the pricing of consumer
credit both before and after the financial crisis.

                                         7
the data, defines the variables, and lists all of the data sources.
     Our sample consists of the credit card master trusts set up by American Ex-
press, Bank of America, Bank One, Citibank (Citi), J.P. Morgan Chase (Chase),
Capital One, Discover Financial (Discover), First National Bank (First National),
and World Financial Network/Alliance Data System (World Financial). Table
A2 in the Internet Appendix lists the credit card master trusts for these ten
issuers, along with their identifiers in the Bloomberg system.

     For each master trust, we identify all credit card ABS series and classes in
the Bloomberg system. Next, for each credit card ABS, we identify the issue
date, the expected maturity date, the principal amount issued, whether the ABS
pays fixed or floating coupon cash flows, and in the latter case the floating index
(one-month or three-month Libor) plus the basis-point spread. In addition, we
manually collect information from prospectus supplements about the required
risk-retention by the seller (the minimum percentage of portfolio receivables the
issuer is required to hold, or minimum seller's interest).9 We also manually col-
lect information on the subordination for each series and class by reading the
prospectus documents for all master trusts which we obtain from the Bloomberg
system or from regulatory filings with the SEC (Form 424-B).10 For each credit
card ABS, we collect the monthly payment rate, the portfolio yield, the charge-off
rate, the excess-spread, as well as month-end prices from the Bloomberg system.

     The monthly payment rate (MPR) measures the speed at which cardholders
pay down the amount owed on their credit card balances and it is computed as
the ratio of total cash flows into the trust each month divided by the portfolio
receivables balance, expressed as a percentage. The portfolio yield is the annu-
alized percentage gross return on the credit card receivables portfolio and it is
calculated as the total monthly (gross) cash flows into the credit card master trust
divided by the outstanding principal balance at the beginning of the month.11
The charge-off rate measures the rate of default on the credit card receivables
9
 This information is unavailable from the prospectus supplements for Capital
One. Similarly, this information is unavailable for Citibank prior to the second
half of 2002.
10
   Specifically, for each series and each A, B, and C class, we identify the attach-
ment and detachment points expressed in percent of the total series par amount
at which the class experiences first losses or a complete loss, respectively.
11
  Gross cash inflows consist of interest on the revolving principal balances (fi-
nance charges) plus income from fees on the accounts such as late charges, card
annual fees, cash advance fees, overdraft charges, and card interchange. Cash
inflows include recoveries on defaulted receivables, but exclude charge-offs from
the current month.

                                         8
and it is calculated as the (one-month) annualized percentage rate of charge-offs
on the portfolio. Credit card receivables are typically charged off after the card-
holder has been delinquent in paying the revolving balance for more than 180
days.

     Finally, the excess spread is the annualized percentage net return on the
portfolio and it is calculated as the annualized rate of (gross) portfolio yield less
servicing fees, coupon cash flows to noteholders, charge-offs, and any other trust
expenses. Excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement for the notes.
Intuitively, as long as the excess spread is positive, the securitization generates
enough cash inflows to cover cash outflows. When the average excess spread is
negative (typically calculated over a period of three months), many master trusts
enter into early amortization.12

     Table 1 presents summary statistics for the characteristics of the portfolios
of credit card receivables underlying the securitizations for each of the ten is-
suers.13 For all the issuers, our data cover both the pre-crisis and the post-crisis
period, and for four issuers, our data cover a period of at last 15 years starting
in 2000. Across all credit card issuers, average portfolio yields are significantly
higher than the corresponding average charge-off rates which is reflected in high
excess spreads. In fact, all issuers have average excess spreads of more than five
percent over the 2000 to 2020 sample period. Nonetheless, there is cross-sectional
variation in these averages. For instance, American Express has an excess spread
of 12.317% compared to an average excess spread of 6.267% in the case of First
National. Moreover, the data show heterogeneity in the average charge-off rates.
American Express has an average charge-off rate of just over 4%, compared to
an average charge-off rate of 7.178% in the case of World Financial.

     Figure 1 plots the portfolio yield, excess spread, and charge-off rates. As
shown, all three variables vary significantly over time. Portfolio yields and excess
spreads decline substantially during the financial crisis, and charge-off rates take
their highest values during that period. However, both portfolio yields and excess
12
   To illustrate how excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement,
suppose a master trust generates a portfolio yield of 14.80% and experiences
charge-offs of 5.50%. The trust has issued notes paying LIBOR floating each
month. Assuming that the floating coupon rate equals 2.05% and that the master
trust is paying a servicing fee of 2%, the excess spread is 14.80% - 2.05% - 2.00%
- 5.50% = 5.25%. Intuitively, this means that the master trust generates about
five cents for each dollar invested each month above what is required to pay
investor coupon interest, servicing fees, and other trust expenses.
13
  The statistics for the individual issuers are computed by taking averages across
all securitizations for each month, and then averaging the monthly averages.


                                         9
spreads quickly recover from their precipitous declines after the financial crisis
and charge-offs start to level off. Despite the wide range of variation, however,
Figure 1 shows that the cross-sectional average excess spread is always positive,
and despite the decline in the financial crisis, never drops below five percent.
Moreover, while charge-offs peak during the financial crisis, the cross-sectional
average tops out at around ten percent. In all, this suggests that credit card
ABS were able to weather the storm from the financial crisis and portfolio yields
and excess spreads quickly returned to pre-crisis levels.

     Table 2 presents summary statistics for the individual A, B, and C tranches
of the credit card securitizations in the sample. As shown, credit card ABS
typically have maturities in the range of 2 to 4 years on average. In terms of
credit support, the average attachment and detachment points of the individual
tranches show that C classes absorb roughly the first 8 to 26 cents of losses (per
dollar of notional amount of the ABS), whereas A classes can withstand portfolio
write-offs between roughly 15 and 25 cents before experiencing first losses. Table
2 also shows that the average floating spread above Libor of the tranches varies
with the credit risk of the tranches, with senior A tranches having lower spreads
relative to B and C tranches of the same issuer.14 That A classes are relatively
well shielded against portfolio write-offs is also reflected in the prices of class
A notes. As shown, average prices of class A notes are generally closer to par
compared to the prices of class C notes. Nonetheless, the minimum and maximum
prices suggest that there is substantial variation in the average prices of credit
card ABS. For instance, the prices of class C notes decline to less than 50 cents
per dollar of par amount during the sample period for seven of the ten issuers.
     Figure 2 plots the prices for A, B, and C tranches. As shown, there is
substantial time variation in the prices of A, B, and C tranches. Specifically, all
prices decline precipitously during the financial crisis, but quickly rebound after
the crisis. However, despite the turmoil during the crisis, the average prices of
class A notes never drop to less than 80 cents per dollar of par amount. By
contrast, the average prices of class C notes plummet to values close to only 50
cents per dollar of par value during the crisis.




14
  Many of the tranches in the sample pay fixed coupon rates rather than floating
spreads over Libor. To put all of the tranches on a consistent basis in Table 2,
we swap these fixed coupon rates into floating rate spreads using the approach
described in the Internet Appendix.


                                        10
                               5. THE MODEL


To model the consumer credit risk premium, we use a framework that parallels
standard approaches for modeling corporate bond default risk. While triggering
the early amortization of a credit card trust portfolio differs in some aspects from
the default of a corporate bond, it can clearly be interpreted as the primary event
initiating financial distress for credit card ABS. Most credit card securitizations
include the provision that early amortization of the credit card master trust
is triggered by the event of the excess spread becoming negative. Intuitively,
this follows since the excess spread only becomes negative when the underlying
portfolio of credit card receivables experiences disastrously high levels of charge-
offs or defaults by cardholders.

     Accordingly, the model assumes that a credit card trust is able to make all
promised payments to credit card ABS investors as long as the excess spread is
positive. As soon as the excess spread makes a first passage to zero, however, the
credit card trust suffers an early amortization distress event, and the underlying
pool of receivables may experience significant principal losses. This specification
parallels that used in the structural corporate bond credit modeling literature in
which corporate financial distress is triggered by the value of a firm's assets mak-
ing a first passage to some critical threshold (see Black and Cox (1976), Longstaff
and Schwartz (1995), Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001), and others.) As in
standard reduced form corporate credit models, we assume that the credit losses
suffered by the portfolio upon early amortization are specified exogenously (see
Jarrow and Turnbull (1995), Duffie and Singleton (1999), Duffee (1999), and
others). Rather than assuming a specific "loss given default", however, we fol-
low the CDO modeling literature by allowing for a discrete distribution of losses
when early amortization is triggered (see Longstaff and Rajan (2008), Bhansali,
Gingrich, and Longstaff (2008), and others).
     Let  denote the charge-off rate on the underlying portfolio of credit card re-
ceivables. Since  represents the probability that any individual account defaults
and cannot pay, the probability  may differ under the risk-neutral and objective
measures. We denote the risk-neutral and objective charge-off probabilities by
Q and P , respectively.

     The excess spread for the underlying portfolio equals the yield on the port-
folio minus debt servicing costs, servicing fees, and portfolio charge-offs. Let X
denote the risk-neutral excess spread (given by subtracting off the risk-neutral
charge-off rate Q rather than P ). We assume that the excess spread X has the
following dynamics under the risk-neutral measure




                                        11
                            dX = ( - X )dt + dZ,                                (1)

where dZ denotes the increment of a standard Brownian motion and ,  , and 
are constants. Consistent with the properties of excess spreads, these dynamics
allow X to take both positive and negative values.

     We consider the standard case in which a credit card master trust has secu-
ritized a common pool of credit card receivables by issuing separate A, B, and
C tranches, each of which is collateralized by the receivables pool. Let N denote
the percentage detachment point of the C tranche (the most-junior tranche), and
N + M the percentage detachment point of the B tranche (the next most-junior
tranche). Also, denote the expected maturity date of the credit card securitiza-
tion by T . Let F denote the risk-neutral probability that X makes a first passage
to zero by time T . If a first passage does not occur by time T , portfolio losses
are zero. If a first passage does occur, however, we assume that there are three
different possible outcomes for the total credit losses on the underlying portfolio.
Specifically, we assume that conditional on a first passage, the loss is N percent
with probability c/F , N + M percent with probability b/F , and 100 percent
with probability a/F . Conditional on the value of X , this specification implies
that there are four possible outcomes for losses on the portfolio. In particular,
the portfolio loss is zero with probability 1 - F , N percent with probability c,
N + M percent with probability b, and 100 percent with probability a. Since the
probabilities must sum to one, F = a + b + c.

      Given this modeling framework, identifying the consumer credit risk pre-
mium reduces to a process of solving for the probabilities a, b, and c, determin-
ing the risk-neutral first passage probability F , and then solving for the implied
risk-neutral excess spread X . First, we solve for the present values of the losses
impounded into the market prices of the individual tranches of a credit card secu-
ritization. This is done by taking the difference between the hypothetical prices
of the tranches in the absence of credit risk--given by discounting promised
tranche cash flows using riskless Treasury rates--and the actual market price of
the tranches. Second, given these present values, we solve for the implied risk-
neutral probability of the excess spread making a first passage to zero during the
life of the tranches. Third, given the stochastic model of the dynamics of the
excess spread, we invert this probability and solve for the implied risk-neutral
portfolio charge-off rate. Finally, the risk premium is given by taking the dif-
ference between the risk-neutral charge-off rate and the actual charge-off rate
observed for the portfolio.15 The Internet Appendix provides full details on the

15
  This approach to estimating the consumer credit risk premium parallels that
used in Chernov, Dunn, and Longstaff (2017) in which the prepayment risk pre-

                                        12
model and the estimation methodology.


           6. THE CONSUMER CREDIT RISK PREMIUM


Table 3 provides summary statistics for the estimated consumer credit risk pre-
mia. As shown, the average values of the risk premia are positive across all of
the issuers. The average values range from 2.85% for Citibank to 10.95% for
World Financial Network. Taken over all observations, the average value of the
risk premium is 5.22%, the median value is 4.13%, and the standard deviation is
4.48%.

     The top panel of Figure 3 plots the overall average values of the risk premium
throughout the 2000­2020 sample period. As shown, there are a number of
interesting patterns and trends in the average risk premia. For example, Figure
3 shows that the average risk premia vary significantly over time with values
ranging from about two or three percent during the early 2000s to roughly 15
percent toward the end of the sample period.16
     Figure 3 also indicates that there have been significant shifts in how the
market prices consumer credit risk over time. Perhaps the most striking aspect
of the time series of the premium is that there appears to have been a major
regime shift in the pricing of consumer credit risk beginning in 2010.
     As another way of illustrating the dramatic repricing of consumer credit risk,
the lower panel of Figure 3 plots the ratio of the implied or risk-neutral charge-off
rate to the actual observable charge-off rate, Q /P . This ratio provides a useful
metric for how the market views consumer credit risk under the pricing (or Q)
measure relative to the objective (or P ) measure. Figure 3 shows that this ratio
is consistently around 1.50 during the early 2000s. Beginning in 2010, however,
the ratio increases rapidly, reaching values of about six by the end of the sample
period. To put these values into perspective relative to those from other credit
markets, we observe that Giesecke, Longstaff, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2011)
find that the ratio of the risk-neutral to objective credit spread for U.S. corporate
bonds averages 2.09 during their 1866­2008 sample period.

mium is identified by taking the difference between the risk-neutral prepayment
rate implied from the prices of mortgage-backed securities and actual prepayment
rates observed in the market.
16
  The small gap in the time series arises since there are almost no tranches
during this time period that meet the maturity criteria our estimation algorithm
requires.


                                         13
     To provide further perspective, Figure 4 plots the consumer credit risk pre-
mia along with the credit spread for high yield corporate bonds. As shown, the
consumer credit risk premium is on the same order of magnitude as the spread
on high yield corporate bonds. For example, the average value of the consumer
credit risk premium during the sample period is 522 basis points, while the av-
erage value of the high yield spread over the same period is 548 basis points.
     There is an extensive literature documenting that risk premia in credit mar-
kets increased significantly during the financial crisis of 2008. Furthermore,
spreads in many sectors of the credit market remained at elevated levels for an
extended period thereafter. Key examples include Bao, Pan, and Wang (2009)
Beber, Brandt, and Kavaczek (2001), Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012), Schwarz
(2019), and others. These patterns raise the question of whether the repricing
of consumer credit risk beginning in 2010 could be at least partially due to the
general widening of all credit spreads during the post-financial-crisis period.
     To explore this possibility, we regress monthly changes in the consumer
credit risk premium on changes in a number of corporate credit spreads. If the
consumer credit risk premium is driven by the same factors driving other credit
spreads, there should be no residual trend during the post-crisis period after
controlling for the changes in the other credit spreads. Because the regression
is estimated in changes, a residual upwards trend would translate into a signif-
icant positive intercept during the post-crisis period. To test this, we allow the
regression intercept to differ between the 2000­2006 pre-crisis period and the
2007­2020 post-crisis period. To control for potential time series properties in
the dependent variable, we also include its lagged change as explanatory variable
in the regression. Table 4 presents the results from the regression.

     As shown, changes in the consumer credit risk premium are directly related
to changes in all of the corporate credit spreads. For example, the first lagged
change in the Aaa, Baa, and high yield spreads are positive and significant. This
indicates that the consumer credit risk premium has properties in common with
corporate credit spreads, consistent with a scenario in which the risk premium
and credit spreads are driven by similar underlying factors.
     The results also suggest, however, that changes in corporate credit spreads
do not fully account for the upwards trend in the consumer credit risk premium
during the post-crisis period. In particular, the intercept is not significantly
different from zero during the pre-crisis period, but has a much larger positive
value and is statistically significant during the post-crisis period. Thus, even after
controlling for changes in the other credit spreads, there is a significant upwards
trend in the consumer credit risk premium during the post-crisis period. This
suggests that changes in the consumer credit risk premium may also be driven
by factors that are unique to this market and not shared by other credit spreads

                                         14
during the post-crisis period.


        7. REGULATORY CHANGES IN THE ABS MARKETS


The results in the previous section immediately raise the fundamental issue:
What is the reason for the dramatic repricing of consumer credit risk beginning
in 2010? In this section, we review some of the major recent changes in the
regulatory environment impacting the credit card ABS markets. The credit card
industry experienced many regulatory changes during the sample period, includ-
ing new consumer protection laws (Card Act), changes in accounting rules for
credit card ABS (FAS 166/167) and new capital requirements from the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and
the Basel Capital Accords.17 These post-crisis regulatory reforms have funda-
mentally changed the economics of asset-backed securitizations and made the
process of securitizing assets much more capital-intensive by turning securitiza-
tion from a low-capital-usage, off-balance-sheet activity into one that consumes
scarce balance-sheet space.18


7.1 FAS 166/167

In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued FAS
166 and 167 to become effective on January 1, 2010.19 The effect of FAS 166 and
167 was to narrow significantly the scope of transactions that qualified as off-
balance-sheet for accounting purposes. In short, FAS 166/167 essentially meant
that credit card ABS that were off-balance-sheet for accounting purposes had
to be reconsolidated on the balance sheets of credit card issuers.20 As a result
17
  For instance, the 2009 Card Act (H.R.627, 111th Congress) institutes a number
of consumer protection and disclosure requirements for consumer credit cards. It
sets regulatory limits on certain types of credit card fees, prohibits issuers from
increasing the interest rate on outstanding balances without advance written
notice, and restricts over-limit and late fees.
18
  Credit card banks also face indirect costs because post-crisis regulatory reforms
from the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III impose restrictions on institutional in-
vestors to hold ABS and also tighten oversight and rating criteria from credit
rating agencies.
19
  Financial Accounting Standards No. 166, Accounting for Transfers of Financial
Assets ­ An Amendment of FASB Statement No. 140, and FASB Statement No.
167, Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R).
20
     Source: https://www.fasb.org/cs/ContentServer?c=FASBContent C&cid=11-

                                        15
of FAS 166/167, U.S. banks reconsolidated $321.9 billion securitized credit card
receivables in the first quarter of 2010.
     The reconsolidation of credit card ABS onto issuer balance sheets was also
accompanied by a dramatic reduction in securitization activity. Credit card ABS
issuance declined by 92% from $40 billion in 2009 to $3.3 billion in 2010 and has
remained at much lower levels during the past decade.21 One reason for this may
be that as on-balance-sheet assets, credit card ABS are subject to regulatory
capital requirements.22 As a result of FAS 166/167, credit card ABS previously
held off-balance-sheet now occupy "expensive real estate" on credit card banks'
balance sheets.23


7.2 FDIC Securitization Safe Harbor Rule

The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) safe harbor rule enacted in
2000 provided bankruptcy remoteness for assets transferred into securitizations,
which meant that the FDIC, as receiver or conservator of a failed bank, could
not repudiate contracts, or recover or reclaim financial assets transferred in con-
nection with securitization transactions when these assets were off-balance-sheet
for accounting purposes. As a result of FAS 166/167, credit card securitizations
became on-balance-sheet assets which meant bankruptcy remoteness would no
longer apply to credit card ABS, and that the FDIC would have the authority
to reclaim any financial assets from the credit card master trust in bankruptcy
proceedings against the credit card bank. Moreover, with the bankruptcy re-
moteness offered by safe harbor protection, credit card ABS could receive higher
credit ratings than the credit card bank originating the receivables. Thus, the
loss of bankruptcy remoteness implied that securitizing credit card receivables
would become substantially more costly for credit card banks, not least because
investors and credit rating agencies would require additional credit enhancement
on credit card ABS.

76155633483&d=&pagename=FASB%2FFASBContent C%2FNewsPage
21
  Source: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h8/h8notes.htm#notes 2011
0429.
22
 12 CFR Part 567 at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2009-09-15/
pdf/E9-21497.pdf.
23
  Given the significant economic impact on banks regulatory capital, regulators
gave credit card banks the option to delay including consolidated credit card ABS
in their risk-based capital ratios for two quarters, followed by an optional addi-
tional two-quarter partial implementation of FAS 167. See http://www.federal
reserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20100121a.htm.


                                        16
     In 2010, the FDIC amended the safe harbor rule, but specified that safe
harbor would be extended to consolidated securitization transactions only under
a strict set of conditions.24 Specifically, securitizations must comply with new
risk-retention rules (the issuer is required to retain an unhedged minimum of
5% of the securitized assets), increased disclosure and reporting requirements,
and securitizations must qualify for off-balance-sheet treatment under generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The net effect is that securitizing credit
card receivables became more costly for credit card banks, because safe harbor
protection now required stricter disclosure, reporting and risk-retention require-
ments.


7.3 The Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III

The Dodd-Frank Act was enacted in 2010 and significantly increased the regu-
lation of credit card securitizations.25 The Dodd-Frank Act requires securitizers
or originators of credit card ABS to retain at least 5% of the credit risk of secu-
ritized exposures.26 The Dodd-Frank Act restricts the interchange fees on credit
card transactions, imposes stricter disclosure requirements regarding credit card
receivables, and tightens credit rating standards from rating agencies. The Dodd-
Frank Act also established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)
to regulate the terms of credit card agreements. In addition, the Dodd-Frank
Act increases capital requirements on banks, and contains multiple provisions
for mandatory risk-based capital requirements that apply to consolidated on-
balance-sheet assets. Specifically, the Dodd-Frank Act increases the minimum
required ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets to 4.5% and introduces
mandatory capital buffers which, taken together, imply a (risk-based) leverage
ratio requirement of at least 7% for many large banks. The Collins Amend-
ment to the Dodd-Frank Act makes bank holding companies (BHCs) subject to
the same rules that apply to depository institutions, and effectively raises risk-
weighted asset requirements for many banks and BHCs since it limits the use
of internal models in reporting regulatory capital ("Collins Floor"). As a result,
subordinate ABS tranches in particular now have significantly higher risk weights
than in the pre-crisis period.

24
     See, Securitization Safe Harbor Rule, 12 C.F.R. § 360.6.
25
  H.R. 4173: Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act,
available at https://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@swaps/documents/file/h
r4173 enrolledbill.pdf.
26
  See Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act, https://www.federalreserve.gov/news-
events/pressreleases/bcreg20110331a.htm. Risk-retention requirements were fi-
nalized in 2014 (Regulation RR, Federal Register, 79 Fed. Reg. 77601).


                                         17
     The Basel III framework, introduced by the Basel Committee in Decem-
ber 2010, redefined regulatory capital, established a global leverage ratio, and
increased banks' required risk-weighted capital ratios. In addition to tighten-
ing equity and risk-weighted capital requirements, the Basel III standard intro-
duced a non-risk-weighted leverage ratio requirement (supplementary leverage
ratio (SLR)), as well as liquidity and funding requirements (liquidity coverage
ratio (LCR) and net stable funding ratio (NSFR)). The net effect of the regula-
tions from the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III is to raise the costs of securitizing
credit card receivables, since credit card banks are required to hold regulatory
capital against credit card ABS assets.


   8. BALANCE-SHEET COSTS AND CAPITAL REGULATION


As discussed earlier, there is an extensive literature on the relation between secu-
rity pricing and the balance-sheet costs and capital constraints faced by financial
intermediaries. In this section, we examine whether the dramatic increase in
the consumer credit risk premium during the post-crisis period may be partially
attributable to the increased balance-sheet costs imposed on financial intermedi-
aries by the recent changes in the regulatory environment.

8.1 Quarter-End Effects
In their analysis of the covered interest rate parity (CIP) relation, Du, Tep-
per, and Verdelhan (2018) provide striking "smoking gun" evidence of the link
between CIP violations and intermediary balance-sheet usage. Specifically, they
show that the magnitude of the mispricing during the post-crisis period is directly
related to the proximity to the end of a quarter (as intermediaries file quarter-end
financial reports and disclose their regulatory capital positions). Following Du,
Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020b), and others,
we also test whether there is a quarter-end effect in the consumer credit risk
premium. In doing this, we use a panel regression framework in which we regress
the consumer credit risk premium on a quarter-end dummy variable that takes
value one for the months of March, June, September, and December, and zero
otherwise. We also include a year-end dummy variable that takes value one for
the month of December, and zero otherwise. We include annual fixed effects as
control variables in the panel regression. Table 5 reports the regression results.

     The results show that the level of the consumer credit risk premium is sig-
nificantly higher at quarter-end than at the end of other months. In particular,
Table 5 indicates that after controlling for the annual fixed effects, the consumer
credit risk premium is about 33 basis points higher at quarter-end than at the
end of other months. This difference is highly statistically significant and is on

                                        18
the same order of magnitude as that documented by Du, Tepper, and Verdel-
han (2018) during the post-crisis period. These results complement those of Du,
Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018) and provide direct evidence of a link between the
consumer credit risk premium and the costs faced by financial intermediaries in
using their balance sheets.

8.2 Risk-Retention Requirements
Comparing Figures 1 and 3 shows that the dramatic repricing of consumer credit
risk beginning in 2010 follows immediately in the wake of the historically high
levels of credit card charge-offs experienced during the financial crisis. While this
observation is clearly only anecdotal, it raises the possibility that the higher level
of charge-offs during the recession following the financial crisis may have led mar-
ket participants to revise prior beliefs about the risk of unsecured consumer credit
in bad states of the world. There is an extensive literature on the role of learning
in credit and other financial markets. Important examples include Routledge
(1999), Pastor and Veronesi (2009), Khandani, Kim, and Lo (2010), Elul, Soule-
les, Chomsisengphet, Glennon, and Hunt (2010), Kuhnen (2015), An and Cordell
(2017), Sirignano, Sadhwani, and Giesecke (2017), Fuster, Goldsmith-Pinkham,
Ramadorai, and Walther (2018), and many others.
     The "wake-up call" from the financial crisis about the risks of unsecured con-
sumer credit could potentially have important implications for consumer credit
card risk premia, particularly given a regulatory environment much more focused
on asset risk and capital adequacy. This is especially true in light of the risk-
retention and risk capital requirements for securitizations enacted as part of the
Dodd-Frank reforms of 2010 and FAS 166/167.

     To explore these possibilities, we again use a panel regression approach.
Specifically, we regress the consumer credit risk premium on the realized charge-
off rates for the underlying credit card receivables portfolios as well as the per-
centage risk-retention requirement for the issuer. An advantage of this approach
is that it allows us to identify the relation between the risk premia, consumer
credit risk, and the risk-retention requirements from both the variation across
securitizations by different issuers, as well as from the time series variation in
these measures. As a control, we include annual fixed effects in the panel regres-
sion. We estimate the panel regression for the entire sample period as well as for
the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods. Table 6 presents the results.
     The results in Table 6 provide strong support for the hypothesis that post-
financial-crisis regulation imposed significant balance-sheet and capital costs on
intermediaries holding risky positions in consumer credit. In particular, the re-
sults show that there is not a significant relation between the consumer credit risk
premium and either the charge-off rate or the risk-retention requirement during

                                         19
the pre-crisis period. In contrast, there is a strongly positive relation between
both variables and the risk premium during the post-crisis period. The coefficient
for the charge-off rate during the post-crisis period is positive and significant (t-
statistic 2.33). Similarly, the coefficient for the risk-retention requirement during
the post-crisis period is positive and highly significant (t-statistic 3.42). An im-
portant implication of these results is that the dramatic repricing of consumer
credit risk beginning in 2010 may be partially due to both a greater focus on the
amount of potential risk and major increases in the costs faced by intermediaries
in holding these risky asset on their balance sheets.

8.3 Capital Regulation and Balance-Sheet Costs
As another way of exploring the relation between the consumer credit risk pre-
mium and the balance-sheet costs and capital constraints faced by intermediaries,
we examine whether changes in the risk premium are correlated with changes in
exogenous measures of these costs and constraints. In this subsection, we focus
specifically on the time series of the average consumer credit risk premium taken
across all issuers in the sample.

     As measures of the constraints faced by intermediaries, we follow Adrian,
Etula, and Muir (2014), He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), Fleckenstein and Longstaff
(2020a), and others in using several aggregate leverage and regulatory capital
ratios. In doing this, we focus on ratios that play central roles not only in the
current regulatory environment, but also in the early 2000s when Basel I/II and
regulation by the FDIC were the primary capital adequacy standards faced by
intermediaries. This set of ratios should measure the impact of regulation on
intermediaries more consistently throughout the entire sample than measures
enacted after the financial crisis such as the SLR and the LCR.

     As the first measure, we use the intermediary leverage ratio provided by He,
Kelly, and Manela (2017) as a proxy for the funding constraints faced by inter-
mediaries. As the second measure, we follow Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020a)
in using the aggregate Tier 1 Capital Ratio for broker-dealers in the financial
markets. The Tier 1 Capital Ratio is defined as total Tier 1 capital as a per-
centage of total risk-weighted assets and has been a key component of capital
regulation starting with the Basel I framework and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) in the early 1990s. The aggregate Tier
1 Capital Ratio is a quarterly average over all broker-dealers and is based on the
Z.1 flow of funds data from the Federal Reserve. We acknowledge that in using
these ratios, we are relying on the assumption that changes in these ratios reflect
changes in either required leverage or capital. This assumption, however, seems
plausible since financial intermediaries have strong incentives to leverage their
balance sheets. Thus, decreases in leverage or increases in capital ratios are likely
driven by tighter regulatory capital requirements. The tighter the requirements,

                                         20
the higher is the potential cost of capital regulation to intermediaries in using
their balance sheets. If the consumer credit risk premium is related to interme-
diary capital regulation costs, then there should be a positive relation between
changes in the premium and changes in the Tier 1 capital ratio, and a negative
relation between changes in the premium and changes in intermediary leverage.

     As a measure of the costs incurred by financial intermediaries in placing as-
sets on their balance sheets, we follow Du, Tepper, and Verdhelhan (2017), An-
dersen, Duffie, and Song (2019), Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020a), and others
in using spreads observed in the market that proxy for the shadow costs of rent-
ing intermediary balance-sheet space. In particular, we use the turn-of-the-year
premium in Eurodollar futures prices used in Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020a).
Eurodollar futures are contracts that settle based on the value of the three-month
Libor rate at their expiration date. This means that contracts with December
expirations are based on the rate for Libor loans that remain on the balance
sheet at year end, while the contracts with March, June, and September expira-
tions are not. Musto (1997), Griffiths and Winters (2005), and others show that
financing rates such as three-month Libor tend to spike near the end of a year as
financial institutions face additional balance-sheet-related pressure to hold cash.
Thus, the size of the expected spike in year-end Libor provides a measure of the
balance-sheet usage costs financial institutions face. Fleckenstein and Longstaff
(2020a) identify the size of the expected spike as the difference between the fu-
tures price for a December contract and the average of the futures prices for the
contracts expiring three months earlier/later (September/March). Intuitively,
the turn-of-the-year premium represents the incremental cost of balance-sheet
usage at year end relative to other months. Changes in these incremental costs,
however, should be reflective of variation in the tightness of the balance-sheet
constraints facing financial intermediaries.
     Table 7 reports the results from regressing monthly changes in the average
consumer credit risk premium on changes in the leverage and capital ratios as
well as changes in the turn-of-the-year premium. We also include the lagged
change of the risk premium in the regression as a control for the time series
properties of the dependent variable.
     The results also provide strong support for the hypothesis that the consumer
credit risk premium is related to the balance-sheet and capital regulation costs
faced by financial intermediaries. First, Table 7 shows that changes in both
the broker-dealer Tier 1 capital ratio and the intermediary leverage ratio are
significantly related to changes in the risk premium. In particular, changes in
the Tier 1 capital ratio are positively related to changes in the risk premium
and are highly significant (t-statistic 3.93). Changes in the intermediary leverage
ratio are negatively related to changes in the risk premium and are also highly


                                        21
significant (t-statistic -3.04). The signs of these coefficients are both consistent
with the hypothesis that the consumer credit risk premium increases as financial
intermediaries become more constrained.

     Table 7 also shows that there is a strong relation between the risk premium
and the turn-of-the-year measure of balance-sheet usage costs. The change in
the turn-of-the-year premium is significantly positively related to changes in the
risk premium (t-statistic 2.72). This result is very intuitive, suggesting that the
average consumer credit risk premium increases precisely when participants in
other important financial markets view that the cost of holding positions on their
balance sheet has increased.
      In summary, these results strongly suggest that intermediary balance-sheet
constraints may be an important determinant of the consumer credit risk pre-
mium. If so, then increases in intermediary balance-sheet costs resulting from the
extensive changes in capital regulation and other requirements during the post-
crisis period could play an important role in explaining the dramatic increase in
the risk premium during the latter part of the sample period. It is important to
acknowledge, however, that these regression results simply document correlations
between the variables, and should not be interpreted as providing direct causal
evidence. We will address this issue more directly in the next subsection.

8.4 The 2010 Reconsolidation Event: A Natural Experiment

To explore the relation between the risk premium and intermediary balance-sheet
costs at a more fundamental causal level, we use the mandatory reconsolidation
of credit card master trusts back onto issuer balance sheets that occurred on
January 1, 2010 as an exogenous identification vehicle. This reconsolidation
event provides us with a natural experiment in which we can measure the impact
on each issuer of placing a dollar of securitized consumer credit on its balance
sheet.

8.4.1 Intermediary balance-sheet costs

Intermediary asset pricing theory suggests that the costs incurred by intermedi-
aries in placing assets on their balance sheet depend on at least three factors.
First, these costs are impacted by how binding the capital constraints faced by
the intermediary are. Second, the costs also depend on the marginal cost to the
intermediary of obtaining additional capital. Third, the costs should also depend
on how much capital the acquisition of an asset requires. The first two of these
are key elements of models such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and are
often expressed in terms of margins/haircuts and other types of leverage and cap-
ital constraints as well as the cost of unsecured debt or equity. The third plays
a central role in models such as the debt-overhang model of Andersen, Duffie,


                                        22
and Song (2019) in which the cost of acquiring an asset may exceed the value
of the asset to an intermediary's current shareholders. Thus, the acquisition of
some assets may have the effect of reducing an intermediary's regulatory capital.
We designate this third factor as "capital intensity" since it reflects the direct
impact on an intermediary's available capital resulting from placing assets on its
balance sheet.
8.4.2 Measuring capital intensity

The implementation of FAS 166/167 required intermediaries to reconsolidate
many of their securitizations back onto their balance sheets on January 1, 2010.
Typically, the decision by an intermediary to acquire assets and place them on
its balance sheet is an endogenous one. In contrast, the reconsolidation of credit
card securitizations onto issuer balance sheets was a mandatory exogenous event.
An important implication of this is that we can use the resulting impact on the
issuer's capital as an exogenous instrument to measure capital intensity.
     The reconsolidation event resulted in a major revision to the financial state-
ments of all the issuers in the sample and is discussed in detail in their financial
disclosures. Table 8 summarizes the impact of reconsolidation on the total assets,
liabilities, loan loss reserves, retained earnings, and Tier 1 capital ratios for each
of the issuers in the sample. As shown, the reconsolidation resulted in major
changes in the capitalization of the issuers. For example, in the case of Citibank,
the reconsolidation resulted in an increase in total assets of $ 137.0 billion, an
increase in total liabilities of $ 146.0 billion, an increase in the loan loss reserve
of $ 13.4 billion, a decrease in retained earnings of $ 8.4 billion, and a decline in
the Tier 1 capital ratio of 1.38%. Changes of the magnitude shown in Table 8
clearly had first-order effects on the balance sheets and regulatory capital ratios
of the issuers in the sample.
     To measure the capital intensity of the individual issuers in placing secu-
ritized assets on their balance sheet, we take the ratio of the January 1, 2010
change in the issuer's retained earnings to the total dollar amount of assets re-
consolidated. As shown in Table 8, this ratio ranges from a low of 5.13% for
Bank One and Chase to a high of 12.21% for First National. We emphasize
that it is the natural experiment provided by the reconsolidation of asset-backed
securitizations onto issuer balance sheets that allows us to identify the capital
intensity of these transactions from the perspective of the individual issuers.
8.4.3 The panel regression

In the absence of frictions, we would not expect a "technical" accounting change
of the type mandated by FAS 166/167 to have fundamental economic effects
on financial intermediaries or security prices. When intermediaries face frictions


                                         23
and binding constraints, however, this may no longer be true. The rapidly-
growing literature on intermediary asset pricing suggests that balance-sheet costs
resulting from funding frictions and regulatory capital constraints can have major
effects on the pricing of securities in which these intermediaries make markets.
This implies that the 2010 rule change requiring asset-backed securitizations to
be consolidated onto issuers' balance sheets could affect pricing if the change
tightened intermediary constraints and increased their balance-sheet costs. In
particular, if credit card securitizations are now capital intensive events in the
sense that the issuer needs to raise additional capital just to maintain its current
regulatory capital ratios, and if the issuer also faces frictions, constraints, and
additional costs in raising capital, then this may impact the observed consumer
credit risk premium. It is important to note that the impact occurs through the
interaction between the capital constraints and costs faced by the intermediary
and the capital intensity of the securitization.

     In light of this, we estimate a panel regression specification for the consumer
credit risk premium in which the interactions between capital constraints, capital
costs, and capital intensity play the central role. In taking the model to the data,
however, we first need to map issuer observables into model parameters.
      First, we interpret the capital ratio for an issuer as playing a similar role
as margins and haircuts in models such as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
G^ arleanu and Pedersen (2011), and others. This is intuitive since both margins
and regulatory capital constraints have the net effect of prohibiting intermediaries
from financing assets entirely with debt. To illustrate, an 8% Tier 1 capital
requirement can be broadly interpreted as playing a similar role to imposing an
8% margin requirement on an intermediary. Thus, the issuer's capital ratio can
be viewed as economically equivalent to the margin constraint in models such
as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). Second, the cost of raising additional
capital can be proxied in a number of ways. A standard approach in the empirical
literature is to use the CDS spread or credit spread of the issuer as a proxy for its
cost of unsecured debt. We note that this cost plays a central role in models such
as Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2019).
     To examine the relation between the consumer credit risk premium and
the balance-sheet costs faced by intermediaries, we estimate the following panel
regression specification,



                              N
               Prem it =      j =1 j   I jt + 1 Ratio it × Intensity i

                             + 2 Spread it × Intensityi +      it ,              (1)

                                          24
where  and  are regression coefficients, I jt are annual fixed effects dummy
variables, and where Ratio, Spread, and Intensity denote the issuer's capital
ratio, the issuer's credit spread, and the issuer's capital intensity measure for
asset-backed securitizations. Table 9 reports the regression results.

     The results provide strong support for the hypothesis that the consumer
credit risk premium is directly related to intermediary balance-sheet costs. In
particular, both the interaction term between the capital ratio and the intensity
measure, and between the credit spread and the intensity measure, are positive
and significant in the regression. This implies that the dramatic increase in
the risk premium during the 2010­2020 period could be at least partially due
to corresponding increases in intermediary balance-sheet costs associated with
extensive new capital regulation. While the two interaction terms are significant
during both the pre-consolidation and post-consolidation periods, we note that
the magnitude of their regression coefficients is much higher during the latter
period. This is consistent with the increase in the consumer credit risk premium
resulting from both increasing balance-sheet costs and greater sensitivity to these
costs.

     The earlier results in Table 6 suggested that the consumer credit risk pre-
mium became more sensitive to charge-off risk, and that risk-retention rules may
have played a larger role during the post-crisis period. As an alternative speci-
fication, we incorporate the charge-off rate and the risk-retention ratio into the
panel regression,



                    N
      Prem it =     j =1 j   I jt + 1 Chargeoff it + 2 Retention Ratio it

              + 3 Ratio it × Intensity i + 4 Spread it × Intensityi +      it .   (2)


Table 10 reports the results from this alternative specification.

      As shown, the results are similar to those in Table 9. In particular, both
of the interaction terms are again positive and significant. In addition, the co-
efficients for the interaction terms are much larger during the post-consolidation
period after January 1, 2010. As in Table 6, credit card risk and the risk-retention
ratio are significantly positively related to the consumer credit risk premium over
the sample period. Again, these results are consistent with the interpretation
of the post-financial-crisis increase in the consumer credit risk premium being
driven by increases in intermediary balance-sheet costs and regulatory capital
requirements.

                                        25
                              9. CONCLUSION


We use the secondary market prices of credit card ABS tranches to study how
the market values unsecured consumer credit risk. The results indicate that
there is a substantial risk premium associated with unsecured household debt.
The average value of the consumer credit risk premium is 522 basis points over
the entire 2000­2020 sample period, but has increased to more than ten percent
during the latter part of the sample period. The large risk premium associated
with unsecured consumer credit risk may be a major component of the high
effective rates consumers pay on their credit cards.
     We examine potential explanations for the dramatic increase in the consumer
credit risk premium that occurs around the beginning of 2010. We find that the
consumer credit risk premium is directly related to other credit spreads, but also
appears to be driven by other factors unique to the credit card securitization
market. In particular, we find strong evidence that the consumer credit risk
premium is related to the balance-sheet costs and capital constraints faced by
financial intermediaries. For example, using the natural experiment provided
by the mandatory reconsolidation of credit card ABS back onto issuers' balance
sheets on January 1, 2010 as a way to identify the marginal cost of placing assets
on-balance-sheet, we find that a major portion of the increase in the consumer
credit risk premium during the past decade may be due to the impact of capital
regulation. These results are consistent with other recent evidence about the
relation between intermediary balance-sheet costs, constraints from regulatory
capital requirements, and asset pricing. Finally, our results point towards the
need for further research to understand the role that market credit risk premia
play in determining both the cost and availability of credit to the household
sector. Especially, understanding the extent to which regulation aimed at taming
risk-taking on "Wall Street" could have real effects on the availability and terms
of credit to "Main Street" ought to be a key priority for academics, policy makers
and regulators.




                                       26
                              REFERENCES


Abdallah, Chadi S., and William D. Lastrapes, 2012, Home Equity Lending
and Retail Spending: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Texas, American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 94-125.

Acharya, Viral V., Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez, 2013, Securitization
Without Risk Transfer, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 515-536.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial Intermediaries and
the Cross-Section of Asset Returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557-2596.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and Leverage, Journal of
Financial Intermediation 19, 418-437.

Agarwal, Sumit, Paige Marta Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman, 2009, Payday Loans
and Credit Cards: New Liquidity and Credit Scoring Puzzles?, American Eco-
nomic Review 99, 412-417.

Alan, Sule, and Gyongyi Loranth, 2013, Subprime Consumer Credit Demand:
Evidence from a Lender's Pricing Experiment, Review of Financial Studies 26,
2353-2374.
An, X. and Larry Cordell, 2017, Regime Shift and the Post-Crisis World of
Mortgage Loss Severities, Working Paper No. 17-08, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia.
Andersen, Leif, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song, 2019, Funding Value Adjustments,
Journal of Finance 74, 145-192.

Assuncao, Juliano J., Efraim Benmelech, and Fernando S. S. Silva, 2014, Re-
possession and the Democratization of Credit, Review of Financial Studies 27,
2661-2689.

Ausubel, Lawrence M., 1991, The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card
Market, American Economic Review 81, 50-81.
Ayotte, Kenneth, and Stav Gaon, 2011, Asset-Backed Securities: Costs and
Benefits of "Bankruptcy Remoteness," Review of Financial Studies 24, 12991335.

Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, Jiang Wang, 2011, The Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds,
Journal of Finance 66, 911946.
Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2009, Flight-
to-Quality or Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market,


                                      27
Review of Financial Studies 22, 925957
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian, 2012, The
Availability and Utilization of 401(k) Loans, In David A. Wise, editor, Investi-
gations in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, 145-172.

Bhansali, Vineer, Robert Gingrich, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2008, Systemic
Credit Risk: What is the Market Telling Us? Financial Analysts Journal 64,
(July/August) 16-24.

Black, Fischer, and John C. Cox, 1976, Valuing Corporate Securities: Some
Effects of Bond Indenture Provisions, Journal of Finance 31, 351-367.
Brunnermeier, Marcus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Fund-
ing Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph Mason, 2004, Credit Card Securitization and
Regulatory Arbitrage, Journal of Financial Services Research, August, 5-27.

Campbell, John Y., and Joao F. Cocco, 2105, A Model of Mortgage Default,
Journal of Finance 70, 1495-1554.
Chernov, Mikhail, Brett R. Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2017, Macroecon-
omic-Driven Prepayment Risk and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities,
Review of Financial Studies 31, 1132-1183.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1998, Leverage and Market Stability:
The Role of Margin Rules and Price Limits, Journal of Business 71, 179-210.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2001, Do Credit Spreads Re-
flect Stationary Leverage Ratios? Journal of Finance 56, 1929-1957.
Corradin, Stefano, and Alexander Popov, 2015, House Prices, Home Equity Bor-
rowing, and Entrepreneurship, Review of Financial Studies 28, 2399-2428.

Daley, Brendan, Brett Green, Victoria Vanasco, 2020, Securitization, Ratings,
and Credit Supply, Journal of Finance 75, 1037-1082.
Diep, Peter, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Scott Richardson, 2020, The Cross Section
of MBS Returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Dou, Yiwei, Stephen G. Ryan, and Biqin Xie, 2018, The Real Effects of FAS
166/167 on Banks' Mortgage Approval and Sale Decisions, Journal of Accounting
Research 56, 843-882.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2018, Deviations from
Covered Interest Rate Parity, Journal of Finance 73, 915-957.

                                      28
Duffee, Gregory R., 1999, Estimating the Price of Default Risk, Review of Fi-
nancial Studies 12, 187-226.
Duffie, Darrell, 2018, Post-Crisis Bank Regulations and Financial Market Liq-
uidity, Working paper, Stanford University.

Duffie, Darrell, and Ken Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of Default-
able Bonds, Review of Financial Studies 12, 687-720.

Elul, R., N. S. Souleles, S. Chomsisengphet, D. Glennon, and R. Hunt, 2010,
What `Triggers' Mortgage Default? American Economic Review 100, 490494.
Faltin-Traeger, Oliver, Kathleen W. Johnson, and Christopher Mayer, 2011,
Sponsor Risk and the Performance of Asset-Backed Securities, Working paper,
Columbia University.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020a, Renting Balance Sheet
Space: Intermediary Balance Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Deriva-
tives, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020b, The U.S. Treasury
Floating Rate Note Puzzle: Is there a Premium for Mark-to-Market Stability?
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Flynn, Sean, Andra C. Ghent, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2019, Informational Efficiency
in Securitization After Dodd-Frank, Working paper, Colorado State University.
Furfine, Craig H., 2018, The Impact of Risk-Retention Regulation on the Under-
writing of Securitized Mortgages, Journal of Financial Services Research, forth-
coming.

Fuster, Andreas, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Tarun Ramadorai, and Ansgar Wal-
ther, 2018, Predictably Unequal? The Effects of Machine Learning on Credit
Markets, Working paper, Swiss National Bank.

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits of
Arbitrage: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market,
Journal of Finance 62, 557-595.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2011, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259-4299.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2013, A Model of
Shadow Banking, Journal of Finance 68, 1331-1363.

Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaff, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2011,
Corporate Bond Default Risk: A 150-Year Perspective, Journal of Financial

                                       29
Economics 102, 233-250.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Ego Zakrajsek, 2012, Credit Spreads and Business Cycle
Fluctuations, American Economic Review 102, 1692-1720.

Griffiths, Mark D., and Drew B. Winters, 2005, The Turn of the Year in Money
Markets: Tests of the Risk-Shifting Window Dressing and Preferred Habitat
Hypotheses, Journal of Business 78, 1337-1363.

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets
with Financial Constrained Arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
361-407.
Han, Song, and Geng Li, 2011, Household Borrowing after Personal Bankruptcy,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43, 491-517.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary Asset Pricing:
New Evidence from Many Asset Classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126,
1-35.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2012, A Model of Capital and Crises,
Review of Economic Studies 79, 735-777.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, Amer-
ican Economic Review 103, 732-770.

Jarrow, Robert A., and Stuart M. Turnbull, 1995, Pricing Derivatives on Finan-
cial Securities Subject to Credit Risk, Journal of Finance 50, 53-85.

Keys, Benjamin J., and Jialan Wang, 2019, Minimum Payments and Debt Pay-
down in Consumer Credit Cards, Journal of Financial Economics 131, 528-548.
Khandani, A. E., A. J. Kim, and Andrew W. Lo, 2010, Consumer Credit-Risk
Models via Machine-Learning Algorithms, Journal of Banking & Finance 34,
27672787.

Kondor, Peter, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2019, Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of
Arbitrage Capital, Journal of Finance 74, 1139-1173.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2003, Collateral Constraints and the Amplification
Mechanism, Journal of Economic Theory 111, 277-292.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2010, Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises,
American Economic Journal ­ Macroeconomics 2, 1-30.

Kuhnen, Camelia M., 2015, Asymmetric Learning from Financial Information,
Journal of Finance 70, 2029-2062.

                                     30
Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a Wealth Effect, Journal of
Finance 56, 1401-1440.
Lemmon, Michael L., Laura Xiaolei Liu, Mike Qinghao Mao, and Greg Nini,
2014, Securitization and Capital Structure in Nonfinancial Firms: An Empirical
Investigation, Journal of Finance 69, 1787-1825.
Levitin, Adam J., 2013, Skin-in-the-Game: Risk-Retention Lessons from Credit
Card Securitization, George Washington Law Review 81, 813-855.

Lewis, Kurt, Francis A. Longstaff, and Lubomir Petrasek, 2020, Asset Mispricing,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Li, Geng, and Paul A. Smith, 2010, 401(k) Loans and Household Balance Sheets,
National Tax Journal 63, 479-508.

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt, 2007, Consumer Bankruptcy:
A Fresh Start, American Economic Review 97, 402-418.

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt, 2010, Accounting for the
Rise in Consumer Bankruptcies, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
2, 165-193.
Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt, 2016, The Democratization
of Credit and the Rise in Consumer Bankruptcies Review of Economic Studies
83, 1673-1710.
Longstaff, Francis A., and Arvind Rajan, 2008, An Empirical Analysis of the
Pricing of Collateralized Debt Obligations, Journal of Finance 63, 509-563.

Longstaff, Francis A., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 1995, A Simple Approach to
Valuing Risky Fixed and Floating Rate Debt, Journal of Finance 50, 789-819.
Melzer, Brian T., 2011, The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the
Payday Lending Market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 517-555.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House Prices, Home EquityBased Borrowing,
and the US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-
2156.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2012, The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from
the 2009 Cash for Clunkers Program, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1107-
1142.

Morse, Adair, 2011, Payday Lenders: Heroes or Villains?, Journal of Financial
Economics 102, 28-44.


                                      31
Musto, David, 1997, Portfolio Disclosures and Year-End Price Shifts, Journal of
Finance 52, 1861-1883.
Norden, Lars, and Martin Weber, 2010, Credit Line Usage, Checking Account
Activity, and Default Risk of Bank Borrowers, Review of Financial Studies 23,
3665-3699.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Learning in Financial Markets, Annual
Review of Financial Economics 1, 361-381.

Routledge, Bryan R., 1999, Adaptive Learning in Financial Markets, Review of
Financial Studies 12, 1165-1202.
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1989, Prepayment and the Valua-
tion of Mortgage-Backed Securities, Journal of Finance 44, 375-392.

Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1992, Prepayment, Default, and the
Valuation of Mortgage Pass-Through Securities, Journal of Business 68, 221-239.

Schwarz, Krista, 2019, Mind the Gap: Disentangling Credit and Liquidity in
Risk Spreads, Review of Finance, 557-597.
Sirignano, J., A. Sadhwani, and K. Giesecke, 2017, Deep Learning for Mortgage
Risk, Tech. rep., Stanford University.

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman, 2016, Borrowing High versus Borrowing
Higher: Price Dispersion and Shopping Behavior in the U.S. Credit Card Market,
Review of Financial Studies 29, 979-1006.

Tian, Xiaoli, and Haiwen Zhang, 2018, Impact of FAS 166/167 on the Securiti-
zation of Credit Card Loans, Working paper, Georgetown University.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2016, Consumer Credit: Learning Your Customer's
Default Risk from What (S)he Buys, Working paper, University of California,
Berkeley.

Xiong, Wei, 2001, Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247-292.




                                      32
                                    Portfolio Yield
          24

          23

          22

          21

          20

          19

          18

          17

          16
                2002        2006        2010          2014    2018

                                    Excess Spread
          18

          16

          14

          12

          10

           8

           6

           4
                2002        2006        2010          2014    2018

                                     Charge-Offs
          12


          10


           8


           6


           4


           2


           0
                2002        2006        2010          2014    2018




Figure 1. Average Portfolio Yields, Excess Spreads, and Charge-off
Rates. This figure shows the average portfolio yield, excess spread, and charge-
off rates for the issuers in the sample, where the averages are taken over the
average values for each issuer in the sample for a given month.




                                       33
                                     Class A
         110


         100


          90


          80


          70


          60


          50
                2002        2006        2010       2014        2018

                                     Class B
         110


         100


          90


          80


          70


          60


          50
                2002        2006        2010       2014        2018

                                     Class C
         110


         100


          90


          80


          70


          60


          50
                2002        2006        2010       2014        2018




Figure 2. Average Prices for the A, B, and C Tranches. This figure
shows the average prices for the A, B, and C tranches in the sample, where
the averages are taken over the month-end prices of the respective A, B, and C
tranches for all observations in the sample each month.




                                     34
                                      Risk Premium
          20




          15




          10




           5




           0




           -5
                 2002        2006        2010        2014        2018



                                       Q/P Ratio
          10


           9


           8


           7


           6


           5


           4


           3


           2


           1


           0
                 2002        2006        2010        2014        2018




Figure 3. The Average Consumer Credit Risk Premium and the Ratio
of Implied Charge-offs to Actual Charge-offs. The upper panel of the figure
shows the average consumer credit risk premium, where the average is taken over
the average values for each issuer in the sample for a given month. The lower
panel shows the average ratio of the risk-neutral charge-off rate to the actual
charge-off rate, where the average is taken over the average values for each issuer
in the sample for a given month.

                                        35
          20
                  High Yield Spread
          18
                  Risk Premium
          16

          14

          12

          10

           8

           6

           4

           2

           0
                2002         2006      2010        2014       2018




Figure 4. The Average Consumer Credit Risk Premium and the High
Yield Corporate Credit Spread. This figure lots the average consumer credit
risk premium and the credit spread on high yield corporate bonds. The average
consumer credit risk premium is taken over the average values for each issuer in
the sample for a given month.




                                      36
                                                                     Table 1
Summary Statistics for Credit Card Receivables Portfolio Characteristics. This table presents summary statistics for the indicated
characteristics of the portfolios of credit card receivables underlying the securitizations. The statistics for the individual card issuers are computed by
taking averages across all securitizations for each month, and then averaging the monthly averages. The monthly payment rate is the ratio of total
cash flows collected each month divided by the portfolio balance and is expressed as a percentage. Portfolio yield is the annualized percentage gross
return on the portfolio. Excess spread is the annualized percentage net return on the portfolio. The Charge-off rate is the one-month annualized
percentage rate of charge-offs on the portfolio. Risk-retention denotes the minimum percentage of portfolio receivables the issuer is required to hold.
N denotes the number of months. The sample period is monthly from January 2000 to January 2020.


                                                          Monthly
                                           Sample         Payment         Portfolio        Excess         Charge-off            Risk-
      Card Issuer                           Period           Rate            Yield         Spread              Rate         Retention            N


      American Express                 2000­2019            26.155           21.539        12.317              4.046             7.000         220
      Bank of America                  2000­2012            15.246           19.540         7.839              7.039             4.000         143
      Bank One                         2000­2013            19.056           17.498         7.537              5.642             4.162         160
      Citibank                         2000­2014            19.267           16.558         7.484              5.708             5.000         162
      Chase                            2000­2015            19.654           16.831         7.630              5.051             4.000         185
      Capital One                      2000­2015            19.361           20.146        10.577              4.255             5.000         185
      Discover                         2000­2013            19.580           17.719         8.145              5.536             7.000         159
      First National                   2002­2011            13.605           17.815         6.267              7.314             7.000          87
      MBNA                             2000­2013            15.615           19.147         8.107              6.238             4.000         162
      World Financial                  2000­2020            17.649           30.237        15.338              7.178             4.602         221

      All                              2000­2020            19.032           20.194          9.597             5.677             5.131        1,684
                                                Table 2
Summary Statistics for Credit Card Asset-Backed Securities. This table presents summary statis-
tics for the individual A, B, and C tranches of the credit card securitizations in the sample. Mat denotes
the average maturity of the tranches in years. Sprd denotes the average floating spread above Libor of the
tranches and is expressed in basis points. Attach and detach denote the average attachment and detachment
points for individual tranches and are expressed as percentages of the total notional amount of the securiti-
zation. Min, Mean, and Max denote the minimum, mean, and maximum prices for the individual tranches
during the sample period. The statistics for the individual card issuers are based on the daily values across
all of their outstanding securitizations. The sample is daily from January 1, 2000 to January 31, 2020.



  Card Issuer          Tranche       Mat      Sprd   Attach    Detach      Min     Mean      Max       N


  American Express            A      3.21    30.46     15.04    100.00    63.97    99.71   110.98    3790
  Bank of America             A      2.75     8.41     18.09    100.00    73.43    98.53   100.86     577
  Bank One                    A      2.85    12.22     15.82    100.00    95.75   100.05   102.99     427
  Citibank                    A      3.46    13.34     12.98    100.00    79.52    99.44   112.06    1229
  Chase                       A      3.07    10.58     16.27    100.00    61.57    99.83   110.29    1815
  Capital One                 A      3.52    13.71     20.02    100.00    55.39   101.20   114.91    1865
  Discover                    A      3.09    13.49     12.50    100.00    68.06    99.98   111.58    2596
  First National              A      2.00    44.74     20.23    100.00    92.51    99.92   101.12     195
  MBNA                        A      3.66    14.16     15.28    100.00    78.47   100.79   123.67    4199
  World Financial             A      2.94    33.69     24.69    100.00    59.05   100.55   108.64    1387

  American Express            B      3.22    82.70      8.46     15.07    34.65    98.42   119.86    3722
  Bank of America             B      2.76    64.19      9.54     18.09    40.32    96.16   101.91     584
  Bank One                    B      2.84    36.18      8.75     15.84    96.43    99.98   101.91     424
  Citibank                    B      3.43    43.49      7.78     12.98    52.66    97.29   111.14    1224
  Chase                       B      3.10    33.76      9.05     16.28    24.64    98.53   108.82    1851
  Capital One                 B      3.58    41.78     11.05     20.09    22.63    97.72   112.16    1803
  Discover                    B      3.11    35.61      7.50     12.50    38.32    98.42   110.76    2656
  First National              B      1.93    24.53     10.69     18.09    79.58    98.02   101.63     111
  MBNA                        B      3.67    36.70      8.00     15.28    50.12    99.64   123.09    4216
  World Financial             B      2.98   119.18     16.51     23.29    49.06    99.48   109.85     852

  American Express            C      3.39    42.90      0.00      8.14    20.45    93.43   104.15    1312
  Bank of America             C      2.87   152.02      0.00     10.22    41.07    93.29   110.06     395
  Bank One                    C      3.95    88.93      0.00      8.30    27.81    97.87   107.32     508
  Citibank                    C      4.01    68.96      0.00      7.76    23.27    97.12   113.54    1282
  Chase                       C      3.27    81.53      0.00      9.14    15.97    97.87   104.27    1558
  Capital One                 C      3.43   108.20      0.00     11.34    11.44    97.05   113.89    1590
  Discover                    C      2.00    32.44      0.00     26.86    61.40    86.44   100.20      25
  First National              C      1.99   106.39      0.00      9.50    67.50    97.87   102.41      99
  MBNA                        C      4.00   107.10      0.00      8.13    27.22   100.38   118.83    3051
                                                                  Table 3
Summary Statistics for the Consumer Credit Risk Premia. This table presents summary statistics for the consumer credit risk premia for
the indicated card issuers. The statistics for the individual card issuers are computed by taking averages across all securitizations for each month,
and then averaging the monthly averages. The consumer credit risk premia are expressed as percentages. The columns headings 5%, 25%, 50%, 75%,
and 95% denote the respective percentiles of the distribution of risk premia. N denotes the number of months. The sample is monthly from January
2000 to January 2020.


                                                      Std.
      Card Issuer                       Mean          Dev.            5%          25%           50%           75%           95%            N


      American Express                  7.536        3.338         2.753         4.451         7.446        10.479        12.412         220
      Bank of America                   3.767        2.788        -0.276         1.656         3.370         5.342         9.393         143
      Bank One                          3.016        2.558        -0.469         1.116         2.663         4.758         7.368         160
      Citibank                          2.847        2.446         0.181         1.323         2.140         3.662         8.812         162
      Chase                             3.044        2.817        -0.773         0.655         2.312         5.391         7.870         185
      Capital One                       6.278        2.764         2.270         4.198         5.839         8.576        10.992         185
      Discover                          3.958        4.496        -0.886         0.340         1.630         7.478        12.519         159
      First National                    2.948        2.813        -0.378         1.318         2.308         3.779         9.332          87
      MBNA                              3.771        2.610         0.688         2.324         3.049         4.981         9.685         162
      World Financial                  10.952        5.991         1.404         6.236        11.356        15.843        18.935         221

      All                               5.215        4.484        -0.102         1.838         4.133         7.687        13.744        1,684
                                                                   Table 4
Regression of Changes in Consumer Credit Risk Premium on Changes in Corporate Credit Spreads. This table presents the results
from regressing changes in the consumer credit risk premium on the indicated changes in corporate credit spreads. The pre-crisis and post-crisis
intercepts apply to the 2000­2006 and 2007­2020 periods, respectively. CP spread denotes the spread on investment grade commercial paper relative
to the Treasury bill rate. Aaa and Baa spreads denote the spreads on indexes of corporate bonds with the respective ratings relative to the ten-year
Treasury rate. High yield spread denotes the Bloomberg Barclays index of high yield corporate (option adjusted) spreads relative to Treasury rates.
The consumer credit risk premium and all credit spreads are expressed as percentages. Standard errors are based on Newey-West (1987). The
superscripts  and  denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels, respectively. The sample is monthly from January 2000 to January
2020.


                                         Coef      t-Stat             Coef      t-Stat            Coef      t-Stat             Coef      t-Stat


    Pre-Crisis Intercept                0.0083       0.14           0.0165       0.29            0.0123       0.21           0.0147       0.23
    Post-Crisis Intercept               0.1209       2.77           0.1150       2.61            0.1167       2.60           0.1182       2.43

     Risk Premium t-1                 -0.2550       -2.62         -0.2451       -2.68          -0.2529      -2.72          -0.2597       -2.79

       CP    Spread t                  0.2269       1.42                 -          -                -          -                 -          -
       CP    Spread t-1               -0.2418      -2.03                 -          -                -          -                 -          -
       CP    Spread t-2               -0.1716      -0.86                 -          -                -          -                 -          -
       CP    Spread t-3                0.6445       6.36                 -          -                -          -                 -          -

       Aaa   Spread t                       -          -           0.1537        0.44                -          -                 -          -
       Aaa   Spread t-1                     -          -           0.9222        2.93                -          -                 -          -
       Aaa   Spread t-2                     -          -          -0.5721       -1.94                -          -                 -          -
       Aaa   Spread t-3                     -          -           0.0494        0.16                -          -                 -          -

       Baa   Spread t                       -          -                 -          -           0.0703       0.26                 -          -
       Baa   Spread t-1                     -          -                 -          -           0.5017       2.44                 -          -
       Baa   Spread t-2                     -          -                 -          -          -0.3817      -1.53                 -          -
       Baa   Spread t-3                     -          -                 -          -           0.2150       1.08                 -          -

       High   Yield   Spread t              -          -                 -          -                -          -          -0.0111       -0.15
       High   Yield   Spread t-1            -          -                 -          -                -          -           0.1781        2.80
       High   Yield   Spread t-2            -          -                 -          -                -          -          -0.0514       -0.88
       High   Yield   Spread t-3            -          -                 -          -                -          -           0.0675        1.15


    Adj. R2                                         0.089                       0.080                        0.063                       0.064
    N                                                 215                         215                          215                         215
                                              Table 5



Regression of Average Consumer Credit Risk Premium on Quarter-End and Year-End
Indicators. This table reports the results from the regression of the average consumer credit risk
premium on quarter-end and year-end indicators. The average consumer credit risk premium is ex-
pressed as a percentage. The quarter-end indicator takes value one for March, June, September, and
December observations, and zero otherwise. The year-end indicator takes value one for December,
and zero otherwise. Standard errors are based on Newey and West (1987). The superscripts  and

   denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels, respectively. The sample is monthly
from January 2000 to December 2019.



                                                                Coeff.             t-Stat


            Quarter-End Indicator                             0.3270                3.90
            Year-End Indicator                               -0.1556               -0.59


            Annual Fixed Effects                                                     Yes

            Adjusted R2                                                            0.972
            Number of Observations                                                   220
                                                                      Table 6



Panel Regressions of Consumer Credit Risk Premia on the Charge-off Rates and Risk-Retention Requirements. This table
reports the results from the panel regression of the consumer credit risk premia on charge-off rates and the required minimum issuer risk-
retention ratios for the credit card securitization portfolio. The consumer credit risk premia are expressed as percentages. The charge-off rates
are expressed as a percentage. The risk-retention ratios are expressed as a percentage. The pre-crisis period is 2000­2006. The post-crisis period
is 2007­2020. Robust standard errors are clustered by year. The superscripts  and  denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent
levels, respectively. The sample is monthly from January 2000 to December 2019.



                                                  Full Sample                          Pre-Crisis                         Post-Crisis

                                                Coef        t-Stat                   Coef           t-Stat             Coef         t-Stat


      Charge-off Rate                         0.2073          1.69               -0.0978         -0.62                0.3434            2.33

      Risk-Retention Ratio                    0.2214          1.95                 0.0210            0.26             0.5161            3.42


      Time Fixed Effects                                        Yes                                   Yes                               Yes

      Adjusted R2                                            0.586                                  0.073                           0.479
      Number of Observations                                 1,474                                    664                             810
                                            Table 7



Regression of Changes in the Consumer Credit Risk Premium on Changes in Inter-
mediary Capital and Balance Sheet Cost Measures. This table reports the results from the
regression of changes in the average consumer credit risk premium on the change in the aggregate
Tier 1 capital ratio for broker-dealers, the change in the He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) measure
of intermediary leverage, and the change in the Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020) turn-of-the-year
index of balance sheet costs. The consumer credit risk premium is expressed as a percentage. Tier
1 capital is expressed as a percentage. Intermediary leverage is expressed as a percentage. The
turn-of-the-year index is expressed as a percentage. Standard errors are based on Newey and West
(1987). The superscripts  and  denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels,
respectively. The sample is quarterly from April 2000 to December 2019.



                                                                Coeff.           t-Stat


         Intercept                                              0.0694             0.57

          Risk Premium t-1                                    -0.3603            -7.12

          Tier 1 Capital Ratio t                               2.6635             3.93
          Intermediary Leverage Ratio t                       -0.5333            -3.04
          Turn-of-Year Measure t                              12.9620             2.72


         Adjusted R2                                                              0.311
         Number of Observations                                                      67
                                                                   Table 8
Summary Statistics for FAS 166/167 Reconsolidations. This table presents summary statistics for the financial impact on the consolidating
entity resulting from the mandatory implementation of FAS 166/167 on January 1, 2010. Assets consolidated, change in liabilities, change in loss
reserve, and change in retained earnings are expressed in billions of dollars. The effect on Tier 1 capital is expressed in terms of the change in the
percentage Tier 1 capital ratio. The capital intensity ratio is the ratio of the change in retained earnings to the change in assets and is expressed as
a percentage.


                                                                                                                         Effect on
                                                                                Change      Change in      Effect on        Tier 1      Capital
                               Elected               Assets      Change in      in Loss      Retained         Tier 1      Capital     Intensity
   Card Issuer                To Defer         Consolidated      Liabilities    Reserve      Earnings       Capital          Ratio       Ratio


   American Express                No                  29.00          25.00        2.50          -1.80        -1.60         -1.20          6.21
   Bank of America                 No                 100.40         106.70       10.80          -6.20        -9.70         -0.76          6.18
   Bank One                        Yes                 87.70          92.20        7.80          -4.50        -4.40         -0.34          5.13
   Citibank                        No                 137.00         146.00       13.40          -8.40       -14.20         -1.38          6.13
   Chase                           Yes                 87.70          92.20        7.80          -4.50        -4.40         -0.34          5.13
   Capital One                     No                  41.85          44.87        3.85          -3.02        -6.88         -3.82          7.22
   Discover                        No                  21.10          22.43        2.10          -1.40        -1.41         -2.20          6.64
   First National                  No                   1.31           2.54        0.33          -0.16        -0.39         -0.92         12.21
   MBNA                            No                 100.40         106.70       10.80          -6.20        -9.70         -0.76          6.18
   World Financial                 No                   3.40           3.70        0.50          -0.40        -0.49         -1.49         11.76
                                                                     Table 9



Panel Regressions of the Consumer Credit Risk Premia on Measures of Intermediary Balance Sheet Constraints. This table
reports the results from the panel regression of the consumer credit risk premia for the individual issuers on the indicated variables. The
consumer credit risk premia are expressed as percentages. Ratio is the ratio of total equity to total assets for the issuer and is expressed
as a percentage. Spread is the credit spread for the issuer (CDS spread or weighted-average cost of debt relative to Treasury rates) and is
expressed as a percentage. Intensity is expressed as a percentage. The pre-consolidation period is 2000­2009. The post-consolidation period
is 2010­2020. Robust standard errors are clustered by year. The superscripts  and  denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent
levels, respectively. The sample is quarterly from April 2000 to December 2019.



                                                 Full Sample                   Pre-Consolidation                 Post-Consolidation

                                              Coef        t-Stat                Coef        t-Stat                Coef        t-Stat


      Ratio × Intensity                      0.0119         2.34               0.0115         2.32              0.0521          2.30
      Spread × Intensity                     0.1356         2.94               0.0637         3.84              0.4132          3.62


      Time Fixed Effects                                       Yes                             Yes                               Yes

      Adjusted R2                                          0.639                             0.326                             0.551
      Number of Observations                                 354                               212                               142
                                                                       Table 10



Panel Regressions of the Consumer Credit Risk Premia on Measures of Credit Risk and Intermediary Balance Sheet Con-
straints. This table reports the results from the panel regression of the consumer credit risk premia for the individual issuers on the indicated
variables. The consumer credit risk premia are expressed as percentages. The charge-off rates are expressed as a percentage. The risk-retention
ratios are expressed as a percentage. Ratio is the ratio of total equity to total assets for the issuer and is expressed as a percentage. Spread is the
credit spread for the issuer (CDS spread or weighted-average cost of debt relative to Treasury rates) and is expressed as a percentage. Intensity
is expressed as a percentage. The pre-consolidation period is 2000­2009. The post-consolidation period is 2010­2020. Robust standard errors
are clustered by year. The superscripts  and  denote significance at the ten-percent and five-percent levels, respectively. The sample is
quarterly from April 2000 to December 2019.



                                                   Full Sample                      Pre-Consolidation                    Post-Consolidation

                                                 Coef         t-Stat                  Coef         t-Stat                   Coef         t-Stat


      Charge-off Rate                          0.1915           3.32               -0.3062         -2.45                 0.0697          0.73
      Risk-Retention Ratio                     0.6700           3.28                0.8373          4.54                -0.0332         -0.07

      Ratio × Intensity                        0.0110           2.10                 0.0130          2.75                 0.0766          1.96
      Spread × Intensity                       0.1284           1.83                 0.0078          0.69                 0.3809          4.50


      Time Fixed Effects                                         Yes                                  Yes                                  Yes

      Adjusted R2                                             0.664                                 0.461                                0.571
      Number of Observations                                    300                                   180                                  120
    INTERNET APPENDIX FOR




 THE MARKET RISK PREMIUM FOR
UNSECURED CONSUMER CREDIT RISK




       Matthias Fleckenstein
       Francis A. Longstaff
                            INTERNET APPENDIX


A.1 Data Sources
Table A1 provides a description of all the data and variables used in the study
along with their definitions and corresponding sources. Table A2 lists the credit
card master trusts for the ten credit card issuers in the study with their identifiers
in the Bloomberg system.


A.2 Definitions

This section defines the key quantitative variables for analyzing credit card se-
curitizations.
Base Rate: The base rate is the sum of the total monthly coupon cash flows to
note holders, servicing fees and other trust expenses, as a percentage of the total
receivables balance as of the first day of the month. The base rate is a measure
of the monthly cash outflows from the credit card master trust.
Card Interchange: Interchange is a fee exchanged between banks in a credit
card transaction and is typically expressed as a percentage of the transaction
amount. Interchange fees are not paid by cardholders. This fee is typically paid
by the merchant to the bank that issues the credit card to compensate the card
issuer for assuming interim cardholder credit risk and fraud because the merchant
is paid at the time of the sale, but the issuing bank is not until the cardholder
is billed and makes payment. Interchange is often shared by the merchant's
bank, the bank issuing the credit card, and Visa or Mastercard for clearing the
transaction.

Charge-offs: Credit card receivables are typically charged off after the card-
holder has been delinquent in paying the revolving balance for more than 180
days. The charge-off rate is the amount charged off each month divided by the
total outstanding principal balance at the beginning of the month. Since the out-
standing principal is reduced by the amount of principal charge-offs at the start
of the next month, charge-offs diminish the collateral value backing the issued
notes and the level of receivables backing the notes declines. If charge-offs reach
a threshold as specified in the prospectus supplement, an early amortization of
notes is triggered.
Excess Spread: The excess spread is the annualized rate of (gross) portfolio
yield less servicing fees, coupon cash flows to noteholders, charge-offs, and any
other trust expenses.1 Excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement for
1
    The servicing fee is an annual fee expressed in percent and paid to the servicer

                                          1
the notes. Intuitively, as long as the excess spread is positive, the securitization
generates enough cash inflows to cover cash outflows. When the average excess
spread is negative (typically calculated over a period of three months), many
master trusts enter into early amortization.2

Monthly Payment Rate (MPR): The monthly payment rate (MPR) is the
monthly rate of total principal cash flows during the month divided by the total
principal receivables balance at the beginning of the month. The MPR is a
measure of the speed at which cardholders pay down the amount owed on their
credit.

Portfolio Yield: Portfolio yield is the annualized rate of total monthly cash
flows into the credit card master trust divided by the outstanding principal bal-
ance at the beginning of the month. Gross cash inflows consist of interest on the
revolving principal balances (finance charges) plus income from fees on the ac-
counts such as late charges, card annual fees, cash advance fees, overdraft charges,
card interchange, and discounted receivables.3 Cash inflows include recoveries on
defaulted receivables, but exclude charge-offs from the current month. The port-
folio yield is a measure of the income generated by the credit card receivables.


A.3 The Credit Card ABS Market
This section discusses the credit card asset-backed securities (ABS) market and
describes the mechanics of credit card asset-backed securities.
   The market for securities backed by consumer credit is a very large and
mature market. Credit card receivables have been securitized since the late 1980s

of the credit card portfolio for servicing the portfolio on behalf of the master
trust. It is often set as a fixed percentage of the total receivables in the credit
card master trust.
2
  To illustrate how excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement, sup-
pose a master trust generates a portfolio yield of 14.80% and experiences charge-
offs of 5.50%. The trust has issued notes paying LIBOR floating each month.
Assuming that the floating coupon rate equals 2.05% and that the master trust
pays a servicing fee of 2%, the excess spread is 14.80% - 2.05% - 2.00% -
5.50% = 5.25%. Intuitively, this means that the master trust generates about
five cents for each dollar invested each month above what is required to pay
investor coupon interest, servicing fees, and other trust expenses.
3
 Some credit card master trusts can add receivables at a discount, typically
ranging between 1% and 5%. The difference between the face value of receivables
and their discount is added to finance charge collections.


                                         2
and by the late 1990s securitization had become the dominant funding source for
credit card receivables.4 Annual issuance of ABS increased from just under $40
billion in 1990 to around $200 billion in 2001. Between 2002 and 2007, annual
issuance was consistently in the range of $230 billion to $275 billion. The volume
of ABSs backed by revolving consumer credit grew at a compound rate of about
19.79 percent between 1989 and 2009. As of year-end 2019, there were more than
$127 billion in credit card ABS outstanding, and $18 billion in credit card ABS
were issued in 2019. Total ABS issuance in 2019 was $306 billion across consumer
credit, automobile, equipment (floorplans, leases and transportation), student
loans, CDO/CLOs and other ABS (franchises, insurance, timeshares). Consumer
credit ABS made up about 7.06% of total $1.8 trillion ABS outstanding as of
year-end 2019.5
    Credit cards are the primary funding source for revolving consumer credit.
As of March 2020, there was over $1 trillion in revolving consumer credit out-
standing.6 As of the end of the first quarter of 2020, about 92% of revolving
consumer credit is held by credit card banks ($926 billion out of $1.01 trillion).
     Credit cards are widely held and extensively used by consumers. The Federal
Reserve reports in the Survey of Consumer Finances that about 70% of families
had at least one credit card in 2013.7 Credit cards are offered by a variety of
financial institutions, but primarily banks. Among the variety of cards offered
by card issuers, common programs include premium cards that provide incentives
to use the card in the form of airline miles, rewards points or cash but that may
also carry higher annual fees or interest rates.
     The general-purpose credit card market in the U.S. is concentrated with the
top ten issuers holding over 80% of the outstanding credit card balances and the
top three issuers controlling more than 60% of the market. Cards issued by Visa
and Mastercard account for nearly 85% of about 544.5 million general-purpose
credit cards in 2016. American Express and Discover accounted for another 99
4
 See FDIC Credit Card Securitization Manual 2007, https://www.fdic.gov/regul
ations/examinations/credit card securitization/.
5
    https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-abs-issuance-and-outstanding.
6
 Federal Reserve Board, G.19 Release on consumer credit at https://www.fed
eralreserve.gov/releases/g19/Current/.
7
  Credit cards are unsecured, open-ended revolving debt obligations used to fi-
nance the purchase of goods and services as well as for cash advances. A credit
card represents a contractual agreement between the credit card holder and a
financial institution. The agreement defines the terms and conditions such as
the card interest rate, fees, and required payments.


                                        3
million general-purpose cards in 2016.8 Over five thousand depository institu-
tions, including commercial banks, credit unions, and savings institutions, issue
Visa and Mastercard credit cards and independently set the terms and conditions
on their plans. In 2016, consumers made more than 34.3 billion transactions,
amounting to a dollar volume of more than $3.1 trillion using general-purpose
credit cards.9
    The underlying collateral of a credit card ABS consists of account receivables
generated when consumers make charges on their credit cards to purchase goods
and services. From the issuer's perspective, credit card receivables are in effect a
short-term unsecured loan. Consumers pay back either the full principal of this
unsecured loan or make partial payment. In the latter case, the issuer finances the
remaining balance and earns interest (finance charges). Intuitively, the idea for
pooling credit card receivables is to turn the volatile cash flows from individual
consumers paying off their credit card debts, into a stable cash flow that in
aggregate resembles a bond which can then be tranched and sold to investors.

     Credit card issuers typically use "master trusts" for the process of securi-
tizing credit card receivables and creating notes that are subsequently sold to
investors. This is because the master trust structure allows an issuer to sell
multiple securities from the same trust, all of which rely on the same pool of
receivables as collateral. To illustrate, an issuer would transfer, say, $1 billion of
card receivables from one million accounts to a master trust, then issue multiple
notes in various denominations and sizes.
     Even though the receivables are transferred to the master trust, the issuer
(also referred to as the seller) must maintain an ownership interest in the trust.
On the one hand, this "seller's interest" ensures that the issuer has some skin-in-
the-game to maintain the credit quality of the pool, but it also absorbs seasonal
fluctuations in credit card receivable balances so that the certificate holder's
invested amount is always fully invested in credit card receivables. However, the
seller's interest does not provide credit enhancement for the investors. In other
words, the seller has a pari passu claim on the master trusts cash flows. The size
of the seller's participation must remain at or above a minimum percentage of
the trust receivables balance. The minimum required seller's interest for most
master trusts tends to be in the 4% to 7% range of outstanding receivables. If
the seller's interest falls below this threshold, the seller must add receivables or
an early amortization event is triggered.
8
  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress
on the Profitability of Credit Card Operations of Depository Institutions, June
2017.
9
  See, HSN Consultants, Inc. (2017), Nilson Report, no. 1104 (February).


                                          4
     As consumers pay back their card balances, the issuer transfers receivables
from more accounts to the master trust. Moreover, the issuer can add receiv-
ables to the trust and create additional securities which are referred to as a new
"series." However, even though master trusts issue different series over time,
the receivables in the master trust are not segregated to indicate which series
of securities they support. Instead, all the accounts support all the securities.
Master trusts offer different "classes" of securities to investors which have some
parallels with a CDO structure. Specifically, in a typical transaction, the master
trust issues A, B, and C classes. The class C notes are similar to a CDO equity
tranche in that class C investors bear the first losses in early amortization. Class
B notes are junior to class A notes and are allocated the next layer of losses after
class C notes are wiped out. Finally, class A notes are senior to other classes and
because class A securities have credit support from junior classes, they typically
receive AAA credit ratings.
     Each class can be thought of as having attachment and detachment points
like a typical CDO. The class C notes have attachment points of zero and, say,
15% which means that the tranche thickness of the C class absorbs the first 15
cents of losses for each dollar of credit card receivables. Similarly, class A notes
have an attachment point, say, 25%, which means that class A investors will not
experience losses unless total losses in the credit card portfolio exceed 25 cents
for each dollar of credit card receivables.10
     The process of how cash flows are allocated to different investor classes has
parallels to the CDO waterfall structure. Specifically, the typical setup has two
different cash flow periods: revolving, and controlled amortization (in some cases,
controlled accumulation). A third period, referred to as early amortization can
be triggered when the master trust is incurring sustained losses. If there are
no losses, the two-period structure mimics a traditional bond in the sense that
interest is distributed every month and principal is paid in a single "bullet" cash
flow on the maturity date.
     After issuance, a credit card ABS enters the "revolving period." In this
phase, all cash flows on receivables are split into finance charge collections and
principal payments. Monthly finance charges are used to pay the investor coupon
and servicing fees, as well as to cover any receivables that have been charged off
in the month. Any residual cash flow is referred to as "excess spread" and,
depending on the master trust, is used as credit enhancement or released to the
seller. Cash flows from principal collections, by contrast, are not distributed to

10
  This example abstracts away other credit enhancements built into master
trusts, such as cash collateral accounts, collateral invested amounts, and/or ex-
cess spread accumulation accounts.


                                         5
investors, but are used to purchase new receivables or to purchase a portion of
the seller's interest if there are no new receivables.
     The revolving period continues for a predetermined length of time, typically
from two to several years, and then the controlled amortization (accumulation)
period begins where principal collections are distributed to investors. For in-
stance, a credit card ABS with a five-year expected maturity might revolve for
48 months and then enter amortization for the final 12 months. The two primary
mechanisms through which amortization is achieved are controlled amortization
and controlled accumulation.

     In the case of controlled amortization, principal cash flows are distributed in
equal installments, for instance one-twelfth of the invested amount every month
for twelve months. During this period, interest cash flows are based on declining
principal balances. In the case of controlled accumulation, by contrast, princi-
pal cash flows are deposited into a collection account--referred to as "principal
funding account" (PFA)--every month and then paid out as a single "bullet"
cash flows at the end of the accumulation period.
     Independent of whether the credit card ABS is in the revolving period or
in controlled amortization (accumulation), early amortization can be triggered
if there are sustained defaults or write-offs on the pool of credit card accounts.
Common early amortization trigger events include collateral performance dete-
rioration (e.g. the three-month average excess spread falls below zero, or the
collateral balance falls below the investor invested amount), seller/servicer prob-
lems (e.g. seller interest falls below the required minimum level, the seller fails
to transfer new receivables into the trust when necessary), but also legal issues
(e.g. breach of representation or warranties by the issuer, or default, bankruptcy,
and insolvency of the seller or servicer). Basically, once an early amortization
event occurs, then a credit card ABS immediately starts to amortize and ABS
investors begin to receive principal cash flows.
     Credit card ABS have different forms of credit enhancement because as
unsecured revolving debt obligations, credit card receivables offer no collateral in
the event of cardholder default. Common types of credit enhancement are excess
spread, a cash collateral account (CCA), a collateral invested amount (CIA), and
subordination.
     Excess spread is the key form of internal credit enhancement. Intuitively,
excess spread is simply the residual cash flow after investor interest, servicing
fees, and charge-offs are allocated to each series. Excess spread is calculated as
the gross portfolio yield less charge-offs, investor coupon, and servicing fees, and
is expressed as an annualized percentage of the outstanding principal balance.
Typically, a negative three-month moving average excess spread for a particular

                                         6
series triggers early amortization. Available excess spread is often shared with
other series, deposited into a spread account as credit enhancement or released
to the seller.
     A cash collateral account (CCA) is a segregated cash reserve account, funded
at closing and held by the trust. Amounts deposited in the CCA are used to
cover shortfalls in interest, principal, or servicing expenses for a particular series
if excess spread is reduced to zero. The cash to fund the CCA is usually lent by a
third party and invested in high-grade short-term securities, all of which mature
on or before the next distribution date. Draws on the CCA may be reimbursed
from future excess spread.
     A collateral invested amount (CIA) is a privately placed tranche of a series
that is subordinate in payment rights to all investor certificates. It basically acts
as another layer of subordination that is used to cover deficiencies if excess spread
is reduced to zero. In some master trusts, the CIA has credit enhancement via a
spread account and is allocated some monthly excess spread, if available. Draws
on the CIA can be reimbursed from future excess spread.
     The perhaps most straightforward form of credit enhancement is subordina-
tion via senior/subordinate investor certificates. For instance, senior participa-
tion is in the form of class A certificates and subordinate participation is in the
form of class B and class C certificates. Class C will absorb losses allocated to
class A and to class B, unless those losses can be covered by excess spread, or by
draws from the CCA or CIA. Principal collections are allocated to subordinate
classes only after the senior certificates are fully repaid.
     Before 2010, a master trust was usually set up to satisfy the conditions
to qualify as a special purpose entity (QSPE) for off-balance-sheet accounting
treatment.11 Effective on November 15, 2009, FAS 166 eliminated the concept of
qualifying special purpose entity, and thus all securitization transactions became
subject to the consolidation assessment. The next section discusses the impact
of FAS 166/167 on credit card issuers in detail.


A.4 Regulation and Capital Requirements
This section discusses key regulatory events and capital requirements that were
enacted after the 2008 financial crisis.

11
  The four conditions are a) demonstrably distinct from the transferor, b) re-
stricted as to its permitted activities, c) limited as to the types of assets it can
hold, and d) limited as to its ability to sell or otherwise dispose non-cash financial
assets.


                                          7
A.4.1 The Card Act
In May of 2009, Congress enacted the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility
and Disclosure Act of 2009, commonly referred to as the Card Act.12 The Card
Act institutes a number of consumer protection and disclosure requirements for
consumer credit cards, but does not apply to small business credit cards. Credit
card issuers must follow various rules with respect to the marketing, underwrit-
ing, pricing, and billing of consumer credit cards. The Card Act sets regulatory
limits on certain types of credit card fees, and requires card issuers to provide
monthly credit card statements showing the costs of making only the minimum
payment. Issuers are prohibited from increasing the interest rate on outstanding
balances, except in limited circumstances such as when a promotional rate ex-
pires, a variable rate adjusts, or an account is seriously delinquent or completes a
workout arrangement. Credit card issuers must provide a 45-day advance notice
of rate increases or other significant changes to terms and must give consumers
the right to opt out of significant changes to account terms. Under the Card Act,
issuers cannot impose fees for transactions that would put the account over its
credit limit, and cannot charge over-limit fees more than once during per billing
cycle. The Card Act limits over-limit fees to the actual over-limit amount, gen-
erally prohibits late fees of more than $25 and prohibits account inactivity fees.
Card issuers are also required to apply payment amounts in excess of the min-
imum payment first to the balance with the highest interest rate and then to
balances with lower interest rates. The Card Act restricts marketing of credit
cards to card holders under the age of 21 and requires that applicants for new
accounts who are under the age of 21 demonstrate an independent ability to
make the required minimum periodic payments. The provisions of the CARD
Act took effect in three phases between August 20, 2009, and August 22, 2010.


A.4.2 Regulation AB
The SEC introduced revisions to Regulation AB in April 2010 which tightened
disclosure requirements by the credit card bank originating the credit card re-
ceivables.13 The SEC's proposal was adopted in Section 942 of the Dodd-Frank
Act.14 Under the SEC's proposal, issuers of ABS must provide standardized
asset-level information at the time of issue and over time about the composi-
tion and performance of the underlying collateral. Specifically, this information
must be disclosed in Schedule L at the time of issue and Schedule L-D over
12
  H.R.627 111th Congress, available at https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-
congress/house-bill/627.
13
     The financial institution is also referred to as sponsor, transferor, or seller.
14
     http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/2011/33-9244.pdf.


                                             8
time through 8-K filings. In addition, the SEC revised public shelf registration
requirements under the Securities Act Rule 415.


A.4.3 FAS 166/167
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued FAS 166 and 167
in June 2009 to become effective on January 1, 2010.15 The effect of FAS 166
and 167 is to significantly narrow the scope of transactions that qualify as "off-
balance-sheet" for accounting purposes. In summary, FAS 166/167 essentially
required that credit card receivables that were off-balance-sheet for accounting
purposes had to be reconsolidated onto the balance sheets of credit card issuers.16
     Prior to FAS 166/167, credit card master trusts were set up as Qualifying
Special Purpose Entities (QSPEs).17 This meant that credit card loans trans-
ferred into the master trust were off-balance-sheet for accounting purposes.18 In
other words, whether or not credit card issuing banks had to consolidate the
assets and liabilities of master trusts on their balance sheet required that the
master trusts qualify as QSPEs. FAS 166/167 essentially eliminates the concept
of QSPEs, and thus master trusts become subject to consolidation assessment
as variable interest entities (VIEs). Whether or not a VIE is off-balance-sheet
for accounting purposes treatment depends on whether the credit card issuing
bank is deemed the "primary beneficiary," and thus the consolidator of VIE. In
particular, the rules require a sponsor of a variable interest entity (VIE) to con-
solidate that transaction onto its balance sheet in the event it retains power to
direct activities that most significantly affect performance and when the sponsor
maintains either the obligation to absorb significant losses or right to receive sig-
nificant benefits from the VIE. Since credit card banks have "the power to direct
15
  Financial Accounting Standards No. 166, "Accounting for Transfers of Finan-
cial Assets, An Amendment of FASB Statement No. 140", and FASB Statement
No. 167, "Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R)."
16
   https://www.fasb.org/cs/ContentServer?c=FASBContent C&cid=117615563
3483&d=&pagename=FASB%2FFASBContent C%2FNewsPage, https://www
.fasb.org/cs/ContentServer?c=FASBContent C&cid=117615563348
17
  In a typical credit card securitization transaction, the credit card issuer es-
tablishes a Qualified Special Purpose Entity (QSPE) as a separate entity and
transfers the credit card receivables to the QSPE. The QSPE holds the underly-
ing receivables and issues certificates to investors. See, Rosenblatt and Mountain
(2005).
18
  The credit card issuing bank (seller) generally retains a small portion of the
securitized pool of receivables in the form of the "seller's interest."


                                         9
activities that most significantly impact the VIE's economics" by changing the
composition of the credit card receivables transferred to master trusts and by
modifying credit card contracting terms, such as interest rates and credit card
fees, and because credit card banks typically retain a first loss position in terms
of seller's interest, most issuers are deemed primary beneficiaries and thus must
reconsolidate securitized credit card receivables onto their balance sheet effective
with the first annual reporting period beginning on or after November 15, 2009.19
     As a result of FAS 166/167, domestically chartered commercial banks re-
consolidated $321.9 billion securitized credit card receivables in the first quarter
of 2010.20 Moreover, after FAS 166/167 took effect, credit card banks reduced
their credit card ABS issuance by 92%, from $40 billion in 2009 to $3.3 billion
in 2010.21
     An important consequence of consolidating master trusts is that as on-
balance-sheet assets, credit card receivables become subject to regulatory capital
requirements.22 In a sense, as a result of FAS 166/167, receivables previously
held off-balance-sheet now occupy "expensive real estate" on credit card banks'
balance sheets. To illustrate that capital charges can be significantly higher with
consolidation under FAS 166/167, consider the standard minimum requirement
of total capital to risk-weighted assets of 8% ("Cooke ratio") which credit card
banks have to meet since the first Basel framework. As off-balance-sheet as-
sets, credit card banks could apply a 0% risk weight to AAA-rated credit card
securitizations. In contrast, with SFAS 166 consolidation, the risk weight for
on-balance-sheet assets is 100%, resulting in the full 8% capital charge for the
credit card ABS. Thus, capital charges are at least eight times higher because
19
  J.P. Morgan Chase adopted the new reconsolidation accounting guidance for
VIEs on January 1, 2010, "as the Firm will be deemed to be the primary benefi-
ciary of its credit card securitization trusts as a result of this guidance, the Firm
will consolidate the assets and liabilities of these credit card securitization trusts
at their carrying values on January 1, 2010, and credit card-related income and
credit costs associated with these securitization activities will be prospectively
recorded on the 2010 Consolidated Statements of Income in the same classifica-
tions that are currently used to report such items on a managed basis." See J.P.
Morgan Chase, Annual Report for the fiscal year 2009.
20
  Credit card loans comprise most of revolving consumer credit measured in the
Federal Reserve's Consumer Credit G19 Statistical Release. See https://www.
federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/about.htm.
21
     https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h8/h8notes.htm#notes 20110429.
22
 12 CFR Part 567 at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2009-09-15/
pdf/E9-21497.pdf.


                                         10
credit card banks are also required to provision for losses associated with credit
card receivables previously held in the master trusts. In the case of J.P. Morgan
Chase, for instance, the firm added about $88 billion of assets (under U.S. gen-
erally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)) upon adoption of FAS 166/167
in January 2010 which implied that J.P. Morgan would need to add about $88
×0.08 = $ 7 billion in regulatory capital to maintain its existing capital ratios.
J.P. Morgan's unsecured credit spread from credit default swaps was about 80
basis points in January 2010 which suggests costs from the adoption of FAS
166/167 on the order of $56 million per year.

     In aggregate, the Federal Reserve estimated that FAS 166/167 would result
in $900 billion of ABS assets to be reconsolidated on banks' balance sheets. This
tidal wave of securitized assets was expected to lower Tier 1 risk-weighted capital
ratios by 70 basis points across all institutions in aggregate. Specifically, as of
the second quarter of 2009, banks had Tier 1 capital of $1.1 trillion, and Tier 1
capital ratios were expected to decline from 10.8% to 10.1% in aggregate.23

     Given the potential significant economic impact on banks' regulatory capital,
regulators collectively issued a final rule in December 2009 and made explicit
that assets reconsolidated under FAS 166/167 were to be included in banks' total
assets for calculating leverage ratios and in their risk-weighted assets.24 However,
the FDIC provided banks with the option to delay the effects on their risk-based
capital ratios for two quarters, followed by an optional additional two-quarter
partial implementation of the effect of FAS 167 on risk-weighted assets.25


A.4.4 FDIC Securitization Safe Harbor Rule
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) Securitization Rule (Secu-
ritization Safe Harbor Rule, 12 C.F.R. § 360.6) provides safe harbor protection
in a receivership or conservatorship of an insured depository institution if the
transfer of financial assets under the securitization no longer qualifies for off-
balance-sheet treatment under FAS 166/167.26 The final rule was published in

23
     See, J.P. Morgan, Securitized Products Weekly, December 11, 2009.
24
     https://www.fdic.gov/news/board/DEC152009no2.pdf.
25
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20100121a.htm.
26
  A "financial asset" is defined as "cash or a contract or instrument that conveys
to one entity a contractual right to receive cash or another financial instrument
from another entity." See 12 C.F.R. § 360.6(a)(1). "Transfer" refers to the
conveyance of [a financial asset] or creation of a security interest in a financial
asset to or for the benefit of the issuer. See 12 C.F.R. § 360.6(a)(11).


                                        11
12 C.F.R. § 360.6; Final Rule Regarding Safe Harbor Protection for Treatment
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as Conservator or Receiver of Fi-
nancial Assets Transferred by an Insured Depository Institution in Connection
With a Securitization or Participation After September 30, 2010.27

     The first safe harbor rule from 2000 provided bankruptcy remoteness for
assets transferred into securitizations, which meant that the FDIC, as receiver
or conservator of a failed bank, could not repudiate contracts, recover or reclaim
financial assets transferred in connection with securitization transactions that
are off-balance-sheet for accounting purposes.28 Specifically, under the safe har-
bor rule from 2000, the FDIC provided that notwithstanding a bank becoming
subject to FDIC conservatorship or receivership, if the sponsor's asset transfer
in a securitization constituted a "sale" under GAAP, the FDIC would not use
its power to repudiate the asset transfer agreement in the securitization. In
other words, if a credit card securitization meets the requirement of a "true sale"
for accounting purposes. the FDIC will not reclaim any financial assets from
the credit card master trust in bankruptcy proceedings against the credit card
bank. Through this bankruptcy remoteness offered by safe harbor protection,
credit card ABS can receive a higher credit rating than the credit card bank
originating the receivables.29

27
 The final rule is available at http://www.fdic.gov/news/board/10Sept27no4.
pdf.
28
  The FDIC has substantial powers upon insolvency of insured depository insti-
tutions. Specifically, if the FDIC is appointed the conservator or receiver of an
insured depository institution, upon its insolvency or in certain other events, the
FDIC has the power: (1) to transfer any of the depository institution's assets
and liabilities to a new obligor without the approval of the depository institu-
tion's creditors; (2) to enforce the terms of the depository institution's contracts
pursuant to their terms; or (3) to repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to
which the depository institution is a party, the performance of which is deter-
mined by the FDIC to be burdensome and the disaffirmation or repudiation of
which is determined by the FDIC to promote the orderly administration of the
depository institution.
29
  In 2009, rating agencies indicated that they may ultimately conclude that the
safe harbor no longer applies and, in certain cases, that the highest rating an
ABS security could receive would be based on the sponsoring bank's unsecured
debt rating, rather than being based on a separate evaluation of the securiti-
zation trust. Accordingly, credit card banks were at risk that their credit card
securitization would no longer receive or maintain AAA ratings under the same
terms and conditions as prior to FAS 166/167.


                                        12
     When the Financial Accounting Standards Board's FAS 166 and 167 came
into effect in November 2009, many securitization transactions were no longer off-
balance-sheet for accounting purposes because they no longer qualified as "true-
sales" transactions. This meant that safe harbor protection no longer applied to
credit card ABS, and the FDIC would be allowed under FAS 166/167 to recover
financial assets from credit card master trusts in the event that the credit card
issuing bank enters bankruptcy.
     However, the FDIC amended the Securitization Rule in 2010 to specify a
set of conditions under which safe harbor protection still applies to asset securi-
tization transactions. Specifically, the amended Securitization rule extends safe
harbor protection to securitizations without regard to whether the transaction
qualifies for sale accounting treatment under FAS 166 and 167, but it imposes
stricter requirements as a condition for bank-sponsored securitizations to qualify
for safe harbor. Specifically, bank-sponsored securitizations must comply with
new risk-retention rules, increased disclosure/reporting requirements, and qualify
for off-balance-sheet treatment under GAAP. Existing revolving trusts or master
trusts with obligations outstanding as of September 27, 2010 were "grandfa-
thered," in the sense that safe harbor continues to apply if these securitizations
meet the requirements of the original safe harbor, including qualifying for sale
accounting treatment under FAS 140 standards in effect prior to November 15,
2009.
     Securitization transactions that do not achieve off-balance-sheet accounting
treatment under GAAP (including those involving master trusts and revolving
trusts that are not grandfathered), no longer have the original safe harbor protec-
tion even if they otherwise meet criteria of the Securitization Rule. Consequently,
the FDIC, as receiver or conservator, has the right to repudiate a securitization
agreement and to seize assets from a securitization trust under certain conditions.


A.4.5 The Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III
The post-crisis regulatory reforms via the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and the Basel III capital accords
in conjunction with FAS 166/167 fundamentally change the economics of asset-
backed securitizations and make the process of securitizing assets much more
capital-intensive by turning securitization transactions from being a low-capital-
usage, off-balance-sheet activity into one which consumes expensive balance-sheet
space. Moreover, credit card banks face indirect costs because post-crisis regu-
latory reforms from the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III impose restrictions on
institutional investors to hold asset-backed securities and also tighten oversight
and rating criteria from credit rating agencies.


                                        13
A.4.5.1 The Dodd-Frank Act
The Dodd-Frank Act significantly increases the regulation of credit card securiti-
zations.30 The Dodd-Frank Act was enacted in 2010 and requires securitizers or
originators of credit card ABS to retain at least 5% of the credit risk of securitized
exposures. It restricts the interchange fees payable on credit card transactions,
imposes stricter disclosure requirements regarding the credit card receivables,
and seeks to tighten credit rating standards from ratings agencies. The Dodd-
Frank Act also establishes the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to
regulate the terms of credit card agreements. Moreover, large credit card issuing
banks become subject to oversight from the Financial Stability Oversight Coun-
cil (FSOC) which has the authority to require companies deemed "systemically
important" to sell or transfer assets and terminate activities if the regulators
determine that the size or scope of activities of the company pose a threat to the
safety and soundness of the financial stability of the United States.
     In addition, Section 331 of the DFA changes how FDIC assessment fees are
calculated by requiring that these fees be assessed on consolidated assets instead
of on deposit liabilities as had been the case pre-crisis. In conjunction with the
consolidation requirement from FAS 166/167, this meant that credit card banks
become subject to higher FDIC assessment fees.
     The Dodd-Frank Act increases capital requirements on banks, and contains
multiple provisions for mandatory risk-based capital requirements that apply to
consolidated on-balance-sheet assets. Specifically, the Dodd-Frank Act increases
the minimum required ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets to 4.5 per-
cent. In addition to raising risk-weighted capital requirements, the Dodd-Frank
Act introduces a capital conservation buffer, comprised of additional Tier 1 capi-
tal of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets when fully implemented. Systematically
important institutions also become subject to a countercyclical capital buffer on
top of the capital conservation buffer. The effect of the minimum risk-weighted
leverage requirement of 4.5 percent and the 2.5 percent capital conservation buffer
combined implies a risk-based leverage ratio requirement of at least 7 percent for
many large banks.

     In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act effectively imposes stricter capital require-
ments by establishing new rules for determining which assets and other instru-
ments can be included in calculating common equity Tier 1 capital, other Tier 1
capital, and Tier 2 capital. Specifically, under the Dodd-Frank Act, when credit
card banks purchase credit card accounts, they are no longer allowed to include
30
  H.R. 4173: Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act,
available at https://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@swaps/documents/file/
hr4173 enrolledbill.pdf.


                                         14
the "purchase credit card relationship intangible assets," in intangible assets
which reflects the amount by which the cost of net credit card assets acquired
exceeds their fair value, in calculating Tier 1 capital.
     The Dodd-Frank Act also introduces the framework for systematically im-
portant financial institutions (SIFIs) in 2010. Financial institutions deemed "too-
big-to-fail" not only become subject to stricter capital and liquidity rules, but
they also become subject to stricter risk management requirements and have to
meet certain prudential standards under regulatory supervision by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Specifically, under systemic risk rules,
also referred to as the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests (DFAST), bank holding com-
panies (BHCs) with $50 billion or more in assets must provide regulators with
detailed additional information on their capacity to withstand financial crises
and submit detailed capital plans over a nine-quarter horizon across a range of
stress scenarios. These provisions affect large credit card banks including Amer-
ican Express, Discover, and Capital One, and Bank of America, Chase, and
Citigroup.
     Section 171(b) of the Collins Amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act makes U.S.
BHCs and other systemically significant non-bank financial companies subject to
the same capital requirements that apply to federally insured depository institu-
tions. As a result, the capital requirements of a BHC become at least as strict as
those applied to its depository subsidiary. Moreover, the Collins Amendment of
the Dodd-Frank Act effectively raises risk-weighted asset requirements for many
banks and BHCs because it limits the use of internal models in reporting reg-
ulatory capital ("Collins Floor"). Specifically, under the Collins Amendment
to the Dodd-Frank Act, banks report their regulatory capital ratios under both
bank-internal risk-management models and using a set of prespecified regulatory
rules, the so-called "standardized approach." If standardized credit and market
risk-weighted assets exceeded total modeled risk-weighted assets, then a bank
must calculate its regulatory capital requirements in reference to the former.
This matters for credit card ABS because under the Basel Securitization Frame-
work capital requirements for securitization, exposures are assigned based on a
Supervisory Formula Approach (SFA).31 Thus, under the SFA subordinate ABS
tranches have significantly higher risk weights than pre-crisis.


A.4.5.2 Basel III

The Basel III framework, introduced by the Basel Committee in December 2010,
redefines regulatory capital, establishes a global leverage ratio, and increases
banks' required risk-weighted capital ratios. In addition to tightening equity
31
     https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2011/fil11075.pdf.


                                        15
and risk-weighted capital requirements, the Basel III standard introduces a non-
risk-weighted leverage ratio requirement, as well as liquidity requirements for
all banking organizations (banking organizations included credit card banks, na-
tional and state banks, savings associations, BHCs, and savings and loan holding
companies).
     As part of Basel III, the "fundamental review of the trading book" (FRTB)
changes the treatment of securitization exposures held by banks in the trading
book. In general, assets held in the trading book face lower capital charges
than those in the banking book and as a result of the FRTB's "Market Risk
Amendment," banks are required to hold capital against securitization exposures
in the trading book as if they were in the banking book.32
     The DFA and the Basel III capital framework introduce new liquidity regu-
lations on banks. Specifically, in December 2010, the Basel Committee proposed
two liquidity requirements in the form of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR).33
     The LCR is designed to ensure that banks meet short-term liquidity needs
and requires banks with over $50 billion in assets to hold sufficient high-quality
liquid assets (HQLA) to cover projected net short-term cash obligations over a
30-day stress period.34 Specifically, banks must to maintain a ratio of high-quality
liquid assets to net cash outflows greater than one. To qualify as high-quality
liquid assets, assets have to meet certain operational requirements including that
the assets be unencumbered and under the control of the treasury function.35
32
     http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs193.pdf.
33
     Basel Liquidity Framework, http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs188.htm.
34
  The scenario for this standard includes: (a) the run-off of a proportion of retail
deposits; (b) a partial loss of unsecured wholesale funding capacity; (c) a partial
loss of secured, short-term financing with certain collateral and counterparties;
(d) additional contractual outflows that would arise from a downgrade in the
bank's public credit rating by up to and including three notches, including col-
lateral posting requirements; (e) increases in market volatilities that impact the
quality of collateral or potential future exposure of derivative positions and thus
require larger collateral haircuts or additional collateral, or lead to other liquid-
ity needs; (f) unscheduled draws on committed but unused credit and liquidity
facilities that the bank has provided to its clients; and (g) the potential need for
the bank to buy back debt or honor non-contractual obligations in the interest
of mitigating reputational risk.
35
 Section 22, p. 61530 of the U.S. final rule implementing the LCR, available at
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-10-10/pdf/2014-22520.pdf.


                                         16
Moreover, the Basel III framework implements the NSFR as a measure of a
bank's liquidity needs over a one-year horizon. Basically, the NSFR is intended
to promote resilience over a longer time horizon by requiring banks to fund their
activities with more stable sources of funding on an ongoing basis.36 The liquidity
regulations via the LCR and NSFR, collectively, increase the costs of revolving
retail credit lines to consumers and businesses, because credit card banks are
required to maintain capital against "unconditionally cancellable commitments"
such as credit card loans under Basel III liquidity regulations.
     In addition to stricter liquidity requirements on credit card banks, the Basel
framework tightens leverage requirements. The Supplementary Leverage Ratio
(SLR) was first introduced in June 2012 (finalized in July 2013) and applies to
large financial institutions with $250 billion or more in total consolidated assets,
or $10 billion or more of on-balance-sheet foreign exposures. The SLR introduces
a minimum three percent Tier 1 leverage ratio that takes into account both
on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures regardless of their risks.
Specifically, the SLR is the ratio of Tier 1 capital to non-risk-weighted "total
exposures." Total exposures are defined as the sum of on-balance-sheet assets,
exposures from (off-balance-sheet) derivatives, repo-style transactions, and off-
balance-sheet exposures from lending commitments, guarantees, warranties, and
financial standby letters of credit. Importantly, on-balance-sheet securitizations
increase the total exposure measure and thus lower the SLR.
     In addition to the SLR, U.S. regulators tightened leverage requirements fur-
ther in April 2014 by finalizing the Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio
(eSLR). The eSLR adds an additional two-percent capital requirement for glob-
ally systematically important banks (GSIBs) on top of the previous three-percent
SLR requirement, making a total SLR requirement of five percent for these large
institutions. Furthermore, any insured depository institution that is a subsidiary
of a GSIB must maintain a minimum SLR ratio of six percent to be consid-
ered well-capitalized. The eSLR applies only to the largest, most complex U.S.
BHCs, those with assets of at least $700 billion or with assets in custody of at
least $10 trillion on a consolidated basis with their insured banking subsidiaries.
As of 2019, J.P. Morgan Chase, Citigroup, and Bank of America are among the
GSIBs.37

36
  In the NSFR requirement, stable funding is defined as "the portion of those
types and amounts of equity and liability financing expected to be reliable sources
of funds over a one-year." See http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs188.htm.
37
  The Financial Stability Board publishes an annual list of GSIBs at https://
www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/policy-development/addressing-sifis/global-system
ically-important-financial-institutions-g-sifis.


                                        17
     There are also indirect operational costs associated with the Basel III liq-
uidity requirements. Under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests (DFAST) and the
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which became effective
in 2010 and 2011, respectively, large financial institutions are required to submit
detailed capital plans over a nine-quarter horizon that show their ability to main-
tain liquidity and funding ratio requirements across a range of stress scenarios.


A.4.6 Risk-Retention Rules
Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires that credit card banks retain mean-
ingful risk of securitization transactions, and in April 2011, the SEC, the FDIC,
and the Federal Reserve Board jointly issued a proposal implementing Section 941
of the DFA.38 On October 22, 2014, the SEC, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve
Board finalized risk-retention requirements for credit card securitizations.39 Reg-
ulation RR requires sponsors or a wholly-owned affiliate of the sponsor to retain
an unhedged minimum of 5% of the credit risk of the securitized assets. The re-
tained risk can be held in the form of a "seller's interest" representing at least 5%
of the aggregate unpaid principal balance of all outstanding investor asset-backed
security interests in the issuing entity. Moreover, the amount of risk-retention
held in the form of the seller's interest can be offset by amounts in an excess
funding account, but the sponsor is not permitted to sell or hedge the retained
interest for the life of the transaction, and cannot pledge it for non-recourse fi-
nancing. Alternatively, the sponsor can meet the risk-retention requirement via
"vertical retention," where the sponsor retains a fraction of every tranche.
     Prior to Regulation RR, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
adopted risk-retention requirements via the "Securitization Rule" from Septem-
ber 2010.40 Specifically, the rule requires the primary originator of credit card
ABS (sponsor) to retain at least five percent of the credit risk of the securitized
credit card receivables.41 The sponsor can retain either an interest of five per-
cent in each of the tranches sold to investors or in a representative sample of the
38
   See https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20110331
a.htm.
39
   Regulation RR, Federal Register, 79 Fed. Reg. 77601.
40
   FDIC Rule 360.6, available at https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/
2000-7800.html.
41
   "Sponsor" includes any "person or entity that organizes and initiates a secu-
ritization by transferring financial assets, either directly or indirectly, including
through an affiliate, to an issuing entity, whether or not such person owns an
interest in the issuing entity or owns any of the obligations issued by the issuing
entity. See 12 C.F.R. §360.6(a)(10).


                                         18
securitized assets equal to not less than five percent of the principal amount of
the financial assets at transfer. The FDIC provided that the retention regula-
tions from Section 941(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act are to supersede those from
the Securitization Rule once the Dodd-Frank rules become effective.


A.5 Estimating the Consumer Credit Risk Premium.
In this section, we present the consumer credit risk modeling framework used to
value credit card ABS tranches. We then discuss the details of how we use this
framework to estimate the consumer credit risk premium.
A.5.1 The Consumer Credit Risk Model
We begin by first considering the standard case in which a credit card master
trust has securitized a common pool of credit card receivables by issuing separate
A, B, and C tranches, each of which is collateralized by those receivables. The C
tranche is the most junior of the three tranches and absorbs the first N percent
of portfolio credit losses. Using industry terminology, the C tranche is said to
attach at zero percent, detach at N percent, and have a thickness of N percent.
If there are no credit losses on the underlying pool of receivables, investors in
the C tranche receive all promised payments. If the total credit losses on the
underlying pool of receivables equals or exceeds N percent, then investors in the
C tranche lose 100 percent of their investment. The B tranche is senior to the C
tranche and absorbs any credit losses on the portfolio above the initial N percent
absorbed by the C tranche, up to a total of N + M percent of the portfolio. Thus,
the B tranche is said to attach at N percent, detach at N + M percent, and have
a thickness of M percent. If the total credit losses for the portfolio are less than
N percent, investors in the B tranche receive all promised payments. If the total
credit losses equal or exceed N + M percent of the portfolio, investors in the B
tranche lose 100 percent of their investment. Finally, the A tranche is the most
senior tranche and absorbs all credit losses on the portfolio above and beyond
the first N + M percent that are collectively absorbed by the C and B tranches.
Thus, the A tranche attaches at N + M percent, detaches at 100 percent, and
has a thickness of 100 - N - M percent.
     Let  denote the charge-off rate on the underlying portfolio of credit card
receivables. Since  represents the probability that any individual account de-
faults and cannot pay, the probability  can be different under the risk-neutral
and objective measures. We denote the risk-neutral and objective charge-off
probabilities by Q and P , respectively.
    As described in the paper, the excess spread for the underlying portfolio
equals the yield on the portfolio minus debt servicing costs, servicing fees, and


                                        19
portfolio charge-offs. Let X denote the risk-neutral excess spread (given by sub-
tracting off the risk-neutral charge-off rate Q rather than P ). We assume that
the excess spread X has the following dynamics under the risk-neutral measure


                             dX = ( - X )dt + dZ,                                (A1)

where dZ denotes the increment of a standard Brownian motion and ,  , and 
are constants. Consistent with the properties of excess spreads, these dynamics
allow X to take both positive and negative values.

     Denote the expected maturity date for the C tranche by T . Let F denote
the risk-neutral probability that X makes a first passage to zero by time T . If
a first passage does not occur by time T , portfolio losses are zero. If a first
passage does occur, however, we assume that there are three different possible
outcomes for the total credit losses on the underlying portfolio. Specifically, we
assume that conditional on a first passage, the loss is N percent with probability
c/F , N + M percent with probability b/F , and 100 percent with probability
a/F . Conditional on the value of X , this specification implies that there are four
possible outcomes for losses on the portfolio. In particular, the portfolio loss is
zero with probability 1 - F , N percent with probability c, N + M percent with
probability b, and 100 percent with probability a. Since the probabilities must
sum to one, F = a + b + c.
     To solve for the probabilities a, b, and c, we first need to estimate the present
value of the expected losses for each of the A, B, and C tranches. To do this,
we first compute the hypothetical value of each tranche under the assumption of
no losses. This is done by simply discounting the promised cash flows for each
tranche at the riskless Treasury rate. We then calculate the present value of the
expected losses by taking the difference between the riskfree value of the tranche
and its actual market price. Let VA , VB , and VC denote the present value of the
expected losses for the respective tranches.
     We next solve for the expected losses per dollar notional amount for the
three tranches which we denote respectively as EA , EB , and EC . Under the
assumptions that losses are uncorrelated with the riskless discount rate and are
realized at the expected maturity date of the tranche, then



                                  EA = VA /D(T ),                                (A2)
                                  EB = VB /D(T ),                                (A3)
                                  EC = VC /D(T ),                                (A4)

                                         20
where D(T ) denotes the price of a riskless zero-coupon bond with maturity T .
     Finally, the expected losses for the three tranches can be expressed in terms
of the probabilities a, b, and c as follows



                                  EA = a + b + c,                             (A5)
                                  EB = a + b,                                 (A6)
                                  EC = a.                                     (A7)


These expressions, in conjunction with those above, imply that the probabilities
a, b, and c can be determined directly from the present values of expected losses
estimated from the market prices of the A, B, and C tranches.
     Once the probabilities a, b, and c are determined, the value of the implied
risk-neutral probability F of a first passage is given as F = a + b + c. Given
the value of F , we can then solve for the implied value of the risk-neutral excess
spread X by inverting the following closed-form expression for the first passage
probability of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process,


                                                                   
                                                           Dj,a2 (w 2 )
     F = -          exp( (w2 - a2 )/2 -  t j,a2 )                       dt,   (A8)
             0                                      j =0
                                                           D  (a 2 )
                                                             j,a   2




where

                                           X
                                  w=-     + ,                                 (A9)
                                           
                                         
                                   a=-    ,                                   (A10)
                                         


and where D (·) is the parabolic cylinder function with index  , (j,b ), j  1 is
the ordered sequence of positive zeros for   D (b), and D (·) is the derivative
of D (·) with respect to its index.42

42
  The first passage density for the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process is obtained di-
rectly by first using the transformation in Section 2 of Lipton and Kaushansky
(2018) and then applying Theorem 3.1 of Alili, Patie, and Pedersen (2005).


                                         21
     Once the value of the risk-neutral excess spread X is determined, we can
solve for risk-neutral charge-off rate Q directly. To see this, recall that the
excess spread is defined as the portfolio yield minus debt costs, servicing fees, and
the charge-off rate. Since only the charge-off rate differs between the objective
and risk-neutral measures, the difference between the objective and risk-neutral
excess spreads is simply Q - P . Thus, the value of Q is obtained immediately
by adding this difference to the observed value of P .
A.5.2 The Empirical Methodology
In solving for the consumer credit risk premium for an issuer for month t, we
estimate the consumer credit risk premium separately for each series of A, B,
and C tranches for that issuer and then take a simple arithmetic average of the
implied consumer credit risk premia over all of the series in the data set for that
issuer that month. In doing this, we restrict the sample to series with at least
12 months to expected maturity and to series with 20 years or less to expected
maturity.

     We estimate the riskless discount function D(T ) using the following ap-
proach. We collect month-end values of the constant maturity Treasury (CMT)
rates for 1-month, 3-month, 12-month, 2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, 10-year,
and 20-year maturities from the Federal Reserve H.15 release for each month
during the sample period. We then use a standard exponential spline algorithm
to bootstrap the discount function and interpolate it to a vector of monthly hori-
zons ranging from one month out to 20 years (for more details on this algorithm,
see Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005)).
      Many of the credit card securities in the sample pay monthly fixed coupons.
The other securities pay monthly floating coupon payments tied to either one-
month or three-month Libor (plus a spread). For comparability, however, it is
often useful to place all of the securities on a common basis by either swapping
the fixed rate securities into floating, or swapping the floating rate securities into
fixed. To illustrate this, we couch the discussion in terms of swapping the floating
rate securities into fixed (the procedure for swapping fixed coupon securities into
floating is directly analogous).
      First, we swap the floating index for the securities paying coupons based on
one-month Libor into three-month Libor by using a standard basis (or tenor)
swap (for a discussion of the basis swap market, see Fleckenstein and Longstaff
(2020)). Since this basis swap typically involves a small fixed spread of several
basis points, the net effect of this is to adjust the spread on the floating rate
security slightly. Second, we then swap out the floating three-month Libor cash
flows for the securities using a standard fixed for three-month Libor swap. Since
the fixed leg of a standard swap pays coupons on a semiannual basis, we make a

                                         22
slight adjustment to the market swap rate by reannuitizing the fixed leg of the
swap to correspond to monthly cash flows. The net effect of entering into this
swap is to convert the net monthly cash flows from Libor plus the fixed spread
to the sum of the fixed swap rate plus the fixed spread (which simply becomes
a new fixed coupon once added together). We note that since the initial market
values of the swaps entered into are zero, the process of swapping into fixed
does not change the price of the credit card security (with the accompanying
swap)--swapping the security into fixed only changes the effective net coupon
rate.

     The modeling framework described above is based on the assumption that
data are available for all three of the A, B, and C tranches for the credit card
securitization. For a subset of the sample, however, we are missing data for the
junior C tranche. In these cases, we adapt the methodology slightly by making
the assumption that the probability c equals b, which then allows us to solve
for the probability of a first passage and the implied value of Q . To examine
the robustness of this assumption, we compare the values of c and b for the
observations when data on all three of the A, B, and C tranches are available.
We find that the median value of the ratio of c to b is 1.04. This suggests that
this assumption is probably a reasonable one.
     For most of the credit card securitizations in the data set, the A, B, and
C tranches are issued simultaneously as a series. For some types of credit card
trusts, however, all C tranches provide subordination support for all A and B
tranches, and all B and C tranches provide subordination support for all A
tranches. These types of trusts are often referred to as "socialized" structures.
In this situation, A, B, and C tranches need not be issued simultaneously as long
as the C tranches collectively provide sufficient subordination support for the
more senior tranches, and similarly for the B tranches. For these trusts, we use
the following protocol. If there is data for one or more C tranches available for
a given month, then we use the prices of those tranches to estimate the implied
probability of a first passage. If there are no C tranches, however, we form pairs
of the available A and B tranches and use the procedure described in the previous
paragraph to estimate the implied probability of a first passage. In doing this,
however, we only use pairs of A and B tranches where the expected maturities
of the two tranches are within one month of each other.
     World Financial uses a structure that differs only slightly from the other
master trusts in our data. Specifically, the Word Financial Credit Card Master
Note Trust issued certificates referred to as "Class-M" notes that are subordinate
to the class A notes, but senior to class B notes. In this instance, we designate
the Class M notes as the B tranche, but otherwise follow the same algorithm.
    As discussed in the paper, a credit card ABS with an expected maturity

                                       23
date of T months is generally in the revolving phase until T - 12 months, and
then enters into a planned amortization phase in which its principal is returned
to investors over a 12-month horizon in 12 equal amounts. Since capturing this
feature in the modeling framework would add significant complexity without any
meaningful impact on the results, we make the simplifying assumption that the
credit card ABS pays off the full notional amount at time T - 6, unless a prior
first passage has occurred.
     We require estimates of the parameters ,  , and  to implement the dy-
namic model for the excess spread process. Numerical estimation shows that the
parameters  and  have relatively little effect on the estimated values of the
consumer credit risk premia. Accordingly, we make the simplifying assumption
that  =  = 0. As an estimate of the volatility parameter, we use the stan-
dard deviation of month-to-month changes in the observed charge-off rate. We
find that this value is remarkably stable both over time as well as across credit
card master trusts. Given this, we simply use the unconditional standard devia-
tion of changes in the charge-off rate of 0.50 percent per month as the value of 
throughout the entire estimation process. For robustness, we also use an GARCH
framework to provide a time-varying estimate of the volatility of monthly changes
in the charge-off rate. These results obtained using this approach are virtually
identical to those we present in the paper.

     Finally, for computational simplicity, we solve for the implied risk-neutral
excess spread X using a simulation approach rather than numerically inverting
the expression in Equation (A8). Specifically, for a given trial value of the initial
value of X , we simulate 50,000 paths of the excess spread from time zero to time
T and estimate the probability of a first passage by tabulating the fraction of
the paths that attain negative values prior to time T . In doing this, we follow
industry practice and define the first passage to occur when the implied risk-
neutral excess spread is negative on average over a three-month period. We then
iterate this process over values of X until the simulated first-passage probability
matches the value for F implied by solving for the probabilities a, b, and c from
the prices of the credit card ABS tranches.




                                         24
                                REFERENCES


Alili, L., P. Patie, and J. L. Pedersen, 2005, Representations of the First Hitting
Time Density of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process, Stochastic Models 21, 967980.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020, The U.S. Treasury Float-
ing Rate Note Puzzle: Is there a Premium for Mark-to-Market Stability? Journal
of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Lipton, Alexander, and Vadim Kaushansky, 2018, On the First Hitting Time
Density of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process, arXiv:1810.02390v2.

Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield
Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default
Swap Market, Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
Rosenblatt, Marty, Jim Johnson, and Jim Mountain, 2005, Securitization Ac-
counting, Deloitte Financial Services, 7th Edition.




                                        25
                                                                   Table A1
Data Definitions and Sources. This table summarizes the datasets used in this study. Frequency shows at what intervals the data are available.
Description and Source show the data source and its definition. The data are for the period from January 2000 through January 2020.

           Data                                            Frequency          Description and Source

 1         Treasury CMT Data                               Daily              Constant maturity Treasury rates from the Federal Reserve H.15
                                                                              Selected Interest Rates Release for tenors of 1, 3, 6 months and 1,
                                                                              2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20 years.
 2         Discount Function                               Daily              Discount function out to 20 years bootstrapped from Treasury CMT
                                                                              Data as described in Liu, Longstaff, Mandell (2006).
 3         Libor Interest Rate Swap Spreads                Daily              Three-month Libor into fixed interest rate swap rates. Cash flows
                                                                              on the fixed leg are semiannual, and the floating leg pays three-
                                                                              month Libor each quarter. Data from the Bloomberg system for
                                                                              tenors of 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 months, and 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 20
                                                                              years.
 4         Libor Basis Swap Spreads                        Daily              Three-month Libor into One-month Libor interest rate basis swap
                                                                              rates. Cash flows on the fixed leg are at quarterly frequency, and the
                                                                              floating leg pays one-month Libor reset monthly each quarter. Data
                                                                              from the Bloomberg system for tenors of 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 months, and
                                                                              2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 20 years.
 5         Libor                                           Daily              Three-month USD London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) from
                                                                              the Bloomberg system.
 6         Ten-year Rate                                   Daily              The ten-year Treasury constant maturity rate from the Federal Re-
                                                                              serve H.15 Selected Interest Rates Release. Data from the Bloom-
                                                                              berg system.
 7         Treasury Bill Rate                              Daily              The three-month Treasury bill rate from the Bloomberg system.
 8         Eurodollar Futures Data                         Daily              Three-month Eurodollar Futures prices for contract expirations in
                                                                              September, December, March, and June from Bloomberg.
 9         Turn-of-Year Measure                            Daily              The Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020) turn-of-the-year index of bal-
                                                                              ance sheet costs.
 10        Commercial Paper (CP) Spread                    Daily              The spread on investment grade U.S. commercial paper and the
                                                                              3-month Treasury bill rate from the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
                                                                              Louis. Data from the Bloomberg system.
 11        AAA Spread                                      Monthly            The spread between yields on AAA corporate bonds and the 10-year
                                                                              Treasury rate. Data from the Bloomberg system.
 12        BBB Spread                                      Monthly            The spread between yields on BBB corporate bonds and the 10-year
                                                                              Treasury rate. Data from the Bloomberg system.
 13        High-Yield Spread                               Monthly            The Bloomberg index of High-yield corporate bond spreads relative
                                                                              to Treasury rates. Data from the Bloomberg system.
                                        Table A1 -- Continued
     Data                                  Frequency    Description and Source

14   CDS Spread                            Monthly      The five-year credit default swap spread on credit card banks from
                                                        the Bloomberg system.
15   Intermediary Leverage Ratio           Monthly      The He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) intermediary leverage factor.
                                                        Data from the authors' webpage.
16   Monthly Payment Rate                  Monthly      Monthly payment rates (MPR) of the credit card master trusts
                                                        from the Bloomberg system. The monthly payment rate is the
                                                        ratio of total cash flows collected each month divided by the port-
                                                        folio balance, expressed as a percentage.
17   Credit Card ABS Tranche Prices        Monthly      Prices of individual A, B, and C tranches of the credit card secu-
                                                        ritizations in the sample. Data from the Bloomberg system.
18   Portfolio Yield                       Monthly      Monthly portfolio yields of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                        Bloomberg system. The portfolio yield is the annualized percent-
                                                        age gross return on the portfolio.
19   Excess Spread                         Monthly      Monthly excess spreads of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                        Bloomberg system. The excess spread is the annualized percent-
                                                        age net return on the portfolio.
20   Charge-off Rate                       Monthly      Monthly charge-off rates of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                        Bloomberg system. The charge-off rate is the one-month annual-
                                                        ized percentage rate of charge-offs on the portfolio.
21   Risk Retention Ratio                  Monthly      Required minimum issuer risk retention ratio for the credit card
                                                        securitization portfolio. Data collected from prospectuses filed
                                                        with the SEC (form 424-B filings).
22   Attachment and Detachment Points      Monthly      The average attachment and detachment points for individual
                                                        tranches, expressed as percentages of the total notional amount of
                                                        the securitization. Data collect from from prospectuses filed with
                                                        the SEC (form 424-B filings).
23   Tier 1 Capital Ratio                  Quarterly    Tier 1 capital as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. Data are
                                                        averages over all banks with total assets in excess of $10 Billion
                                                        provided by the FDIC (https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/).
24   Capital Ratios                        Quarterly    Quarterly Tier-1 capital ratios, Tier-1 leverage ratios, and equity-
                                                        to-assets ratios the parent companies of the individual credit card
                                                        master trusts. Data from CapitalIQ.
25   Credit Spreads                        Quarterly    Weighted-average yield to maturity on bonds issued by the parent
                                                        companies of the individual credit card master trusts relative to
                                                        2-year Treasury rates. Data from CapitalIQ.
                                             Table A2

Credit Card Issuers. This table presents the credit card issuers used in the analysis along with the names
of the credit card master trusts and their identifiers in the Bloomberg system.

           Issuer                    Issuing Entity                             Bloomberg Identifier

    1      American Express          Credit Account Master Trust                AMXCA

    2      Bank of America           Credit Card Trust                          BACCT
                                     Master Credit Card Trust                   BAMT

    3      Bank One                  Master Trust                               BOMT
                                     Issuance Trust                             BOIT

    4      Citibank                  Credit Card Issuance Trust                 CCCIT

    5      Chase                     Credit Card Master Trust                   CHAMT
                                     Issuance Trust                             CHAIT

    6      Capital One               Master Trust                               COMT
                                     Multiasset Execution Trust                 COMET

    7      Discover                  Card Master Trust                          DCMT
                                     Card Execution Note Trust                  DCENT

    8      First National            Master Note Trust                          FNMT

    9      MBNA                      Credit Card Master Note Trust              MBNAS
                                     Master Credit Card Trust                   MBNAM

    10     World Financial           Credit Card Master Note Trust              WFNMT
