                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                FINTECH BORROWERS:
                         LAX-SCREENING OR CREAM-SKIMMING?

                                        Marco Di Maggio
                                         Vincent Yao

                                       Working Paper 28021
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28021


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Di Maggio and Vincent Yao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fintech Borrowers: Lax-Screening or Cream-Skimming?
Marco Di Maggio and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 28021
October 2020
JEL No. G21,G23,G4

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the personal credit market using unique individual-level data covering fintech and
traditional lenders. We show that fintech lenders acquire market share by first lending to higher-
risk borrowers and then to safer borrowers, and mainly rely on hard information to make credit
decisions. Fintech borrowers are significantly more likely to default than neighbor individuals
with the same characteristics borrowing from traditional financial institutions. Furthermore, they
tend to experience only a short-lived reduction in the cost of credit, because their indebtedness
increases more than non-fintech borrowers a few months after loan origination. However, fintech
lenders' pricing strategies are likely to take this into account.


Marco Di Maggio
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 265
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdimaggio@hbs.edu

Vincent Yao
Georgia State University
J. Mack Robinson College of Business
35 Broad Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30303
wyao2@gsu.edu
1. Introduction

Financial markets have recently witnessed a disruptive force: the rise of online intermediaries
and, more generally, fintech companies, i.e., firms that apply technology to improve financial
activities. Fintech companies have targeted the consumer credit market, which is one of the
largest credit markets, with outstanding credit of $3.8 trillion in 2018 (FED, 2018) and their
market share has been predicted to increase to 20% by 2020 (Transunion, 2017). Therefore,
it is important to understand how these new intermediaries affect households' borrowing and
consumption decisions. Given their increasing popularity, there are natural questions to ask:
who borrows from fintech lenders? Do fintech lenders serve individuals underserved by the
traditional banking system or are they able to attract the most credit-worthy borrowers? Do
these loans help borrowers build a better credit history?
    Some observers argue that fintech lenders might be able to operate where the banks do
not find it profitable.1 This might be because they face significantly lower fixed costs, e.g.,
they do not have branches, or because they are less strictly regulated, which might allow them
to adopt laxer lending standards.2 Thus, the entry by fintech lenders might alleviate credit
frictions, such as credit rationing due to information asymmetries (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981) or
imperfect competition (Ausubel, 1991; Parlour and Rajan, 2001). This might result in access
to credit for financially constrained households or lower financing costs for those who switch
from traditional institutions to new online lenders. On the contrary, the use of different data
and tools might enable fintech lenders to capture the most creditworthy borrowers, which
might result in lowering the average quality of the pool of households borrowing from banks.
Thus, how the market equilibrium looks remains an empirical question.
    Ideally, to investigate these issues, one would need individual-level data on borrowers'
1
  For instance, Jamie Dimon told investors in 2014 that: "There are hundreds of startups with a lot of brains
  and money working on various alternatives to traditional banking. The ones you read about most are in the
  lending business, whereby the firms can lend to individuals and small businesses very quickly and ­ these
  entities believe­ effectively by using Big Data to enhance credit underwriting. They are very good at reducing
  the pain points in that they can make loans in minutes, which might take banks weeks." (JP Morgan Chase
  annual report, 2014)
2
  Fintech lenders are generally regulated by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and state regulators,
  rather than by the Federal Reserve or the Office of Comptroller of Currency (OCC).


                                                       2
characteristics, including information about their liabilities, recorded not only at the time of
the loan application but over time; furthermore, it would be critical to have a benchmark
to assess fintech borrowers' performance, e.g., similar individuals borrowing from other insti-
tutions. This paper investigates these issues using novel and unique panel data from one of
the three main credit bureaus in the country, which allows us to overcome these challenges.
The key novelties of the data are the ability to distinguish between traditional and fintech
lenders; information about the terms of the loans, and the richness of the data which include
information about all borrowers' liabilities, as well as some demographic information about
the borrowers. In contrast to existing studies on Fintech lenders, we are able to include in our
analysis multiple lenders, rather than focusing, for instance, on Lending Club, and our data is
a monthly borrower-level panel rather than a cross section of loan applications. Furthermore,
in contrast to previous studies, we observe a natural benchmark: individuals borrowing at the
same time from traditional lending institutions.
   While this data covers multiple types of loans, we focus on unsecured personal loans for
two key reasons. First, personal credit is one of the fastest-growing segments of the consumer
credit market, and it has been the subject of particular interest from fintech lenders. Second,
these loans are unsecured loans, which make them more easily comparable across lenders,
because the contract is standard and the only terms are the loan size, the maturity and the
interest rate (each of which we observe).
   Since very little is known about the market for consumer credit, we start by investigating
its key features and how this market has evolved in the last several years. One key question
is how fintech lenders successfully increased their footprint while also facing the competition
of significantly more established financial institutions. There are two potentially successful
market penetration strategies. New lenders might target credit constraints borrowers, which
has the advantage of providing them with more data to improve their credit models and time
to increase their brand recognition to attract better borrowers, but it is likely to come at the
cost of higher defaults. In contrast, new lenders might try to focus on the most creditworthy
borrowers, winning them over by offering them better terms than those offered by traditional

                                               3
banks, this is likely to result in slower volume growth and lower profitability but it can prove
to the market the better technology in identifying higher-quality borrowers.
    We test this hypothesis by differentiating between lenders based on how much time they
have been operating in a specific market, defined at the state level. We find that fintech
lenders tend to start with less creditworthy individuals and then increase their market share
by extending credit to better borrowers.3 Most of the fintech borrowers have credit scores
in the mid-range between 640 and 720. They tend to have a higher number of accounts and
exhibit a higher credit utilization ratio, which suggests that they already have plenty of access
to credit, and that one of the potential reasons to apply for a fintech loan is to consolidate
higher-rate credit card debts. In all specifications, to absorb any time-varying credit demand
shock at the local level, such as changes in house prices or in employment opportunities, or
heterogeneous diffusion of these new lenders, we control for zip code by month fixed effects.
    We can further exploit the granularity of the data to explore the main loan features. In
particular, we test whether the loan features offered by fintech and traditional institutions
differ significantly. We find that fintech lenders charge on average higher rates, about 3%
higher, to lower score borrowers.4 We investigate whether this pricing difference depends on
the fintech lenders' market share and find that the difference in pricing is lower for regions
where fintech lenders originate less than 20% of loans, i.e., fintech lenders are more cautious in
charging higher rates in areas where they still have room to grow. Instead, we find that fintech
lenders offer a better deal than non-fintech to higher score individuals with a 1.5% lower rate.
Finally, if data processing is one of the key differences between fintech and traditional lenders,
one might think that the rates would differ depending on how much information the credit
report contains. We find that the rate differential is the largest for borrowers with thin files,
as fintech charge a premium of more than 5% compared to non fintech lenders.
    This evidence suggests that the way hard information contained in the credit report is
3
  Alternatively, this result can be demand-driven as at the beginning fintech lenders might only attract bor-
  rowers that are not able to obtain credit from other lending institutions. However, once their reputation is
  established, fintech lenders might be able to attract higher quality borrowers
4
  The rate does not include potential additional fees which we do not observe.



                                                      4
used might be a key factor in explaining the differences in lenders' pricing decisions. However,
fintech lenders advertise the use of alternative data not present on the credit report, e.g.,
rent payment history, utility bills or education, to provide a more accurate assessment of a
consumer's financial behavior. We shed some light on this issue by regressing the interest
rate on borrowers' characteristics, allowing for both linear and non-linear effects, and con-
trolling for time-varying shocks by including zip-code by month fixed effects. The R2 from
these regressions measures how much of the variation in interest rates is explained by the
observable borrower characteristics across lender type. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that
the information in the credit report is able to explain most of the variation in interest rates for
fintech lenders, while this is not the case for traditional lenders. To our knowledge, this is the
first study showing that fintech lenders, much more than traditional lenders, focus their credit
decisions on the most salient hard-information figures found on the credit report, suggesting
a soft information deficiency for these new lenders.
   We then turn to our main results and examine whether fintech loans exhibit different per-
formance than loans granted by traditional institutions in the 15 months following origination.
We find that fintech loans are significantly more likely to be in default, even when we include
a full set of borrower's credit characteristics, as well as loan features and zip code by month
fixed effects. In other words, these results are not driven by time-varying local heterogeneity
as we are comparing similar borrowers getting loans from fintech and non-fintech in the same
month and zip code with similar terms. The results are also economically meaningful, in
fact, we find that the fintech loans exhibit a 1.1% higher default probability, which is large
compared to the sample mean of 1.4%. In addition, the relative underperformance persists
for our entire time window starting in month five after origination.
   One potential concern with this analysis is that borrower heterogeneity between those that
have a fintech loan and those who do not might be affecting our findings. We address it in
multiple ways. First, we present our results for three more restricted samples for which we
match fintech borrowers to non-fintech ones using a propensity score matching, a manual cri-
teria, and an entropy balance methodology. We match on a full set of demographic and credit

                                                5
characteristics pre-origination that are likely to affect the loan performance. All specifications
confirm our main findings. Furthermore, we exploit the panel nature of the data and show
that the results are robust to the inclusion of borrower fixed effects, which allows us to capture
time-invariant observable and unobservable characteristics of the borrower. We also provide
results highlighting how this relative underperformance differs based on borrower's character-
istics. We find that fintech borrowers default more than matched non-fintech borrowers when
they have a low credit score and a thin credit file, suggesting that rather than being able to
identify the "invisible prime" borrowers, the identified individuals perform worse than those
borrowing from traditional institutions. We show that these results are not driven by one
specific period of time in our sample, as they hold even when we distinguish between different
cohorts of borrowers.
   Next, we analyze what the reason for this higher delinquency probability might be. One
possibility is that the fintech borrowers are using the additional funds not to consolidate their
debts, but rather to support additional expenditures. We find several pieces of evidence con-
firming this result. Specifically, both their total indebtedness and revolving balance increase
more than their matched individuals borrowing from traditional institutions after loan origi-
nation. Also, we find that fintech borrowers are more likely to purchase a car in the first few
months after origination. This makes them overextended and more likely to default. In fact,
we also find that the delinquency rate on any type of account for fintech borrowers is higher.
This type of behavior results in their credit score first increasing, due to the initial partial
debt consolidation, but then falling steadily after the first quarter post loan origination.
   We also explore the heterogeneity of this result and find that borrowers with low credit
score, high interest rate and a thin file are the subgroups where the results are the strongest.
The evidence on the soft information deficiency and this heterogeneity based on the length of
the credit report further suggests that fintech lenders are exposed to adverse selection. For
instance, fintech borrowers might be weaker in their financial management skills which would
translate into higher default rates. However, by predominantly relying on hard information,
fintech lenders are likely to miss this source of risk and so end up giving credit to borrowers

                                                6
that would have been rejected by a traditional lender.
    At this point we can ask whether fintech lenders are likely to take this different behavior
into account, e.g., by charging a higher interest rates, which could compensate for the higher
default probability. We investigate this issue by examining whether fintech and non-fintech
lenders' interest rates are predictors of ex-post loan performance. Specifically, we model de-
faults as a function of interest rate as well as borrowers' characteristics. The more accurate
the interest rates are, the more positively correlated with defaults they should be.5 We find
that this is indeed the case, even when we control for a full set of borrower characteristics. In
addition, we show that the rates set by fintech lenders are even better predictors of defaults
than those charged by traditional institutions. The difference is considerable since the corre-
lation is at least 20% higher for fintech lenders. This suggests that fintech lenders might be
better at pricing on the intensive margin. An additional benefit that is likely to mitigate the
adverse effects of defaults on fintech lenders is that once they receive a loan from an online
lender, borrowers are more likely to rely on the same lenders, which increases its lifetime value.
Thus, higher defaults do not necessarily translate into worse outcomes for fintech lenders as
these are likely to be priced in.
    Taking stock of our results, the evidence points out that the increased ease and speed with
which borrowers can have access to credit is particularly appealing to certain households who
tend to use these funds, in conjunction with other forms of credit, to sustain their consumption,
which ultimately makes them more financially vulnerable. These results might also inform
the debate about the need to provide clearer guidelines and regulatory scrutiny for those new
institutions operating in this market. In the same way in which the Dodd-Frank Act induced
banks to be more concerned about the borrowers' ability to repay, a similar intervention in
this unsecured lending market might reduce the negative consequences of granting loans to
borrowers who are bound to default.
    Our paper contributes to a growing literature examining fintech lending.6 Vallee and Zeng
5
  This correlation might also be driven by a more severe adverse selection or moral hazard issue present in
  fintech lending.
6
  See Morse (2015) for an early review of this strand of the literature.


                                                    7
(2018), for instance, examines how information provision by a marketplace lender to investors
affects their performance, using a sudden reduction in the information about borrowers' char-
acteristics provided by Lending Club after 2014. Hertzberg, Liberman and Paravisini (2018),
instead, shows how maturity choice can be used to screen borrowers by exploiting a natural
experiment due to changes in the menu of loans offered by Lending Club. Buchak, Matvos,
Piskorski and Seru (2018) and Fuster et al. (2018) study whether there is substitution or
complementarity between fintech lenders and traditional banks in the mortgage market.
       There are also a few recent studies that focus specifically on the consumer credit segment
of the market, i.e., unsecured personal loans (see, among others, Liao et al. 2017; Danisewicz
and Elard, 2018; De Roure, Pelizzon and Thakor, 2018; Balyuk, 2019).7 The most related
studies are Tang (2019) and Chava, Paradkar and Zhang (2019), which analyze the interaction
between traditional and fintech lenders. Specifically, Tang (2019) exploits a regulatory change
that caused banks to tighten their lending criteria to study whether banks and P2P lenders
are substitutes or complements. The author uses the data made available by Lending Club
and variation in exposure to that regulatory change at the county level. The main result is
that treated markets experienced a disproportionate increase in P2P loan applications and a
deterioration in borrower quality after the regulatory change. These findings are consistent
with the hypothesis that P2P platforms operate as substitutes for banks.
       Chava, Paradkar and Zhang (2019), instead, look at one marketplace lender (MPL), and
show that borrowers who have access to the MPL experience laxer credit constraints as their
credit score improves. They argue that these improvements in credit scores cause an increase
in credit card limits, which for subprime borrowers ultimately translate into higher default
rates. We share similar findings on defaults. However, Chava, Paradkar and Zhang's (2019)
main control group is composed of people who got rejected by banks, while ours is borrowers
sharing very similar characteristics who do get approved by banks. Then, the interpretation
of the increase in defaults is also very different, ours points to the differences in screening
7
    Other related papers in this literature include Iyer et al. (2015), Mariotto (2016), Balyuk (2017), Wolfe and
    Yoo (2017), and Balyuk and Davydenko (2018).



                                                         8
between lenders.
       Finally, while we share with these two papers the focus on the relation between traditional
banks and fintech lenders, we differ in the data, the methodology and the main results. Specif-
ically, we exploit the richness of our data covering all the major fintech lenders to provide an
in-depth analysis of how the market for consumer lending has evolved in recent years. Then,
we take advantage of individual level data comprising both banks and fintech lenders to test
whether the performance of fintech lenders differs and what the main drivers are. We find
that fintech loans are more likely to default, but this is likely to be taken into account by
the fintech lenders' pricing models. We also highlight a soft information deficiency affecting
fintech lenders that is consistent with the performance results we uncovered.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data employed and the
construction of the sample. Section 3 describes the key features of the consumer credit market
and how it evolved in recent years. Section 4 presents our results on borrowers' performance,
and Section 5 examines the lenders' pricing decisions. Section 6 presents additional evidence
on the benefits of fintech loans for both borrowers and lenders, while Section 7 concludes.



2. Data

2.1. Data Sources

Our analysis relies mainly on data available at one of the nation's largest credit bureaus.
The credit bureau provides information on households' balance sheets, specifically, monthly
payment history of all the borrower's loans, including auto loans, mortgages, student loans
and credit cards (revolving). It also contains information about the main features of these
individual loans, such as date opened, account type, loan size, monthly scheduled payment
(for installments only), balance, lender and performance history.8 It contains more than 200
million consumer credit files and over a billion credit trades, i.e., information about single
8
    Typical account types include unsecured personal loans, credit cards (bank card, department store card,
    retail card), auto loan, student loan, mortgage, junior lien, home equity line of credit, line of credit, etc.



                                                         9
loans, and is updated monthly. Limited versions of this data have been employed in other
papers studying households' financial decisions. However, our proprietary version is unique in
a few respects.
    First and foremost, to carry out our analysis we need to distinguish between traditional
and fintech lenders, which we can do since we observe the identity of the lenders through credit
tradeline tables. Second, our data is not confined to households' balance sheet information but
includes other information about the borrowers. For instance, we also observe demographic
information, such as the gender, age, marital status and whether the borrower is a college
graduate, which is collected by creditors. Overall, we believe our data gives us a unique
opportunity to study the consumer loan market, and what distinguishes individuals borrowing
from traditional lenders and those relying on the credit granted by fintech ones.


2.2. Sample Design

To create a representative and matched sample, we first identify all the individual loans
associated with the fintech companies in the credit tradeline data. We define fintech lenders
as those who operate exclusively online and do not have a brick and mortar presence, do not
accept deposits, and are not regulated by the Federal Reserve or the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (OCC). We also require them to be recently founded.9 We restrict our sample
to only the loans with a minimum of $500 loan size, accounts opened since January 1, 2012
when there are at least 100 of these loans originated by these companies in a given month, and
borrowers living in Continental USA. We then identify all unsecured personal loans originated
by non-fintech lenders. We randomly draw 25% of all unsecured personal loans originated by
fintech lenders and by non-fintech lenders in 2012­2017, excluding loans with missing loan
maturity and missing loan size, but include those with missing credit score, debt balances,
age of credit and borrower age.10 For the borrower with year-month panel data, we match all
9
 Few lenders have rebranded themselves as fintech companies after the mortgage crisis. We only consider
 lenders founded after 2005.
10
   Table A.1 provides several statistics about missing information. Overall, we only have 2.5% of missing
   observations. Panel A shows the missing rates by variables for the overall sample as well as for fintech vs.
   non-fintech lenders, showing that the interest rate is the only variable that is missing for fraction of the


                                                      10
loans in our loan-level sample with monthly credit report data from 3 months before through
15 months after the origination of the loan.


2.3. Summary Statistics

Our final sample contains 3,792,757 loans originated during the sample period, 2012-2017.
They are for 1,882,286 borrowers who have either fintech or bank loans, which is our main
sample. We present key summary statistics in Table 1 about the loan-level data. In the
appendix we provide more detailed statistics by subsample (Table A.2). Our main analysis is
at the loan level. We start to track the ex post performance of the loan from the month of
origination and the borrower's outcomes four months prior to loan origination, both through
15 months after that. Our panel data sample contains over 53 million records and we report
the summary statistics in Table A.3. On credit outcomes, we report typical information:
the number of accounts, and the balance on all the main accounts (i.e., auto, credit cards,
student and mortgage), borrower's credit score which predicts borrower's creditworthiness in
the near future (Vantage score), the age of the credit history, delinquent (DLQ) balance and
also DLQ rate at the time of origination. We also report information about borrower's credit,
demographic and employment characteristics at origination.
   On average, US consumers in our sample have more than 20 financial accounts opened
during the sample period and have an average credit score of 654. Revolving accounts (credit
cards) balance is on average about $10,000, while revolving utilization is on average 43%,
although the standard deviation is significant (34%). On average the borrowers in our sample
are 49 years old, 8% of the households have jobs in professional, technical and management
occupations, and about 20% are high income borrowers, i.e., defined as income above $100,000.
   We are able to match loan size and loan term for almost all the loans in our sample.
On average, borrowers take out $8,492 per loan with a term of 39 months. With scheduled
payment, loan term and loan size, we calculate the original note rate to be about 13% on
 sample. Panel B shows that there is not important geographic variation across states, while Panel C reports
 missing information by age of the borrower. Finally, Panel D reports the key statistics for the subsample
 with and without the interest rate information and shows that the samples are very similar.


                                                    11
average for the vast majority of our loans. We also summarize the ex-post borrower and loan
performance at the loan level based on the maximal delinquent balance during our observation
window on any account and the personal loan, respectively. As of December 2017, 21% of the
borrowers and 1.4% of the loans in our sample have experienced at least one delinquency.
       Panel (a) of Figure 1 plots the number of personal loans originated by fintech lenders and
non-fintech lenders. The largest fintech lenders include Lending Club Corporation, GreenSky
Financial, SoFi Lending Corp, Avant Credit Corporation, LoanDepot.com, Upstart Network
Inc, and Cashcall.11 Non-fintech lenders include all the other lenders, which are generally
major banking institutions. The figure also suggests a non-complete substitution with the
traditional banking sector, as the overall market experienced a significant growth in recent
years. Fintech lenders were originating only a very small fraction of the personal loan market
in 2012, but starting in late 2013 they experienced a significant growth. Panel (b) of Figure
1 shows that the fintech market share doubled from 2014 to 2016, irrespective of whether we
measure it based on the number or the volume of loans.



3. Consumer Loan Market

Since very little is known about the market for consumer credit, this section investigates its
key features and how this market has evolved in the last several years.


3.1. Fintech Lending over Time

Fintech lenders mainly started in California and New York and then expanded throughout
the U.S. Figure 2 plots the growth rate of fintech loans from 2013 to 2017 showing the high-
est growth rate on the East coast and some of the central states. One question is how they
successfully increased their footprint while also facing the competition of significantly more
established financial institutions. A market penetration strategy envisions new lenders tar-
11
     We excluded from our final sample all the lenders that specialize in debt settlement, such as OneMain and
     Freedom Financial. There are no loans originated by Prosper in our data source, because Prosper does not
     report to all the three credit bureaus.


                                                       12
geting credit constrained borrowers, which would provide them with more data to improve
their credit models and time to increase their brand recognition to attract better borrowers.
In contrast, new lenders might try to focus on the most creditworthy borrowers, winning them
over by offering them better terms than those offered by traditional banks. Figure 3 inves-
tigates this question by plotting key borrowers average characteristics based on the year of
entry of each lender in each state. That is, the x-axis identifies the numbers of years since the
entry in a state.
   Panel (a) shows that the average credit score improves as time in the same market passes by,
especially for fintech lenders, going from 668 to 703 while for non-fintech lenders it goes from
631 to 679. Panel (b) shows that the average age also increases from 46 years to 51, showing
a stronger penetration among older borrowers over time. As another indication of improved
performance, panel (c) shows that the prior borrower delinquency declines significantly from
0.12 to 0.06. This is true, to a lesser extent, also for non-fintech lenders. Panel (d) shows that
these changes in borrower composition occur while the average loan size stays constant for
fintech lenders, but increases for non-fintech lenders. This is consistent with fintech lenders
providing more standardized loan menus, while banks might be more prone to increase loan
size after establishing lending relationships with local borrowers. More detailed statistics for
fintech lenders are provided in Table 2, showing for instance that the number of inquiries
tends to decrease, while the maturity of the loan increases as a lender operates in a market for
longer. Overall, this evidence suggests that fintech lenders tend to start with less creditworthy
individuals and then increase their market share by extending credit to better borrowers.
These results are also consistent with a demand-driven explanation. During the first few
years of operation, fintech lenders might only attract marginal borrowers, e.g., those that are
not able to obtain credit from other lending institutions. However, as fintech lenders establish
a reputation and increase customer awareness, they might be able to attract higher quality
borrowers.
   Another dimension we explore is how fintech lenders extend credit across the credit score
distribution, specifically, how much they tend to focus on the left tail, which might not have

                                               13
access to traditional institutions. Figure 4 plots the distribution of loans for both types of
lenders by credit score. Panel (a) presents the number of loans, and it shows that over our
sample period traditional lenders are more likely to lend to less credit-worthy individuals than
fintech lenders. This holds true even when we look at dollars volume in Panel (b). This is
consistent with the fact that some of the main fintech lenders have minimum credit score
requirements for being considered for a loan. Figure A.1 in the online appendix reports these
panels separately by year to investigate whether this result changed over time. It shows that
the result was the strongest during the earlier years, when fintech lenders did not seem to
grant any loans to individuals with scores below 600. Note that while the fintech borrower
credit score distribution remains fairly stable over time, for non-fintech lenders it changes by
shifting towards the higher-score borrowers in later years. This is consistent with the fintech
loans being more standardized, while the banks might change with regulatory, demand and
funding conditions.
   Next, we explore in more details the ex-ante heterogeneity among individuals borrowing
from different types of lenders. We estimate the following baseline specification:


                          F intechi,z,t =  · Xi,t + µz + t + +i,z,t                          (1)


where the main dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the borrower i, living
in zip code z , has a fintech loan in month t and 0 otherwise. The main independent variables
are the borrower's characteristics Xi,t . To control for local economic shocks that might affect
the propensity to get a fintech loan, we include zip code by year-month fixed effects. Thus,
we are comparing the characteristics of neighbor individuals at the same time from different
lenders.
   Panel A of Table 3 focuses on several credit attributes. We standardize all the continuous
independent variables so that the magnitude of these coefficients is associated with a one
standard deviation (S.D.) increase in these variables. Column (1) shows that each S.D. increase
of credit score, about 97 points, is associated with 2% higher likelihood of borrower obtaining a


                                               14
fintech loan on average. The specification is useful to compare the linear effects of credit score,
however Figure A.2 plots the coefficients of a similar specification to (1) but with different
dummies for different credit score 20-point bins. We find that borrowers with credit scores
between 640 and 720 are significantly more likely to have a fintech loan. In other words, even
this regression evidence shows that the bulk of customers for fintech lenders is neither in the
bottom nor in the very top of the credit score distribution.
   Are fintech lenders strategically focusing on customers with a longer credit history poten-
tially to exploit the higher degree of information available about their profiles? Column (2)
does support this hypothesis, because it shows that the length of the credit history has an
economically significant effect. This is consistent with the evidence we shall provide in a later
section about the soft information deficiency affecting fintech lenders. Column (3) suggests
that fintech borrowers have also on average a higher number of credit accounts.
   Consistent with the intuition that one of the main purposes of obtaining a personal loan
is to consolidate existing debts with higher interest rates, Column (4) shows that fintech
borrowers are more likely to have a higher revolving utilization ratio, although the magnitude
of the effect is small, since each S.D. increase of credit card utilization, which is equivalent
to 30%, is associated with 0.6% higher likelihood of borrower obtaining a fintech loan. One
important dimension to explore to shed light on whether fintech lenders are likely to go after
borrowers in distress or that would find it difficult to get a loan from a traditional lenders is to
check whether prior delinquency matters for fintech lenders. Column (5) shows that borrowers
who have defaulted in the past are 4.5% less likely to obtain a fintech loan than a non-fintech
one. Thus, fintech lenders are even more cautious when it comes to lending to borrowers with
delinquent history.
   Another complementary way to assess the borrowers' profiles is to investigate how they
manage their current accounts. The credit bureaus classify borrowers in revolvers and trans-
actors, depending on their use of credit cards. Revolvers are borrowers that carry balances
over multiple months, while transactors tend to pay off their credit cards at the end of each
month. We find that fintech borrowers are significantly less likely to be transactors (Column

                                                15
6). Columns (7) and (8) show that these borrowers are also more likely to have a student loan
and a mortgage. Column (9) shows very similar results in a multivariate setting. Notably,
once we include all variables, the magnitude of the effects of the credit score and the number
of accounts decline. Overall, fintech borrowers tend to carry credit card balance, but do not
exhibit the usual traits of borrowers that do not have access to financial markets.
   We exploit the breadth of our data to investigate whether fintech borrowers are also differ-
ent on other demographic information. Panel B of Table 3 shows that borrowers with fintech
loans are slightly more likely to be male (Column 1) and more likely to be married (Column
2). More importantly, fintech borrowers are more likely to have a college degree (Column 3),
while Column (4) shows that high-income borrowers (i.e., those earning more than $100,000)
are about 5% more likely to borrow from fintech companies. Column (5) also shows that
younger borrowers are 1% more likely to get a fintech loan. Specifically, allowing for non-
linearities, Panel (b) of Figure A.2 shows that individuals that are between 30 and 45 years
old are significantly more likely to get a fintech loan. We complement the previous analysis
with information about the borrowers' occupations: technician, management, cleric worker,
laborer, student, homemaker, retired, or business owner. We find that professionals are 4.5%
more likely to have a fintech loan. These findings further suggest that the more educated
borrowers and those with higher-paying jobs are more likely to turn to fintech lenders than to
traditional institutions for their financial needs.


3.2. Loan Terms

We can further exploit the granularity of the data to explore the main loan features by testing
whether the loan features offered by fintech and traditional institutions differ significantly.
Table 4 regresses the loan amount, the loan maturity and the interest rate on a fintech loan
indicator, which compares them to personal loans granted by non-fintech. This rate does not
include potential additional charges, e.g. origination fees, as they are not present in our credit
bureau data. Columns (1)-(3) control for the borrower's credit score, age of credit history and



                                                16
age as well as zip code by year-month fixed effect, while Columns (4)-(6) include time and
borrower fixed effects. When we analyze the interest rate, we control for the loan size and the
maturity of the loan. Effectively, the first three columns compare borrowers that have fintech
loans with those having non-fintech loans, while the last three columns take advantage of the
subsample of borrowers that have both fintech and non-fintech loans on their credit report.
       We find that fintech lenders are more generous about granting larger loans: on average, a
fintech loan has a $1,600 higher balance. We also find that usually the maturity of the loan is
about ten month longer. Controlling for the loan size and the maturity, we find that fintech
lenders charge a 1.5% higher rate on average. As expected, we find that higher credit score is
associated with larger loans, longer maturity and significantly lower interest rates. Similarly,
a longer credit history is associated with larger loans and longer maturity, but no discernibly
different effect on rates. Also, older borrowers have smaller loans, slightly shorter maturity
loans and higher rates, although the effects for maturity and rate are economically small, i.e.,
one third of a month and eight basis points. Column (3) also shows that larger loans tend
to feature lower rates, which is likely driven by the fact that larger loans are only granted to
more creditworthy individuals, and longer maturity loans feature slightly higher rates.
       Interestingly, once we control for borrower fixed effects, which restricts attention to bor-
rowers having both a fintech and a bank personal loan, the result for loan amount increases
in magnitude to $2,900, while the maturity of fintech loans becomes about one month shorter
than non-fintech. Furthermore, within borrower variation shows that the interest rates charged
by fintech lenders are 13 basis point lower than those charged by banks.12 As expected, bor-
rower fixed effects also absorb most of the effects of the other control variables, likely because
the borrower fixed effect is capturing most of the variation in the borrower's riskiness profile,
and that is the main dimension that drives variation in the interest rate from the lenders'
point of view. These results also motivate why, when we investigate the loan performance of
12
     Due to the growth of fintech lenders, it might be that for a significant fraction of borrowers the non-fintech
     loan is first. This means that once they borrow from fintech they might be older and wealthier. To check
     whether this affects our results, appendix Table A.4 presents results where we match borrowers who had
     first a fintech loan to those with a non-fintech loan first. We find very similar results on loan amounts and
     interest rates, while we find that the fintech loans are about 3 months shorter in this sample.


                                                         17
fintech and banks loans, we take advantage of multiple approaches, from carefully matching
fintech to non-fintech borrowers, to exploiting the panel nature of the data with the inclusion
of borrower fixed effects to control for potentially unobserved borrower heterogeneity.
   Panel B of Table 4 complements the previous results to shed some light on how interest
rates vary within different subsets of borrowers. In fact, the differences between fintech and
non-fintech lenders are likely to be more or less accentuated depending on the different target
individuals. Columns (1) and (2) report the results for borrowers above and below a credit
score of 700. We find that fintech lenders on average charge higher rates, about 2.8% higher,
to low score borrowers, while they offer a better deal than banks to higher score individuals
with a 1.5% lower rate. Columns (3) and (4) show that fintech lenders offer higher rates
irrespective of age, but the difference with non-fintech is larger for older borrowers, i.e., older
than 45 years. Columns (5) and (6) relate to Figure 1 (b) as we test whether the difference
in pricing is also a function of the fintech lenders' market share defined at the county level,
with "high" identifying counties where fintech lenders have at least 20% of the market. We
find that the difference in pricing is half for low county share than for high ones. Intuitively,
this suggests that the rate is a dimension used to attract new borrowers as fintech lenders are
more wary to charge higher rates in areas where their competitive position is weaker.
   Finally, one might think that fintech lenders screen applicants not only based on hard
information provided in the credit report, but could use alternative data to price the loans. If
true, this would suggest that their rates would differ depending on how much information the
credit report contains. Columns (7) and (8) test this hypothesis by estimating our specification
separately for individuals with "thin credit files," i.e., borrowers with credit history shorter
than 48 months. We find that the rate differential is the largest for borrowers with thin
files, as fintech charge a premium of more than 5% compared to non fintech lenders while the
difference we found in Panel A of about 1.5% remains for those with longer histories.




                                                18
3.3. Screening

The evidence presented in Table 4 suggests that the hard information contained in the credit
report might be an important dimension that drives differences across lenders, potentially, as
input to different credit models. Then, we investigate the differences in screening technologies
between fintech and traditional lenders in more detail. Fintech lenders advertise the use of
alternative data to serve borrowers who may otherwise not be approved for loans. Alternative
data may allow a lender to get a more accurate assessment of a consumer's financial behavior
that is only partially reflected in traditional credit scores. For instance, lenders may use
information about an individual's rent payment history, utility bills or education to assess
and price borrowers' riskiness. On the one hand, this alternative data can increase access to
credit for individuals with a short credit history or that are priced out of the market; on the
other, some of the alternative variables could involuntarily discriminate against some group
of borrowers (Bartlett et al., 2017).
       This tension has attracted the attention of policy makers including the CFPB. After is-
suing in 2017 a no-action letter to Upstart Network, Inc., a company that uses alternative
data in making credit underwriting and pricing decisions, the CFPB encouraged lenders "to
develop innovative means of increasing fair, equitable, and nondiscriminatory access to credit,
particularly for credit invisibles and those whose credit history or lack thereof limits their
credit access or increases their cost of credit, while maintaining a compliance management
program that appropriately identifies and addresses risks of legal violations."13
       Following Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2015) and Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru (2018),
we examine whether fintech lenders' use of different information results in different pricing
models. We do so by examining how much variation in interest rates is explained by standard
borrower characteristics across lenders. We estimate the following specification:


            Ratei,z,t =  · CreditScorei,t +  · LoanSizei,t +  · Xi,t + µz + t + +i,z,t               (2)
13
     See https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/update-credit-access-and-no-action-letter/.




                                                      19
where we regress the interest rate on the credit score and loan size, as well as, on a number
of credit and borrower characteristics. Furthermore, to capture macroeconomic variation and
local heterogeneity we include different fixed effects such as zip code and month fixed effects.
Finally, we also allow for the effects of these borrowers' characteristics to be non-linear. We
estimate the regressions separately for fintech and non-fintech banks. The R2 from these
regressions measures the object of interest - how much of the variation in interest rates is
explained by the observable borrower characteristics across lender types- and is presented for
different models in Table 5 Panel A.
   Somewhat surprisingly, we find that these standard characteristics capture most of the
variation in the rates set by fintech lenders. Even just the credit score and the loan size,
together with time fixed effects, explain 44% of the variation for fintech lenders, while only
2% for traditional lenders. The regional heterogeneity is an important factor though. In fact,
including zip code by month fixed effects increases the R2 to 77% for fintech and to 57% for
traditional lenders. This is also the result of fintech lenders not always operating nationally.
Including more variables, such as age or credit history, improves the R2 by only 2%. Also,
when we allow for non-linear effects we see the R2 increasing to almost 80% for fintech lenders
and 59% for non-fintech.
   For all of these specifications, we test the significance of the R2 differences following the
test proposed by Erickson and Whited (2002) and find that the R2 for the fintech lenders is
significantly higher than that for traditional lenders. The differences are also economically
large as they are at least 15%. As expected, the differences disappear once we control for
lender fixed effects as that would capture most of the variation in pricing models.
   Overall, these findings show that, contrary to what one could have expected given the
recent emphasis on alternative data, we find that the information in the credit report is able
to explain most of the variation in interest rates for fintech lenders. Furthermore, we show
that this is not the case for traditional lenders, suggesting a potential role for soft information
absent in the credit reports. To our knowledge, this is the first study showing that, in contrast
to traditional lenders, fintech lenders focus their credit decisions on the most salient hard-

                                                20
information figures found on the credit report, rather than exploiting the predictive power
contained in soft information or alternative data. Consistent with this interpretation, we show
in Table 5 Panel B that there is significant learning for fintech lenders, as the R2 declines as
lenders operate in the market for longer, i.e., they acquire more soft information, although
fintech lenders still rely more on hard information. Finally, in appendix Table A.5, we also
find that the larger the market share, the more fintech learn as captured by a lower R2 .



4. Borrower Ex-Post Performance

Having described the differences in the characteristics of the fintech borrowers with respect to
the bank borrowers, we can then turn to our main result and investigate how the borrowers
perform after obtaining these loans. On the one hand, these personal loans are marketed as a
way to consolidate existing higher-cost debts, which suggests that fintech borrowers might be
less prone to default as their interest expenses should drop significantly. On the other hand,
the ease with which these funds are accessed and the lack of a personal interaction with a loan
officer, might lead borrowers to misuse the additional credit by increasing their consumption
expenditures, leaving them with too much leverage and unaffordable monthly payments down
the road.
   To investigate these hypotheses, we examine next whether fintech loans are more or less
likely to be in default in the 15 months following origination. We start by comparing cross-
sectionally the performance of the different loans in Table 6. Column (1) reports the results
controlling for time and county fixed effects and shows that fintech loans are more likely to be
in default. Column (2) show that the results also hold once we include a full set of borrower's
credit characteristics, as well as loan features, in addition to county and time fixed effects.
We find that fintech loans are about 1.1% more likely to be delinquent compared to a sample
mean of 1.4%. Intuitively, the credit score as well as the length of credit history and the
number of accounts are inversely related to defaults. Columns (3) and (4) present similar
results once we control for county by month and zip code by month fixed effects respectively,


                                              21
that is, these results are not driven by time-varying local heterogeneity as we are comparing
borrowers getting loans from fintech and non-fintech in the same month and region. Finally,
since Table 4 has shown a difference in the size of the loans granted by fintech and non-fintech
lenders, which might drive the higher delinquency rate we find, Column (5) allows for the
effect of loan size and maturity to be non-linear by controlling for loan size and maturity
binds. Even in this restrictive specification we find similar results. Overall these results show
that fintech loans severely underperform non-fintech loans for similar borrowers.14
       Panel B of Table 6 explores this result across borrowers with different credit scores (Columns
1 and 2), based on whether the fintech lender is the main lender (Columns 3 and 4), on the
fintech lenders' market share (Columns 5 and 6) and on the length of credit history (Columns 7
and 8). We find that the relative underperformance of fintech loans is concentrated among the
borrowers with credit scores less than 700. Having a long-term relationship with the fintech
lender might affect the borrowers' perception of the costs of default. Notice that defaulting
on a fintech loan has exactly the same negative consequences on the borrower's credit score
as defaulting on bank loans though. To analyze whether this is the main force driving our
results, we report our loan delinquency results by differentiating between the cases in which
the fintech and the bank that are providing the personal loan are the main lenders and those
in which they are not. We define as main lenders the institution providing the largest loan to
the borrower. We do not find evidence supporting this hypothesis, as the higher default rates
of fintech loans are present for both subsamples. We do find that, consistent with the previous
evidence that fintech institutions tend to lend to better borrowers as they gain market share,
we find that the higher defaults are even more pronounced in low fintech share counties. Fi-
nally, we find that, as in the case of interest rates, the defaults are significantly higher among
borrowers with thin credit files.
       One potential concern with the previous analysis is that borrower heterogeneity between
those that have a fintech loan and those who do not might be affecting our findings. We address
14
     In Table A.6, we also report the similar regressions with the missing values of the explanatory variables
     imputed using predictive mean matching methodology. This allows us to use every observation in our loan
     sample in the regressions. They yield very similar results as those in Table 6.


                                                       22
this concern in several ways. First of all, Table 7 uses different matching methodologies to
find for each fintech loan the closest match among non-fintech. Panel A uses a propensity
score matching methodology to match based on zip code location, as well as demographic
information, and the full set of credit attributes that we used in Table 3, e.g., credit score,
delinquent history, debt balances, etc.15 This is our preferred specification since it is the
most restrictive and the one with the most conservative results. However, we also provide the
results with two more methodologies. Columns (1)-(4) of Panel B present the results based on
a manually-matched sample based on zip code, age and total indebtedness, as these are likely
to drive most of the variation in the loan performance. Finally, Columns (5)-(8) of Panel B
estimate our main specification employing a generalization of the propensity score matching,
entropy balance weighting, which involves a reweighting scheme that is more flexible than the
nearest neighbor matching (Hainmueller, 2012). Although each methodology selects a different
sample, we find consistent results across all specifications: fintech loans are significantly more
likely to default than similar loans made by non-fintech lenders to extremely similar borrowers.
       An additional way in which we can enrich the previous analysis and at the same time make
sure that unobservable characteristics of the borrower are not the main drivers of the fintech
underperformance is to exploit the panel nature of our data. Specifically, we use the sample
identified by the propensity score matching methodology in Table 7 to present the estimates
of the following specification:


                                          =+5
                     DepV ari,t =         =-1   1 · F intech +  · Xi,t + µi + t + +i,t                       (3)


in which, on the left hand side, we estimate borrower's behavior around the loan origination.
The main independent variables are the interaction between quarter dummies identifying the
periods before and after the loan origination times the fintech borrower indicator, and they are
estimated relative to the origination quarter. This dynamic specification allows us to include
borrower fixed effects µi . In other words, we are comparing our outcome variables for the same
15
     Table A.7 reports the pooled OLS regression results that has similar specification to the regression used in
     PSM. PSM is done by each zip code.


                                                        23
borrower before and after obtaining the loan relative to the origination quarter for fintech and
non-fintech loans. We perform this analysis on the propensity score matched sample.
   In Column (1) of Table 8 the dependent variable is loan delinquency, which would then
capture whether borrowers are more or less likely to default on fintech loans, while in Column
(2) the dependent variable is delinquency on any account. We find that matched fintech
loans first perform better than their bank counterparts, but their performance significantly
deteriorates starting in the third quarter. Furthermore, their underperformance becomes more
pronounced as time from origination increases, in fact, while fintech loans are about 0.30%
more likely to be delinquent in the third quarter after origination, they are 1.7% more likely
to default in the fifth quarter. Column (2) complements the previous analysis by exploring
whether the fintech borrowers are in general more likely to default post-origination on any
account. For instance, if access to a fintech loan resulted in total indebtedness that is too
high to sustain, these borrowers might find themselves behind on other loan payments, e.g.,
on their credit card payments. Column (2) shows that, before origination, the likelihood of
having an account in default is slightly lower for the borrowers with fintech loans compared to
those with bank loans, controlling for borrower fixed effects. However, starting already in the
first quarter after origination, the likelihood that fintech borrowers default is increasing over
time and reaches more than 5% one year after origination. This result is both statistically
and economically significant, since this corresponds to about a 25% increase in the likelihood
to default relative to the sample mean.
   Our matching procedure is likely to account for all the information available to the lenders
at the time of origination, however, we are not able to rule out the possibility that borrowers'
unobservable time-varying characteristics could affect our results. For instance, borrowers
might turn to fintech lenders only when they are not able to get access to credit from tra-
ditional banks. Borrower fixed effects would only capture time-invariant characteristics of
the borrowers that might be correlated with their willingness to apply to fintech lenders and
so it would not be able to capture this situation. The concern is somewhat lessened by the
fact that the observable characteristics we match the borrowers on aim to capture, although

                                               24
imperfectly, these instances.
   Columns (3) and (4) complement the previous results showing how borrowers differ on
other dimensions capturing their financial health depending on whether they borrowed from
fintech or non-fintech lenders. Column (3) shows that in the first two quarters after the
loan origination their credit score increases by about 10 points, consistent with partial debt
repayment, however, it declines over time. This pattern is probably explained not only by
the higher probability to default but also by the overall increase in their total debt balances.
In fact, Column (4) shows that while there is a decline of about $3,000 in the first quarter
after loan origination (relative to the average loan size of $8,400), total indebtedness increases
significantly over time by more than the amount of the initial decline.
   Figure 5 complements the previous findings by plotting the interaction between the fintech
indicator and monthly dummies for the variables in Table 8. Panels (a) and (b) clearly show
that individuals borrowing from fintech lenders experience higher loan delinquency and higher
default rate on any account after origination than matched non-fintech borrowers. Panels (c)
and (d) confirms the dynamic patterns highlighted in Table 8 with credit score first increasing
more for fintech borrowers but then rapidly declining 9 months since origination, and total
balance first sharply decreasing and then increasing after just four months. One might think
that these results could potentially be driven by the earlier cohorts, when the fintech lenders
had limited data and might have been more prone to face adverse selection. Panels (e) and
(f) of Figure 5 show that this is not the case, in fact, we find that the results are consistent
across cohorts, although some years (e.g., 2016) are worse than others (e.g., 2013) especially
for loan delinquency, while there is no variation for borrower delinquency.
   What might be the reason for this higher delinquency probability? One possibility, sug-
gested by the result on total indebtedness, is that the fintech borrowers are using the additional
funds not to consolidate their debts, but rather to support additional expenditures. Our data
does not contain explicit measures of consumption, but we can follow Di Maggio et al. (2017)
and compute the probability to purchase a car using changes in the auto loan balance, which
can be a valuable measure of durable consumption. Column (5) of Table 8 shows that fintech

                                               25
borrowers are indeed more likely to purchase a car in the months following the loan origina-
tion, with the highest spike in the first two months by as high as 0.25%, a 5-percent increase
from the sample mean.
   Another way in which we can measure consumption is with total revolving debt as it
includes spending using credit cards as well as retail cards, e.g., Macy's card or Best Buy's
card. Intuitively, borrowers might initially use the additional funds to repay their credit cards,
but then start financing their expenditures with these credit cards again, which results in a
greater total indebtedness and higher financial fragility. Column (6) shows that while there
is an initial decline in the first two quarters, we see a rapid and persistent increase during the
following year. This evidence corroborates the view that part of the reason for the increase in
defaults is the higher propensity of the fintech borrowers to spend the additional funds rather
than using them to achieve a healthier financial situation. Figure 6 confirms these findings by
plotting the coefficients on the interaction term of fintech loan indicator and relative monthly
dummies from a regression examining the probability to purchase a car and revolving debt as
dependent variables.
   We complement the previous results by exploring whether these findings reside also in the
subsamples where the key interpretation suggests they should reside: for borrowers facing a
high ex ante interest rate; those with low credit score, and in the subsample where the bor-
rower's credit history is "thin." We report the results for these three subsamples in appendix
Table A.8. The results are even stronger than our baseline in these subsamples. Specifically:
We find that borrowers with high interest rate are about 40% more likely to be delinquent
(coefficient is 8.4 vs. 5.8 four quarters after the loan), their credit score declines more (-12
points vs. -0.9), and their total indebtedness increases by $8,390 after four quarters, which is
larger than the average $5,355. The borrower's revolving debt increases by $1,547, which is
substantially more than the baseline $367. We do not find a large difference for car purchases
for this group. Low credit score individuals experience even larger effects on delinquency, i.e,.
coefficient on borrower delinquency is about double the average, and on credit score. Their
total debt increases about 20 percent more than for the average borrower.

                                               26
   Finally, the borrowers with a thin credit file are those where we find the strongest results
for borrower delinquency and decline in credit score. These heterogeneity results fit well with
the interpretation that fintech lenders do not appear to use much information outside the most
salient hard-information figures to set rates (i.e., they don't use much soft information) which
is the main insight from Table 5. Taken together, the evidence in Table 5 and the results on
the borrowers' delinquency suggests that fintech lenders are likely to be exposed to adverse
selection. For instance, fintech borrowers might be weaker in their financial management skills
which would translate into higher default rates. However, by predominantly relying on hard
information, fintech lenders are likely to miss this source of heterogeneity and risk and so end
up giving credit to borrowers that would have been rejected by a traditional lender.
   Overall, these results provide evidence that even when controlling for potential differences
in creditworthiness, fintech borrowers are significantly more likely to be in default both on the
personal loan as well as on other accounts. The results also seem to be concentrated in the
less creditworthy segment of the market. Hence, although Fintech companies advertise their
superior ability in identifying the "invisible prime" and the "underserved borrowers," we find
evidence that their loans perform significantly worse than traditional lenders in that segment
mainly because the borrowers' behavior after origination is different.



5. Loan Pricing and Defaults

The previous findings have established that fintech borrowers are more likely to default than
neighbor non-fintech borrowers with very similar characteristics. However, that does not mean
that fintech lenders are losing money. In fact, the higher interest rates could compensate for
the higher default probability. Furthermore, fintech screening technologies might perform
worse than traditional institutions on the extensive margin, but be more accurate on the
intensive margin.
   We shed some lights on this issue by examining whether fintech or non-fintech lenders'
interest rates are better predictors of ex-post performance in terms of default. Table 4 showed


                                               27
that fintech lenders charge higher rates for similar borrowers, while Table 5 has shown that
fintech lenders rely more heavily on hard information provided in the credit report for the
pricing decisions. We can then complement those results by noting that if lenders are using
more data or better pricing algorithms to set interest rates, then these interest rates should
be more correlated with ex-post performance (Rajan, Seru, and Vig, 2015). Formally, we
estimate the following specification:


               DLQi,z,t =  · Ratei,t +  · Ratei,t · F intech +  · Xi,t + µz,t + i,z,t         (4)


where the dependent variable is the loan default probability. The main coefficients of interests
are  , which captures how correlated the interest rate is to default, and  , which captures
whether this correlation is stronger or weaker for fintech lenders. Note that a higher correlation
can also be driven by a more severe adverse selection or moral hazard issue in fintech lending.
To mitigate this concern, we also include a full vector of controls that should be correlated
with defaults. In addition, in the most conservative specifications, Columns (5) and (6) also
include zip code by month fixed effects. Column (1) of Table 9 shows a positive and significant
coefficient for the interest rate in absence of any other controls. Column (2) shows that the
interaction with the fintech lender indicator is also positive and significant. These results
hold true even once we include the other controls in Columns (3) and (4). Intuitively, the
controls do matter, as they are significant and have the expected sign. For instance, credit
score is strongly negatively correlated with defaults, as is the length of credit history, the
number of accounts and the borrower age. By far the largest coefficient is the credit score
though. Finally, Column (5) and (6) show that zip code by month fixed effects increase the
R2 considerably, but the main coefficients of interest remain economically and statistically
significant.
   Overall, these results show that interest rates are indeed correlated with defaults, and are
even more so for fintech lenders. The difference is considerable since the correlation is at least
20% higher for fintech lenders. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the higher defaults


                                                 28
are likely not to translate to lower profits for the lenders as fintech lenders seem to be better
at pricing than traditional institutions.



6. Fintech Borrowers

The findings discussed in the previous section highlighted that higher defaults do not neces-
sarily translate into worse outcomes for fintech lenders as these are likely to be priced in. This
section provides evidence that there are also other benefits for both lenders and borrowers in
creating a new lending relationship with a fintech institution.
       The first hypothesis we test is whether borrowers tend to be loyal to their fintech lenders.
Intuitively, if a borrower feels the fintech lender provided access to credit that was not available
at other traditional institutions, it is likely that they will return to these lenders in the future.
This would be beneficial for the lenders because of the lower customer acquisition costs and
the more data available about these returning borrowers' behavior.
       We test this hypothesis by checking whether borrowers who got a fintech loan in the past
are more likely to stay with a fintech lender for the next loan. Table 10 shows that this is
the case. Columns (1)-(3) provide the baseline result controlling for zip code by month fixed
effects as well as demographic and credit attributes of the borrower. In all specifications, we
find that those borrowers who got a previous fintech loan have a 60% likelihood to get another
fintech loan.16
       If this loyalty is driven by the fact that fintech lenders provided a loan while other tra-
ditional institutions would not, we should see these effects to be stronger for more credit
constrained borrowers. Column (4) tests this hypothesis by interacting the previous fintech
indicator with an indicator identifying borrowers with lower credit score. We find that lower
credit individuals are 15% more likely to stay with the fintech lender (i.e., interaction co-
efficient of 0.089 relative to a baseline of 0.556). Another important dimension capturing
access to credit is whether the borrower has a thin credit file. Column (5) shows that indeed
16
     As a comparison, we report the results of a similar test for non-fintech borrowers in appendix Table A.9.
     We find that these borrowers stay with the non-fintech lender with only 14 percent probability.


                                                       29
borrowers with these characteristics tend to rely on fintech lenders for multiple loans. Fi-
nally, Column (6) tests whether being the main lender of the borrower influences whether the
borrower keeps obtaining credit from the lender. We show that this is the case, in fact, the
probability increases by an additional 30% when the lender was the main one. Then, we can
conclude that fintech lenders are rewarded by taking some risk and lend to less creditworthy
borrowers as these tend to be loyal and increase their lifetime value.
   To further test in which ways fintech lenders can be filling a gap in the market, we can
also check whether these lenders might be helpful in smoothing negative shocks. Thus, we
complemented the existing data with information about individuals who lost their job due
to involuntary layoffs. This is an additional dataset that is matched by the credit bureau
to credit report data and provides information about individuals who lost their jobs and the
reason leading to the layoff. This provides a unique opportunity to examine whether the
demand for credit post unemployment is met differently by fintech and traditional lenders.
   Specifically, we use this information to test whether individuals who experience unemploy-
ment shocks are more or less likely to get a loan in the quarter after job loss, and whether
they are more likely to get it from a fintech or a traditional institution. We do so in Table
11 where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the loan is originated in a given
month. P ostjobloss is an indicator that takes 1 for individuals with job loss after their job
loss date. Unemployment is an indicator for the individuals with job loss during our sample
period. The specifications in Columns (1) and (2) are based on fintech loans only. Columns
(3) and (4) present the results based on non-fintech loans, while the results for the pool sample
are presented in Columns (5) and (6). Intuitively, we can compare the propensity of accessing
credit for those individuals who lose their job to those who do not, and then we can also
compare this difference for fintech and non-fintech loans. We control for county by time fixed
effects in Columns (1), (3), (5) and control for individual and time fixed effects in the other
specifications.
   Overall, we show that after the job loss individuals are more likely to get a loan from a
fintech lender. Columns (3) and (4) show that this is not the case for non-fintech lenders, once

                                               30
we control for borrower fixed effects. Finally, the last two columns confirm that the higher
propensity to get a loan post job loss from a fintech lender is statistically higher than getting
it from a non-fintech lender. This evidence is consistent with the view that fintech lenders
are less stringent than non-fintech lenders on employment status. The appendix Table A.10
compares outcomes for the unemployed individuals that receive a fintech loan to those that
do not. While we find that their delinquency increases, their total indebtedness as well as
their revolving debit decline. We also find that these individuals are more likely to experience
a growth of their income greater than 5 percent.



7. Conclusion

The growing importance of fintech lenders in the consumer lending market poses several
questions about the market as well as the practices adopted by fintech lenders to quickly
expand and compete with traditional financial institutions. We first show that fintech lenders
tend to first lend to less creditworthy individuals, but over time the quality of their pool of
borrowers significantly improves. We also show that, for similar borrowers, the terms offered
by fintech lenders are different. Specifically, average loan size tends to be larger, and interest
rates higher. We then examine whether the screening technologies between types of lenders
differ significantly. We find, somewhat surprisingly, that fintech lenders rely more on the hard
information provided in the credit report which suggests a soft information deficiency. As
time passes by, fintech lenders seem to learn more about the local markets and rely less on
the hard information contained in the credit report.
   The main result of the paper is that fintech loans are significantly more likely to de-
fault. Also, borrowers' outcomes worsen in the months following the fintech loan origination
compared to similar individuals borrowing from non-fintech lenders. Since selection is an im-
portant concern, we exploit the granularity of our data to match borrowers based on a number
of characteristics at origination using multiple methodologies and confirm the robustness of
these results. The underlying mechanism suggested by our findings is that borrowers spend


                                               31
the additional funds rather than consolidating their debts. In other words, even when bor-
rowers use the personal loan to consolidate their credit card debt, we find that their revolving
balance increases again a few months after origination. The new level of total indebtedness
then becomes harder to sustain.
   The evidence on the underlying screening technology and the results on the borrowers'
delinquency suggest that fintech lenders are likely to be exposed to adverse selection. Specifi-
cally, due to the lack of soft information available to them, fintech lenders might end up giving
credit to borrowers that would have been rejected by a traditional lender who might be able
to detect weaker financial management skills.
   However, we find that the higher likelihood to default is not likely to hurt the fintech lenders
and the borrowers. First of all, fintech lenders seem to price their loans better, because the
interest rate they charge is more correlated with the loan default probability. Furthermore, in
addition to larger payments, the lifetime value of the borrower is also likely to be higher for
fintech lenders. We find that fintech borrowers are loyal, as they tend to get multiple loans
from fintech lenders over time, which is especially true for those less creditworthy borrowers.
From the point of view of the borrowers, we also find that borrowers are more likely to obtain
more credit when they need it the most, e.g., once they lose their job. This suggests that the
additional credit available from fintech lenders might provide a significant relaxation of their
credit constraints.
   This trade-off poses some challenges for policy makers: curbing the credit provided by
fintech lenders could negatively impact the most credit-constrained borrowers. However, in
the same spirit as regulators introduced the "ability to repay" rules for mortgage products in
the aftermath of the subprime crisis, one dimension of interest for regulators might be the need
for fintech lenders to more closely monitor the borrowers' ability to service their unsecured
debt and the way these additional funds are actually used by the borrowers.




                                               32
References
Ausubel, L.M., 1991. The failure of competition in the credit card market. American Eco-
    nomic Review, 50-81.
Balyuk, T. 2019. Financial innovation and borrowers: Evidence from peer-to-peer lending.
    Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 2802220.
Balyuk, T. and Davydenko, S.A., 2018. Reintermediation in Fintech: Evidence from Online
    Lending.
Bartlett, R.P. and Morse, Adair and Stanton, Richard H. and Wallace, Nancy E., 2017 Con-
    sumer lending discrimination in the finTech era. UC Berkeley Public Law Research Paper.
Buchak, G., Matvos, G., Piskorski, T., Seru, A. (2018). Fintech, regulatory arbitrage, and
    the rise of shadow banks. Journal of Financial Economics, 130(3), 453-483.
Chava, S., Paradkar, N., and Zhang, Y. 2019. Winners and losers of marketplace lending: Evi-
    dence from borrower credit dynamics. Georgia Tech Scheller College of Business Research
    Paper 18-16.
De Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., and Thakor, A. V. 2018. P2P lenders versus banks: Cream
    skimming or bottom fishing?
Danisewicz, Piotr and Elard, Ilaf, The Real Effects of Financial Technology: Marketplace
    Lending and Personal Bankruptcy (July 5, 2018). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/
    abstract=3208908.
Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Keys, B. J., Piskorski, T., Ramcharan, R., Seru, A., Yao, V.
    (2017). Interest rate pass-through: Mortgage rates, household consumption, and volun-
    tary deleveraging. American Economic Review, 107(11), 3550-88.
Erickson, T., Whited, T. M., 2002. Two-step GMM estimation of the errors-in-variables model
    using high-order moments. Econometric Theory, 18, 776­799.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2018. Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit.
Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P. and Vickery, J., 2018. The role of technology in mortgage
    lending. The Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.



                                             33
Hainmueller, J. (2012). Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting
    method to produce balanced samples in observational studies. Political Analysis, 20(1),
    25-46.
Hertzberg, A., Liberman, A. and Paravisini, D., 2018. Screening on loan terms: evidence from
    maturity choice in consumer credit. The Review of Financial Studies, 3532­3567.
Iyer, R., Khwaja, A.I., Luttmer, E.F. and Shue, K., 2015. Screening peers softly: Inferring
    the quality of small borrowers. Management Science, 62(6), 1554-1577.
Liao, L., Z. Wang, H. Xiang, and X. Zhang. 2017. P2p lending in china: An overview.
Mariotto, C. (2016). Competition for lending in the Internet era: The case of Peer-to-Peer
    Lending Marketplaces in the USA. Available at SSRN 2800998.
Morse, A., 2015. Peer-to-peer crowdfunding: Information and the potential for disruption in
    consumer lending. Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7, 463-482.
Parlour, Christine A., and Uday Rajan, 2001. Competition in loan contracts. American
    Economic Review, 91(5), 1311-1328.
Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2015. The failure of models that predict failure:
    Distance, incentives, and defaults. Journal of financial economics 115(2), 237-260.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect
    information. American economic review, 71(3), 393-410.
Tang, H., 2019. Peer-to-Peer Lenders versus Banks: Substitutes or Complements? The Review
    of Financial Studies, 32(5), 1900-1938.
Transunion, 2017. Fact versus Fiction: Fintech Lenders. available at https://newsroom.transunion.com
    /Fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-
    performance.
Vallee, B. and Zeng, Y., 2018. Marketplace Lending: A New Banking Paradigm?. The Review
    of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Wolfe, B., and W. Yoo. 2017. Crowding out banks: Credit substitution by peer-to-peer
    lending.



                                              34
                            Figure 1. Fintech Loan Market
           (a) No of Loans                                 (b) Share of Fintech Loans




Notes: This figure plots number of loans originated by fintech lenders and non-fintech lenders
based on our loan sample. The largest fintech lenders include LendingClub Corporation, Green-
sky Financial, SOFI Lending Corp, Avant Credit Corporation, and Upstart Network Inc. Non-
fintech lenders include all the other lenders among top 100 lenders in the unsecured personal
loan market based on their origination volume in 2012­2017. The data is a random sample of
all personal loans reported to one of the main credit bureaus.




                                             35
               Figure 2. Fintech Volume Growth from 2013 to 2017




Notes: This figure plots the growth rate of fintech loan origination volume from 2013 to 2017.
Total origination volume of fintech loans based on our sample is $453 million in 2013 and $3.7
billion in 2017, i.e., an eight-fold increase.




                                             36
           Figure 3. Evolution of Borrower Profile After Market Entry
            (a) Credit Score                                       (b) Borrower Age




       (c) Prior DLQ Indicator                                     (d) New Loan Size




Notes: This figure plots average values of consumer and loan attributes by lender's years of entry.
Lender's years of entry is defined based on number of years from the first loan originated by each
lender in a given state. We report the statistics separately for fintech and non-fintech loans in
each Panel. The statistics are based on all loans in our loan sample summarized in Table 1.




                                                37
                  Figure 4. Evolution of Credit Score Distribution
         (a) Number of Loans                                        (b) Balance




Notes: This figure plots relative frequency of loans over borrower's credit score between the
fintech and non-fintech loans based on our loan sample. Panel (a) plots the frequency based on
number of loans and Panel (b) plots share of loan balance in each credit score bins. Fintech and
non-fintech loans are defined based on the lender names.




                                              38
  Figure 5. Dynamics of Loan and Borrower Performance
(a) Loan DLQ                            (b) Borrower DLQ




(c) Credit Score                          (d) Total Debt




                          39
 (e) Loan DLQ by Origination Year                     (f ) Borrower DLQ by Origination Year




Notes: The figure plots the coefficient on the interaction of fintech loan indicator and relative
month dummies from the regressions that examine the difference in the performance dynamics
between the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The regression is based on the loan-
month panel from 3 month before through 15 months after the loan origination, restricted to
the loans in the PSM­matched sample. The dependent variable for each chart is the figure
title. We control for individual loan, calendar time and relative month fixed effects. Standard
errors are double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. Panels (e) and (f) plot
the coefficients from regressions of loan delinquency and borrower delinquency, respectively, but
based on the subsample of loans originated in each year.




                                               40
                    Figure 6. Dynamics of Borrower Consumption
             (a) New Car                                         (b) Revolving Debt




Notes: The figure plots the coefficient on the interaction of fintech loan indicator and relative
month dummies from the regression examining the difference in the spending dynamics between
the fintech and non-fintech borrowers in our sample. The regression is based on the loan-month
panel from 3 month before through 15 months after the origination of the loan, restricted to the
loans in the PSM­matched sample. The dependent variable for each chart is the figure title. We
control for individual loan, calendar time and relative month fixed effects. Standard errors are
double clustered at county and origination year-month levels.




                                               41
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
Statistic                     N        Mean     St. Dev.   Min   Pctl(25)   Median    Pctl(75)     Max
Fintech Loan Indicator    3,792,757   0.208       0.406     0        0         0           0          1
Loan Size                 3,792,757 $8,492      $11,822     $1    $1,575    $5,446     $11,869   $5,850,000
Maturity                  3,792,757 39.185        26.26      1       13        36         60         999
Note Rate                 2,218,740 13.108        9.818      0     7.033     11.55      18.818     49.996
Borrower DLQ Indicator    3,792,757 21.495       41.079      0       0         0           0         100
Loan DLQ Indicator        3,792,757   1.452      11.964      0       0         0           0         100
No of Accounts            3,709,883 22.878        13.12      0      13        21          30          91
Total Balance             3,709,883 $106,986    $146,034    $-    $13,490   $45,595   $157,011   $8,857,760
Auto Balance              3,709,883 $11,739     $16,168     $-      $-      $5,731    $18,650    $1,997,020
Revolving Balance         3,709,883 $9,749       $24,402    $-     $456     $3,550    $10,754    $6,089,626
Student Balance           3,709,883 $8,061       $25,897    $-      $-        $-          $-      $980,313
Mortgage Balance          3,709,883 $73,061     $128,126    $-      $-        $-      $117,168   $8,175,626
Student Indicator         3,792,757   0.281       0.449      0       0         0           1           1
Mortgage Indicator        3,792,757  0.532        0.499     0        0         1           1          1
Credit Score              3,791,076 653.836       97.873     0      596       658        722         840
Inquiries                 3,709,883   1.253       1.611     0        0         1           2          74
Age of Credit             3,709,883 188.407      100.958     0      122       170        240        1050
Revolving Utilization     3,672,635  0.434        0.344     0      0.079     0.419       0.74       1.111
Age                       3,637,150 48.785       14.323     14       38        48         59          99
Young Indicator           3,792,757   0.412       0.492     0        0         0           1          1
Male Indicator            3,792,757   0.515        0.5       0       0         1           1           1
Married Indicator         3,792,757   0.573       0.495      0       0         1           1           1
College Indicator         3,792,757   0.238       0.426      0       0         0           0           1
Professional Indicator    3,792,757   0.084       0.277      0       0         0           0           1
High Income Indicator     3,792,757   0.209       0.406      0       0         0           0           1
Prior DLQ Indicator       3,709,883   0.168       0.374      0       0         0           0           1
Transactor Indicator      3,782,705   0.067       0.251      0       0         0           0           1
   Notes: This table reports summary statistics of loan-level data. Our loan sample is a random
   sample of all unsecured personal loans originated by fintech and by non-fintech lenders from
   2012­2017. The (original) note rate is calculated using scheduled payment, loan term and loan
   size. Borrower DLQ indicator is defined as an indicator for the borrowers who have any positive
   delinquent balance on their credit report. High income indicator is defined as an indicator for the
   households whose income is more than $100,000. Professional indicator is defined as an indicator
   for the households whose heads work in the professional, technical and management occupations.
   Fintech loan indicator is defined as an indicator for loans originated by one of the fintech lenders.
   Fintech share is computed based on all loans in our loan sample originated in the prior three
   months in a given county.




                                                    42
                     Table 2: Evolution of Fintech Loan Attributes
                                      Fintech Lender's Years of Entry in Each State
                                 1          2           3          4          5          6
      Age                      46.46      46.988       47.517    48.416     49.717     51.023
      % Age  45                0.488       0.473       0.456      0.429      0.388     0.354
      % Professional           0.111      0.112        0.114      0.114     0.116       0.119
      Credit Score             667.9       665.0        674.7     683.9      690.4      703.0
      % Credit Score  620        0.3        0.3          0.2       0.2        0.2        0.1
      Age of Credit             196.6      199.1        204.8     213.6      220.1      230.2
      No of Accounts            23.6       23.0         23.3      23.0       22.7        23.3
      Total Balance           $146,406   $144,227    $144,776   $141,573   $143,742   $158,996
      Rev Utilization          0.498      0.516        0.484      0.467     0.442       0.409
      No of Inquiries          1.212      1.037        0.947      0.792     0.712       0.625
      Prior DLQ                 0.12       0.12         0.10      0.08       0.08       0.06
      Loan Size               $12,633    $12,424      $13,177    $11,991   $11,542    $12,411
      Maturity                  47.0       47.7         52.2       53.0      56.0       59.6
      Note Rate                15.35       17.41        17.50     15.67      15.93      15.23
Notes: This table presents average values of the consumer and loan attributes of fintech loans
by lender's years of entry. Lender's years of entry is defined based on number of years from the
first loan originated by each lender in a given state. The statistics are based on all loans in our
loan sample summarized in Table 1.




                                                43
                       Table 3: Individual Characteristics of Fintech Borrowers
                                                         Panel A: Credit Attributes
Dep Var                                                                        I(Fintechi )× 100
                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)       (9)
Credit Score              0.019***                                                                                             0.007***
                           (0.001)                                                                                              (0.001)
Age of Credit History                  0.020***                                                                                0.014***
                                        (0.000)                                                                                 (0.000)
No of Accounts                                        0.011***                                                                 0.001***
                                                       (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)
Rev. Utilization                                                   0.006***                                                    0.008***
                                                                    (0.000)                                                     (0.000)
Prior DLQ Indicator                                                               -0.045***                                   -0.036***
                                                                                   (0.001)                                      (0.001)
Transactor Indicator                                                                               0.039***                    0.030***
                                                                                                    (0.001)                     (0.001)
Student Loan Indicator                                                                                      0.043***           0.046***
                                                                                                             (0.001)            (0.001)
Mortgage Indicator                                                                                                   0.041*** 0.024***
                                                                                                                      (0.001)   (0.001)
ZIP × Time FE                  Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
N                          3791076         3709883       3709883       3672635       3709883       3782705       3792758       3792758   3663667
R2                          0.382           0.383         0.382         0.381         0.382         0.381         0.382         0.382     0.387

                                                   Panel B: Demographics
      Dep Var                                                          I(Fintechi )× 100
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
      Male Indicator             0.004***                                                                       0.001**
                                  (0.001)                                                                       (0.001)
      Married Indicator                        0.016***                                                        0.009***
                                                (0.001)                                                         (0.001)
      College Indicator                                      0.042***                                          0.031***
                                                              (0.001)                                           (0.001)
      High Income Indicator                                                0.046***                            0.038***
                                                                            (0.001)                             (0.001)
      Young Indicator                                                                    0.010***              0.012***
                                                                                          (0.001)               (0.001)
      Professional Indicator                                                                          0.045*** 0.031***
                                                                                                       (0.001)  (0.001)
      ZIP × Time FE                  Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
      N                          3792757       3792757       3792757       3792757       3792757       3792757       3792757
      R2                           0.38          0.38         0.381         0.382          0.38         0.381         0.383

     Notes: These tables report the linear probability regression results of specifications where the
     dependent variable is the fintech loan indicator (0/1). In Panel A and B, we report results
     on borrower's credit attributes and demographic characteristics, respectively. Student loan and
     mortgage indicators are defined to be 1 for individuals who have positive balance of student loans
     and mortgages, respectively. High income indicator is defined as an indicator for the households
     whose income is more than $100,000. Professional indicator is defined as an indicator for the
     households whose heads work in the professional, technical and management occupations. In
     addition to the variables reported in the table, we also control for zip code by origination year-
     month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at county and origination year-month
                                                     44 sample. Asterisks denote significance levels
     levels. The regression is based on our loan-level
     (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
                                        Table 4: Loan Terms
                                        Panel A: Overall Sample
Sample                       Borrowers that have Fintech              Borrowers that have Fintech
                                   or Bank Loans                           and Bank Loans
Dep Var                   Loan Size     Loan Term    Note Rate     Loan Size     Loan Term   Note Rate
                             (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
Fintech Loan Indicator   1,562.587***   10.506***    1.498***     2,939.567***   -1.176***    -0.135**
                           (30.610)      (0.096)       (0.062)      (38.299)      (0.082)      (0.054)
Loan Size                                            -1.338***                               -0.103***
                                                       (0.024)                                 (0.020)
Maturity                                              0.082***                                0.051***
                                                       (0.002)                                 (0.003)
FICO                     3,129.673***    8.658***    -2.815***     15.639***     0.040***    -0.036***
                           (16.015)       (0.040)      (0.028)      (0.922)       (0.002)      (0.002)
Age of Credit            1,031.716***    1.970***       0.019      1.036***        0.002       -0.001*
                            (9.682)       (0.021)      (0.013)      (0.344)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Age                      -739.777***    -0.378***    0.088***
                            (7.896)       (0.022)      (0.013)
Time FE                      No            No            No           Yes           Yes        Yes
ZIP × Time FE                Yes           Yes           Yes          No            No         No
Individual FE                No            No            No           Yes           Yes        Yes
N                          3559985       3559985     2079676        253,695       253,695     163,436
R2                          0.371         0.526       0.565          0.704         0.576       0.765




                                                    45
                                              Panel B: By Borrower Attributes
Dep Var                                                                   Note Rate
                            Credit Score                     Age                County Fintech Share       Thin Credit
Sample                     High       Low            Old           Young          High       Low          No        Yes
                            (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)
Fintech Loan Indicator   -1.563*** 2.794***         2.506*** 1.153***            1.425***    0.719***    1.404*** 5.436***
                           (0.040)  (0.103)          (0.130)  (0.055)             (0.085)     (0.091)     (0.061)  (1.373)
Loan Size                 -0.035** -2.828***       -2.465*** -0.950***          -0.732***   -1.646***   -1.265*** -5.216***
                           (0.015)  (0.044)          (0.049)  (0.029)             (0.019)     (0.050)     (0.023)  (0.828)
Maturity                  0.003*** 0.155***         0.171*** 0.026***           0.020***     0.119***    0.078*** 0.236***
                           (0.001)  (0.003)          (0.004)  (0.002)             (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)  (0.025)
Credit Score             -4.192*** -1.061***       -2.178*** -3.659***          -5.089***   -2.017***   -2.896***   -0.106
                           (0.036)  (0.034)          (0.038)  (0.034)             (0.057)     (0.029)     (0.028)  (0.172)
Age of Credit            -0.052*** 0.220***         0.055*** -0.120***          -0.239***    0.132***   -0.032***    0.74
                           (0.015)  (0.019)          (0.021)  (0.017)             (0.021)     (0.015)     (0.013)  (0.740)
Age                       0.217***   -0.018         0.057*** 0.320***            0.370***     -0.025*    0.111*** -0.304***
                           (0.017)  (0.016)          (0.018)  (0.018)             (0.021)     (0.015)     (0.013)  (0.091)
ZIP × Time FE               Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
N                         730390     1349286        931309     1148367           704991     1343393     1988624     91052
R2                         0.653      0.674          0.718      0.617             0.525      0.594       0.564      0.939

      Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the loan terms between
      the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The dependent variable in Panel A is reported
      in the column title: loan size, loan term and note rate. The dependent variable in Panel B is
      note rate of the loan. Note rate is calculated using scheduled payment, loan term and loan size.
      In Panel B, the regressions are based on split samples by borrower attributes (credit score, age,
      county fintech share and age of credit). High credit score is defined as the borrowers with a high
      score above 700. Young is defined as borrowers younger than 45 at the time of loan origination.
      County is defined to have high fintech share if the fintech share in previous three months is above
      20%. Borrowers are considered to have thin credit file if their credit history is shorter than 48
      months. In addition to the Fintech loan indicator, we also control for borrowers' credit score,
      age of credit history and age. For the regression of note rate in Panel A, we also control for loan
      size and maturity. For regressions reported in Columns (1)-(3) in Panel A as well as those in
      Panel B, we control for zip code by origination year-month fixed effects. Regressions in Columns
      (4)-(6) Panel A are based on special sample that includes borrowers who have borrowed from
      both fintech and non-fintech lenders in 2012­2017. In these regressions, we include borrower and
      year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at county and origination year-
      month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data. Asterisks denote significance levels
      (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                      46
Table 5: Soft Information: R2 of Different Specifications Explaining Interest Rates
                                     Panel A: R2 based on Overall Sample
                                                                                      R2
                     Specification                                          Sample                      Fintech -
Controls             Time FE        ZIP-Time FE     Lender        All    Fintech    Non-Fintech    Non-Fintech
Credit Score            Yes             No              No       0.033    0.437        0.014            0.423***
Credit Score, Size      Yes             No              No       0.034    0.445        0.019            0.426***
Credit Score, Size      Yes             No              No       0.533    0.768        0.576            0.192***
All                     Yes             No              No       0.211     0.49        0.281            0.209***
All                     Yes             No              No       0.580     0.79        0.645            0.145***
Nonlinear               No              Yes             No       0.256    0.505        0.324            0.181***
Nonlinear               No              Yes             No       0.597    0.796        0.597            0.199***
Nonlinear               No              Yes             Yes      0.833    0.855        0.861             -0.006
                                       Panel B: R2 by Years of Entry
        Specification                                          Sample                       Fintech -
        Controls        ZIP-YM FE             Years of Entry   Fintech   Non-Fintech       Non-Fintech
        Nonlinear             Yes                   1           0.975       0.748           0.227***
        Nonlinear             Yes                   2           0.980       0.741           0.239***
        Nonlinear             Yes                   3           0.969       0.726           0.243***
        Nonlinear             Yes                   4           0.918       0.686           0.232***
        Nonlinear             Yes                   5           0.868       0.591           0.277***
        Nonlinear             Yes                   6           0.787       0.533           0.254***


Notes: This table shows the R2 for different specifications of a regression similar to Table 4. Data
includes all loans in our loan-level sample. Panel A shows pooled regressions based on entire
sample, non-fintech, and fintech subsamples, respectively. In addition to credit score and loan
size, we also control for loan maturity, length of credit history, number of accounts, revolving
utilization, prior DLQ indicator, transactor indicator, mortgage indicator, student loan indicator
and age in the 'All' specification. Nonlinear regressions include nonlinear splines of credit score
and loan Size. Tests of significance of R2 differences follow Erickson and Whited (2002). Panel B
shows regressions based on subsample sample separated by years since individual lender's entry
to a state, non-fintech, and fintech subsamples, respectively. In addition to nonlinear splines of
credit score and loan size, we also control for loan maturity, length of credit history, number of
accounts, revolving utilization, prior DLQ indicator, transactor indicator, mortgage indicator,
student loan indicator and age. Tests of significance of R2 differences follow Erickson and Whited
(2002). Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%)..




                                                        47
      Table 6: Loan Performance based on Entire Loan Sample
                           Panel A: Overall Sample
Dep Var                                       I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                            (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)
Fintech Loan Indicator   0.845***     1.132*** 1.157*** 1.212***          1.209***
                          (0.027)      (0.029)  (0.029)   (0.037)          (0.037)
Loan Size                            -0.105*** -0.095*** -0.098***
                                       (0.017)  (0.016)   (0.018)
Maturity                                0.001   -0.001*    -0.001
                                       (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.001)
Credit Score                         -1.336*** -1.354*** -1.350***        -1.401***
                                       (0.014)  (0.014)   (0.017)          (0.017)
Age of Credit                        -0.033*** -0.041*** -0.051***        -0.066***
                                       (0.008)  (0.008)   (0.010)          (0.010)
No of Accounts                       -0.278*** -0.276*** -0.276***        -0.223***
                                       (0.007)  (0.007)   (0.009)          (0.009)
Age                                  -0.080*** -0.071*** -0.078***        -0.058***
                                       (0.008)  (0.008)   (0.010)          (0.010)
Time FE                    Yes         Yes           No         No          No
County FE                  Yes         Yes           No         No          No
County × Time FE           No          No            Yes        No          No
ZIP × Time FE              No          No            No         Yes         Yes
Loan Size Bin FE           No          No            No         No          Yes
Maturity Bin FE            No          No            No         No          Yes
N                        3,792,757   3,559,985    3,559,985   3,559,985   3,559,985
R2                         0.007       0.017        0.041       0.235       0.237




                                      48
                                              Panel B: By Borrower Attributes
Dep Var                                                          I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                            Credit Score               Main Lender         County Fintech Share          Thin Credit
                           High       Low             No        Yes          High       Low             No        Yes
                            (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)
Fintech Loan Indicator       0.029  2.186***       1.109***     1.103***    0.828***    1.497***      1.138*** 5.847***
                           (0.026)   (0.068)        (0.069)      (0.047)     (0.057)     (0.049)       (0.036)  (1.593)
Loan Size                   0.005  -0.621***       -0.116***   -0.090***     -0.054*   -0.100***     -0.093***   -0.654
                           (0.017)   (0.056)        (0.042)      (0.024)     (0.028)     (0.015)       (0.018)  (0.703)
Maturity                  -0.001** 0.011***        0.005***    -0.006***    0.003***   -0.002***        -0.001    0.015
                           (0.001)   (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.016)
Credit Score             -0.527*** -1.548***       -0.997***   -1.799***   -2.147***   -1.063***     -1.329*** -1.340***
                           (0.029)   (0.029)        (0.024)      (0.029)     (0.039)     (0.017)       (0.017)  (0.265)
Age of Credit               -0.004 -0.183***       -0.095***   -0.053***   -0.070***   -0.036***       -0.018*   -1.476
                           (0.013)   (0.017)        (0.016)      (0.017)     (0.022)     (0.011)       (0.010)  (1.347)
No of Accounts           -0.066*** -0.285***       -0.151***   -0.280***   -0.294***   -0.255***     -0.257***    -0.17
                           (0.013)   (0.012)        (0.012)      (0.018)     (0.023)     (0.010)       (0.009)  (0.243)
Age                       0.065*** -0.126***       -0.081***      -0.009      -0.005   -0.108***     -0.072*** -0.273**
                           (0.014)   (0.015)        (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.023)     (0.011)        (0.01)  (0.139)
ZIP × Time FE               Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
N                         1183605    2376380       1613759     1946226      1076085     2431632       3407831   152154
R2                         0.429      0.313         0.353       0.347        0.256        0.22         0.241     0.815

      Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the ex post perfor-
      mance between the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The dependent variable in all
      regressions is an indicator whether the loan has ever become delinquent from origination through
      15 months after the origination. Regressions in Panel A are based on entire sample and those
      in Panel B are based on split samples by borrower attributes (credit score, main lender, county
      fintech share and thin credit). High credit score is defined as the borrowers with a high score
      above 700. Young is defined as borrowers younger than 45 at the time of loan origination. County
      is defined to have high fintech share if the fintech share in previous three months is above 20%.
      Borrowers are considered to have thin credit file if their length of credit history is less than 48
      months. In addition to the fintech loan indicator, we also control for loan size and loan maturity,
      borrowers' credit score, age of credit history, no of accounts, and borrower age, as well as zip
      code by origination year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at county and
      origination year-month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data for our random sample
      of personal loans. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                      49
      Table 7: Loan Performance based on Matched Samples
                         Panel A: PSM­Matched Sample
Dep Var                                     I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                            (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)
Fintech Loan Indicator   1.739***    0.690*** 0.576*** 0.558*** 1.102***
                          (0.061)     (0.059)  (0.065)   (0.142)   (0.149)
Loan Size                           -0.339*** -0.293***   -0.244
                                      (0.085)  (0.084)   (0.196)
Maturity                             0.009*** 0.011*** 0.014***
                                      (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.003)
Credit Score                        -3.723*** -3.784*** -4.144*** -3.832***
                                      (0.063)  (0.065)   (0.134)   (0.117)
Age of Credit                       -0.212*** -0.203*** -0.285*** -0.261***
                                      (0.029)  (0.031)   (0.071)   (0.070)
No of Accounts                      -0.444*** -0.500*** -0.540*** -0.412***
                                      (0.040)  (0.042)   (0.090)   (0.083)
Age                                  0.135*** 0.145***   0.196**   0.163**
                                      (0.034)  (0.036)   (0.080)   (0.080)
Time FE                    Yes        Yes          No        Yes      No
County FE                  Yes        Yes          No        No       No
County × Time FE           No         No           Yes       No       No
ZIP × Time FE              No         No           No        Yes      Yes
Loan Size Bin FE           No         No           No        No       Yes
Maturity Bin FE            No         No           No        No       Yes
N                         418,626   418,626      418,626   418,626   418,626
R2                         0.012     0.048        0.134      0.55     0.553




                                      50
                                         Panel B: Two Alternative Samples
Dep Var                                                      I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                                     Manually Matched                                Entropy Balancing
                            (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
Fintech Loan Indicator    1.583*** 1.548*** 1.645*** 1.713***            2.241*** 2.215*** 2.358*** 2.422***
                           (0.054)  (0.057)   (0.096)   (0.104)           (0.037)  (0.038)   (0.051)   (0.052)
Loan Size                -0.415*** -0.365*** -0.311***                   -0.041** -0.049** -0.083***
                           (0.026)  (0.027)   (0.044)                     (0.018)  (0.020)   (0.026)
Maturity                  0.008*** 0.007*** 0.007***                     -0.001** -0.001**    -0.001
                           (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.002)                     (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.001)
Credit Score             -2.376*** -2.409*** -2.402*** -2.373***        -1.851*** -1.859*** -1.786*** -1.849***
                           (0.039)  (0.041)   (0.061)   (0.061)           (0.022)  (0.023)   (0.027)   (0.028)
Age of Credit            -0.203*** -0.188*** -0.209*** -0.196***        -0.159*** -0.157*** -0.144*** -0.159***
                           (0.025)  (0.027)   (0.047)   (0.047)           (0.013)  (0.014)   (0.018)   (0.018)
No of Accounts           -0.287*** -0.322*** -0.300*** -0.273***        -0.221*** -0.231*** -0.232*** -0.179***
                           (0.025)  (0.026)   (0.044)   (0.044)           (0.013)  (0.013)   (0.017)   (0.016)
Age                         -0.001   0.001     -0.008    0.025            0.028**   0.027*    -0.016    -0.003
                           (0.027)  (0.028)   (0.050)   (0.050)           (0.014)  (0.014)   (0.018)   (0.018)
Time FE                     Yes        No         No          No            Yes        No         No          No
County FE                   Yes        No         No          No            Yes        No         No          No
County × Time FE            No         Yes        No          No            No         Yes        No          No
ZIP × Time FE               No         No         Yes         Yes           No         No         Yes         Yes
Loan Size Bin FE            No         No         No          Yes           No         No         No          Yes
Maturity Bin FE             No         No         No          Yes           No         No         No          Yes
N                         681,274    681,274    681,274     681,274     2,937,580   2,937,580   2,937,580   2,937,580
R2                         0.028       0.1       0.438       0.44         0.025       0.068       0.354       0.356

      Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the ex post perfor-
      mance between the fintech and non-fintech loans in three different samples. Panel A reports
      results using a matched sample based on the propensity score matching methodology. Details
      of the PSM are discussed in the paper. Columns 1-4 of Panel B report regressions using a
      manually­matched sample requiring fintech and non-fintech loans to be originated in the same
      zip code and origination year with difference in borrower age no more than 4 years and difference
      in borrower's total indebtedness smaller than $2,000 at the time of origination. Columns 5-8 of
      Panel B report regressions weighted by the weights assigned by Entropy Balancing procedure
      following Hainmueller (2011). The dependent variable in all regressions is an indicator whether
      the loan has ever become delinquent from origination through 15 months after the origination.
      We also control for loan size and loan maturity, borrowers' credit score, age of credit history,
      no of accounts,and borrower age, as well as different levels of fixed effects. Standard errors are
      double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. The regressions are based on the
      loan-level data. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                     51
                                  Table 8: Dynamic Effect
Dep Var                    Loan      Borrower     Credit        Total          New       Revolving
                           DLQ        DLQ         Score         Debt           Car         Debt
                            (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = -1               -0.148**       0.051       109.927        -0.022        -7.941
                                      (0.061)      (0.068)      (93.669)      (0.048)      (13.368)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 1                2.042***     7.438***   -3,212.081***      0.061    -669.683***
                                      (0.060)      (0.124)     (163.740)      (0.045)      (33.921)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 2    -0.241***   3.288***     3.445***   3,007.067***    0.250***    -163.694***
                           (0.031)    (0.082)      (0.171)     (227.405)      (0.044)       (46.62)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 3     0.297***   4.543***     0.833***   4,347.042***     0.101**    202.527***
                           (0.042)    (0.093)      (0.197)     (248.564)      (0.044)      (54.295)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 4     0.987***   5.849***    -0.894***   5,355.385***      0.039     367.762***
                           (0.050)    (0.100)      (0.214)     (274.700)      (0.045)      (62.229)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 5     1.746***   6.946***    -2.808***   6,058.412***      0.032     465.642***
                           (0.055)    (0.107)      (0.232)     (295.757)      (0.044)      (70.935)
Individual FE              Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
Time FE                    Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
Relative Qtr FE            Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
N                        5,457,382   8,374,729   8,374,729     8,354,735     7,941,055    8,354,735
R2                         0.603       0.608       0.879         0.924         0.062        0.916
Notes: The table reports the difference in the dynamics of several credit attributes between
the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The regression is based on the loan-month
panel from 3 month before through 15 months after the origination of the loan, restricted to
the loans in the PSM­matched sample. The dependent variable is the column title. Our main
explanatory variable is the fintech loan indicator interacted with the relative quarter dummies.
In all regressions, we control for individual, calendar time and relative quarter fixed effects.
Standard errors are double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                 52
                       Table 9: Pricing and Ex Post Performance
   Dep Var                                             I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                                 (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
   Note Rate                  0.058***   0.054***      0.054***     0.051*** 0.051*** 0.048***
                               (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)  (0.002)   (0.002)
   x Fintech Loan Indicator              0.020***                   0.012***           0.010***
                                          (0.002)                    (0.002)            (0.003)
   Loan Size                                             0.018*       0.009    0.018     0.012
                                                        (0.009)      (0.009)  (0.016)   (0.015)
   Maturity                                            -0.008***   -0.008*** -0.008*** -0.008***
                                                        (0.001)      (0.001)  (0.001)   (0.001)
   Credit Score                                        -0.846***   -0.834*** -0.961*** -0.952***
                                                        (0.015)      (0.015)  (0.023)   (0.023)
   Age of Credit                                       -0.029***   -0.029*** -0.054*** -0.054***
                                                        (0.009)      (0.009)  (0.014)   (0.014)
   No of Accounts                                      -0.144***   -0.146*** -0.143*** -0.144***
                                                        (0.009)      (0.009)  (0.012)   (0.012)
   Age                                                 -0.044***   -0.042*** -0.030** -0.028**
                                                        (0.009)      (0.009)  (0.014)   (0.014)
   Time FE                      Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         No          No
   ZIP Time FE                  No          No           No          No          Yes         Yes
   N                          2,218,740 2,218,740      2,079,676   2,079,676   2,079,676   2,079,676
   R2                           0.008     0.008          0.015       0.015       0.314       0.314
Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the relationship
between ex post performance and pricing between the fintech and non-fintech personal loans in
our sample. The dependent variable in all regressions is an indicator whether the loan has become
delinquent after the origination. Our main explanatory variable is the interest rate on the loan at
origination as well as its interaction with the fintech indicator. We also control for loan size and
loan maturity, borrowers' credit score, age of credit history, no of accounts, and borrower age, as
well as zip code by origination year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at
county and origination year-month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                  53
                                  Table 10: Repeat Borrowers
Dep Var                                                    I(Fintechi )× 100
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Fintech Indicator for Last Loan   0.623***   0.621***    0.615***    0.556***    0.614***    0.609***
                                   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
 × Low Credit                                                        0.089***
                                                                      (0.004)
 × Thin Credit                                                                   0.094***
                                                                                  (0.011)
 × Main Lender                                                                                0.272***
                                                                                               (0.007)
Male Indicator                               0.002***    0.003***    0.003***    0.003***     0.003***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Married Indicator                             0.001**    -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
College Indicator                            0.012***    0.010***    0.010***     0.010***    0.010***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
High Income Indicator                        0.019***    0.015***    0.016***     0.016***    0.015***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Young Indicator                              0.004***    0.004***    0.004***    0.004***    0.004***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Professional Indicator                       0.010***    0.008***    0.009***     0.008***    0.008***
                                              (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Controls                            No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
ZIP × Time FE                       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                 1,695,511 1,695,510    1,650,172   1,650,172   1650172     1650172
R2                                  0.689     0.689        0.689        0.69      0.689        0.69

Notes: The table report the regression results of likelihood of fintech borrowers taking another
fintech loan in the future based on loan-level data. The dependent variable is the fintech loan
indicator. Main explanatory variable is whether borrower's last loan is a fintech loan. We also
interact this variable with indicators for low credit score ( 700), thin credit file (length of credit
history shorter than 48 months), and whether the fintech lender was the main borrower's lender
(highest loan balance). We also control for all the demographic (male, married, college, high
income, young, professional) and consumer credit attributes at the time of origination, as well as
zip code by origination year month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at county
and origination year-month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data. Asterisks denote
significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                 54
                          Table 11: Job Loss and Fintech Loans
Dep Var                   I(Fintechi,t )× 100    I(Non-Fintechi,t )× 100     I(Any Loani,t )× 100
Sample                    Fintech Borrowers      Non-Fintech Borrowers                  All
                           (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)               (6)
Post Job Losst           0.404**     0.260***        0.138**   -0.154***      0.097           -0.216***
                         (0.104)      (0.109)        (0.061)    (0.065)      (0.061)            (0.065)
     × Fintechi                                                             0.397***           0.656***
                                                                             (0.121)            (0.127)
Fintechi × Unemployedi                                                      -0.329***
                                                                             (0.089)
Unemployedi              0.020**                  0.210***                  0.247***
                         (0.075)                   (0.049)                   (0.049)
County Time FE             Yes         No             Yes        No            Yes              No
Borrower FE                No          Yes            No         Yes           No               Yes
Calendar Time FE           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
N                        6,935,265 6,935,265     23,622,976    23,622,97   30,558,241     30,558,241
R2                         0.031     0.053         0.023         0.058       0.021           0.057
Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the relationship between job loss and
personal loan origination. The regression is based on our loan-month panel data matched with
individual job loss data. We restrict the individuals with job loss to 3 months before and 3
months after their job loss date. Those with no job loss are the same as our loan-month panel.
The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the loan (fintech, non-fintech or both) is
originated in a given month. Post job loss is an indicator that takes 1 for individuals with job
loss after their job loss date. Unemployment is an indicator for the individuals with job loss
during our sample period. Regressions in Columns (1) and (2) are based on fintech borrowers
only. Regressions in Columns (3) and (4) are based on non-fintech borrowers only. Regressions in
Columns (5) and (6) are based on both fintech and non-fintech borrowers. In addition, we control
for county and time fixed effects in Columns (1), (3), (5) and control for individual and time
fixed effects in other regressions. Standard errors are double clustered at county and origination
year-month levels. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                55
Appendix

     Figure A.1. Evolution of Credit Score Distribution (Loan-Level)
   (a) 2012: Number of Loans                      (b) 2012: Balance




   (c) 2013: Number of Loans                      (d) 2013: Balance




                                  A.1
(e) 2013: Number of Loans         (f ) 2013: Balance




(g) 2014: Number of Loans         (h) 2014: Balance




                            A.2
(i) 2015: Number of Loans         (j) 2015: Balance




(k) 2016: Number of Loans         (l) 2016: Balance




                            A.3
     (m) 2017: Number of Loans                                   (n) 2017: Balance




Notes: The figure plots relative frequency of number of loans and share of loan balance over
original credit score bins. Original credit score bins are every 20 points from 460 to 840. Those
with score below 460 are grouped to 460 and those above 840 are grouped to 840.




                                              A.4
                           Figure A.2. Nonlinear Coefficients
           (a) Credit Score                                        (b) Borrower Age




Notes: This figure plots coefficients on credit score bins at (Panel A) and borrower age bins
(Panel B) at time of the origination from the regression results of specification similar to Table
3 Panel A. The dependent variable is the fintech loan indicator (0/1). In addition to credit score
or age, we also control for ZIP Code by origination year-month fixed effects. Standard errors
are double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. The regression is based on
loan-level data.




                                              A.5
                             Table A.1: Missing Credit Information
                                            Panel A: Missing Values
                               All                            Fintech                Non Fintech Loans
    Variable
                     Obs      Missing      %         Obs      Missing   %         Obs      Missing      %
                               Obs       Missing               Obs    Missing               Obs       Missing
Loan Size          3,792,974         -    0.0%      761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,201         -    0.0%
Maturity           3,792,974         -   0.0%       761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,201         -    0.0%
Note Rate          2,218,839 1,574,135   41.5%      400,748   361,025   47.4%   1,818,091 1,213,110   40.0%
Borrower DLQ       3,792,974         -   0.0%       761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,202         -    0.0%
Loan DLQ           3,792,975         -   0.0%       761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,202         -    0.0%
No of Accounts     3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833   2.6%
Total Balance      3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833    2.6%
Auto Balance       3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833   2.6%
Rev. Balance       3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049   0.7%    2,953,368    77,833    2.6%
Student Balance    3,710,092    82,882    2.2%      756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833    2.6%
Mortgage Balance   3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833   2.6%
Student            3,710,092    82,882    2.2%      761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,202         -    0.0%
Mortgage           3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       761,773         -    0.0%   3,031,202         -    0.0%
Credit Score       3,791,293     1,681   0.0%       761,712        61    0.0%   3,029,581     1,620   0.1%
Inquiries          3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049    0.7%   2,953,368    77,833    2.6%
Age of Credit      3,710,092    82,882   2.2%       756,724     5,049   0.7%    2,953,368    77,833    2.6%
Rev. Utilization   3,672,841   120,133   3.2%       753,851     7,922    1.0%   2,918,990   112,211    3.7%




                                                   A.6
                                          Panel B: % Missing Credit Information by State
        Random                     All                                   Fintech                           Non Fintech
        Sample                    Loans                                   Loans                              Loans
State
        % Missing     Obs       # Missing    % Missing        Obs      # Missing   % Missing     Obs       # Missing     % Missing
AL        0.4%       79,671       1,992         2.5%           6,723       47        0.7%       72,948       1,970         2.7%
AR        0.4%       31,298       1,064         3.4%           5,337       32        0.6%       25,961       1,038         4.0%
AZ        0.3%       64,006       1,024         1.6%         22,844        91        0.4%       41,162        947          2.3%
CA        0.3%      380,005       7,980         2.1%         116,693     1,400       1.2%      263,312       6,583         2.5%
CO        0.3%      65,663         854          1.3%          20,381      102        0.5%       45,282        770          1.7%
CT        0.3%       26,896        215          0.8%          11,853       36        0.3%       15,043        181          1.2%
DC        0.3%        7,460        142          1.9%           1,662      13         0.8%        5,798        128          2.2%
DE        0.3%       11,181        257          2.3%          2,778        39        1.4%        8,403        227          2.7%
FL        0.3%      237,000       4,029         1.7%         61,701       247        0.4%      175,299       3,857         2.2%
GA        0.3%      104,929       1,679         1.6%          23,478      117        0.5%       81,451       1,629         2.0%
IA        0.3%       16,186        259          1.6%           1,889       8         0.4%       14,297        243          1.7%
ID        0.3%       32,247       1,193         3.7%           3,092       28        0.9%       29,155       1,166         4.0%
IL        0.3%      165,479       4,964         3.0%         38,658       425        1.1%      126,821       4,566         3.6%
IN        0.3%       67,328       1,145         1.7%          15,538      93         0.6%       51,790       1,036         2.0%
KS        0.3%       15,080        226          1.5%           5,102       46        0.9%        9,978        180          1.8%
KY        0.3%       39,633        753          1.9%           6,303       38        0.6%       33,330        700          2.1%
LA        0.4%       49,838       1,296         2.6%           6,271       56        0.9%       43,567       1,263         2.9%
MA        0.3%       46,915        422          0.9%         19,821        79        0.4%       27,094        325          1.2%
MD        0.3%       97,129       1,166         1.2%          20,535       82        0.4%       76,594        996          1.3%
ME        0.3%        7,345         81          1.1%           1,569        3        0.2%        5,776         81          1.4%
MI        0.3%       72,481       1,232         1.7%         21,365       107        0.5%       51,116       1,176         2.3%
MN        0.2%       41,147        453          1.1%         16,247        97        0.6%       24,900        349          1.4%
MO        0.3%       65,612       2,362         3.6%           9,433       94        1.0%       56,179       2,247         4.0%
MS        0.4%       31,296        908          2.9%           1,710       19        1.1%       29,586        888          3.0%
MT        0.3%        4,014         68          1.7%            871         2        0.2%        3,143         69          2.2%
NC        0.3%      217,684       5,007         2.3%          23,884      119        0.5%      193,800       4,845         2.5%
ND        0.3%         937           6          0.6%            171         -        0.0%         766           6          0.8%
NE        0.3%       14,264        143          1.0%           3,090       9         0.3%       11,174        123          1.1%
NH        0.2%       17,204        206          1.2%           4,220       13        0.3%       12,984        195          1.5%
NJ        0.3%       86,120        689          0.8%         28,812        86        0.3%       57,308        630          1.1%
NM        0.3%       61,062       1,710         2.8%          4,727        38        0.8%       56,335       1,690         3.0%
NV        0.3%       36,814        994          2.7%         10,259        41        0.4%       26,555        956          3.6%
NY        0.3%      183,683       3,123         1.7%          40,193      121        0.3%      143,490       3,013         2.1%
OH        0.3%      127,162       1,399         1.1%          31,278      125        0.4%       95,884       1,246         1.3%
OK        0.4%      107,713       3,555         3.3%           6,389       64        1.0%      101,324       3,445         3.4%
OR        0.3%       28,703        373          1.3%           9,767       68        0.7%       18,936        322          1.7%
PA        0.3%      154,932       2,479         1.6%          31,057      124        0.4%      123,875       2,354         1.9%
RI        0.3%        8,521         60          0.7%           3,900       16        0.4%        4,621         46          1.0%
SC        0.3%       76,342       2,138         2.8%          11,411       91        0.8%       64,931       2,013         3.1%
SD        0.3%        2,901         35          1.2%            724         4        0.6%        2,177         30          1.4%
TN        0.3%      213,606       6,835         3.2%          16,095      161        1.0%      197,511       6,715         3.4%
TX        0.3%      332,047       9,297         2.8%          33,637      303        0.9%      298,410       9,251         3.1%
UT        0.3%       59,886       2,096         3.5%          7,416        52        0.7%       52,470       2,046         3.9%
VA        0.3%      145,573       1,892         1.3%          20,753       83        0.4%      124,820       1,872         1.5%
VT        0.2%        2,474         20          0.8%           1,120        3        0.3%        1,354         16          1.2%
WA        0.3%       56,858        682          1.2%         15,544        62        0.4%       41,314        578          1.4%
WI        0.3%       87,726       3,860         4.4%          13,420      121        0.9%       74,306       3,790         5.1%
WV        0.4%        6,277        113          1.8%            923         3        0.3%        5,354        112          2.1%
WY        0.3%        4,646        70           1.5%          1,129         7        0.6%        3,517         63          1.8%
All       0.3%      3,710,092    92,883         2.5%         761,773     5,049       0.7%      3,031,201     77,834        2.6%




                                                       A.7
                        Panel C: % Missing Credit Information by Age Cohort
                         All                                Fintech                  Non Fintech Loans
Age Cohort
              Obs        #          %              Obs        #         %          Obs       #          %
                       Missing    Missing                   Missing   Missing              Missing    Missing
   24         91,994   6,072       6.6%           6,774          41     0.6%      85,220    6,051      7.1%
 24­34       583,455   13,419      2.3%         112,045         672     0.6%     471,353    13,198     2.8%
 35­44       798,590   15,972      2.0%         179,938       1,080     0.6%     618,592    14,846     2.4%
 45­ 54      900,136   17,103      1.9%         194,764       1,169     0.6%     705,332    16,223     2.3%
 55­64       719,591   14,392      2.0%         143,364      1,004      0.7%     576,198    13,253     2.3%
   65        543,587   10,328      1.9%          99,869         899     0.9%     443,701    9,318      2.1%
 Missing     155,622   5,758       3.7%          24,988         225     0.9%     130,620     5,486     4.2%

             Panel D: Comparison between Loans With and Without Missing Note Rate
                                   Note Rate Missing                     Note Rate Not Missing
       Variable
                                 Obs        Mean     St. Dev.           Obs      Mean      St. Dev.
       Loan Size           1,574,134        $7,736       $13,810      2,218,839 $9,029      $10,144
       Maturity            1,574,134        37.951       27.859       2,218,839 40.061       25.027
       Note Rate                                                      2,218,839 13.108        9.818
       Borrower DLQ        1,574,135 22.856     41.99                 2,218,839  20.53      40.392
       Loan DLQ            1,574,135  1.836    13.424                 2,218,839  1.181       10.801
       No of Accounts      1,541,224 23.171    13.483                 2,168,875  22.67       12.852
       Total Balance       1,541,224 $100,795 $141,765                2,168,875 $111,386   $148,837
       Auto Balance        1,541,224 $11,396 $16,049                  2,168,875 $11,982     $16,247
       Rev. Balance        1,541,224 $8,974    $24,750                2,168,875 $10,299     $24,136
       Student Balance     1,541,224 $7,240   $24,097                 2,168,875 $8,644      $27,088
       Mortgage Balance    1,541,224 $68,706 $125,266                 2,168,875 $76,155    $130,032
       Student             1,574,135   0.263     0.44                 2,218,839   0.293       0.455
       Mortgage            1,574,135  0.534     0.499                 2,218,839  0.531       0.499
       Credit Score        1,573,470 649.835   98.472                 2,217,822 656.674      97.347
       Inquiries           1,541,224  1.289     1.632                 2,168,875  1.227       1.595
       Age of Credit       1,541,224 188.076 101.995                  2,168,875 188.643     100.214
       Rev. Utilization    1,523,687   0.44     0.354                 2,149,164  0.429       0.336

 Notes: The table reports the number of % of observations with missing data. We report the
 information on missing values for all the variables in Panel A. In Panels B and C, we report the
 information on missing credit report data, where missing is defined to include any missing value
 in number of accounts, total balance, auto balance, student loan balance, mortgage balance,
 credit score and age of credit. In Column (1) of Panel B, we also report the % of individuals
 with missing number of accounts, total balance, auto balance, student loan balance, mortgage
 balance, credit score and age of credit based on a a random sample of 14,000,000 consumers
 pulled with 2016 credit reports. In Panel D, we report summary statistics of all other variables
 between loans with and without missing note rate based on our loan sample.




                                                     A.8
                 Table A.2: Summary Statistics based on Split Samples
                              Fintech Loans                   Non-Fintech Loans           Fintech -
                         N       Mean     St. Dev.        N         Mean    St. Dev.     Non-Fintech
Loan Size              761,773 $12,295 $11,014         3,031,201 $7,537    $11,825         $4,758
Maturity               761,773 53.908    29.604        3,031,201 35.486     23.968          18.422
Note Rate              400,748 16.041     9.398        1,818,091 12.462      9.791           3.579
Borrower DLQ           761,773 13.488     34.16        3,031,202 23.508    42.405           -10.02
Loan DLQ               761,773   2.257   14.854        3,031,202    1.25    11.111           1.007
No of Accounts         756,724 23.087    11.325        2,953,368 22.824     13.541           0.263
Total Balance          756,724 $146,716 $172,765       2,953,368 $96,807 $136,505          $49,909
Auto Balance           756,724 $13,407 $16,863         2,953,368 $11,311 $15,956           $2,096
Rev. Balance           756,724 $13,994 $28,931         2,953,368 $8,661    $22,972          $5,334
Student Balance        756,724 $12,579 $34,003         2,953,368 $6,903   $23,230           $5,677
Mortgage Balance       756,724 $102,628 $154,626       2,953,368 $65,486 $119,225          $37,142
Student                761,773   0.361     0.48        3,031,202    0.26     0.439           0.101
Mortgage               761,773  0.634     0.482        3,031,202   0.507      0.5            0.127
Credit Score           761,712 684.284   83.877        3,029,581 646.18     99.637          38.104
Inquiries              756,724   0.821     1.34        2,953,368   1.364    1.655           -0.543
Age of Credit          756,724 214.042 102.463         2,953,368 181.84     99.511          32.202
Rev. Utilization       753,851   0.461    0.304        2,918,990   0.427    0.353            0.034
Age                    736,785 48.778    13.458        2,900,568 48.787     14.535          -0.009
Young                  761,773   0.419    0.493        3,031,201   0.411    0.492            0.008
Male                   761,773   0.537    0.499        3,031,201    0.51      0.5            0.027
Married                761,773   0.592    0.491        3,031,201   0.568     0.495           0.024
College                761,773   0.352    0.478        3,031,201    0.21    0.407            0.142
Professional           761,773   0.115    0.319        3,031,201   0.076     0.265           0.039
High Income            761,773   0.313    0.464        3,031,201   0.182     0.386           0.131
Prior Borrower DLQ     756,724   0.086     0.28        2,953,368   0.189    0.391           -0.103
Transactor             761,115   0.096    0.295        3,021,807    0.06    0.238            0.036
County HP Growth       761,773   0.015    0.014        3,031,201   0.011    0.017            0.004
County Home Value      761,504 $248,557 $145,855       3,030,956 $187,776 $122,001         $60,781
County Unemp Rate      761,773   6.254    1.231        3,031,202   6.587    1.714           -0.333
County % College       761,773 30.007     6.314        3,031,202 27.505     8.095            2.502
County Median Income   761,773 $59,773 $13,158         3,031,202 $54,233 $13,312           $5,540
County HP Decline      761,773  -0.239    0.177        3,031,201  -0.163    0.184           -0.076
County Fintech Share   760,414   0.219    0.096        2,976,508   0.116    0.102            0.103
County Bank Rate       760,414 13.882    3.284         2,976,506 12.257     5.482            1.625
County $ Internet      761,773   0.765   0.061         3,031,202   0.744     0.073           0.021
  Notes: This table reports summary statistics of loan-level data split between fintech and by
  non-fintech loans. We draw a random sample of all unsecured personal loans originated by
  fintech and by non-fintech lenders from 2012­2017, excluding loans with missing origination date
  and invalid loan balance (negative or zero), but including loans with missing borrower credit
  report information (debt balances, age of credit and credit score). Borrower DLQ indicator is
  defined as an indicator for the borrowers who have any positive delinquent balance. High income
  indicator is defined as an indicator for the households whose income is more than $100,000.
  Professional indicator is defined as an indicator for the households whose heads work in the
  professional, technical and management occupations. We also report county-level statistics from
  various sources. Home price and home price changes are from Zillow. Unemployment rate,
  fraction of college degree and median household income are from Census Bureau. Fintech share
  and average bank loan rate are computed based on all loans in our sample originated in the prior
  three months in a given county. High-speed internet coverage is from Census Bureau's American
  Community Survey.
                                               A.9
            Table A.3: Summary Statistics based on Consumer Credit Panel Sample
Statistic                    N         Mean     St. Dev.   Min   Pctl(25)   Median    Pctl(75)     Max
Loan DLQ Indicator      38,248,189     0.76       8.684    0        0          0         0           100
Borrower DLQ Indicator 56,684,460     20.681     40.502    0        0          0          0          100
Credit Score            56,684,460    647.859     96.274   0       586        651       719          841
Total Debt              56,684,460   $105,194   $142,581   $-    $14,708    $45,913   $152,492   $9,190,885
Revolving Debt          56,684,460    $9,083     $23,553   $-     $300      $3,036     $9,923    $6,095,354
New Car Indicator       56,684,459     4.389      20.486   0        0          0         0          100
Unemployed Indicator    30,558,241     0.025      0.158    0        0          0          0           1
Post Job Loss Indicator 30,558,241     0.014      0.118    0        0          0          0           1
    Notes: This table reports summary statistics of loan-month panel data that is associated with
    the borrowers in the loan sample. We restrict the credit history to 3 months before through 15
    months after the origination of the personal loan. The two job loss variables are available in a
    subset of our loan-month panel matched with job loss data. We restrict the individuals with job
    loss to 3 months before and 3 months after their job loss date while those with no job loss are
    the same as our loan-month panel.




                                                 A.10
                    Table A.4: Loan Terms based on Matched Sample
            Sample                Matched Borrowers that have Fintech and Bank Loans
            Dep Var                Loan Size     Loan Term            Note Rate
                                      (1)            (2)                 (3)
            Fintech Loan First    1,869.183***    -3.779***             1.070**
                                    (421.440)      (0.902)              (0.456)
            Loan Size                                                 -0.095***
                                                                        (0.007)
            Terms                                                     0.050***
                                                                        (0.008)
            Credit Score           73.700***      0.055***            -0.079***
                                     (1.653)       (0.002)              (0.002)
            Age of Credit          11.672***      0.006***            -0.005***
                                     (1.682)       (0.001)              (0.001)
            Age                    -60.256***     -0.053***            0.031***
                                     (7.316)       (0.013)              (0.006)
            County × Time FE          Yes           Yes                  Yes
            N                       116,544        116,544              74,388
            R2                       0.655          0.752               0.832
Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the loan terms between
the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The dependent variable is reported in the column
title: loan size, loan term and note rate. In addition to the Fintech loan indicator, we also control
for borrowers' credit score, age of credit history and age. For the regression of note rate, we also
control for loan size and maturity. Regressions are based on a subset of the sample that includes
borrowers who have borrowed from both fintech and non-fintech lenders in 2012­2017. We first
separate the sample based on whether they had a fintech-was-first loan or not. We then match the
two subsamples using state and origination year and month of the first loan. In these regressions,
we include county × year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at county and
origination year-month levels. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                 A.11
                   Table A.5: Soft Information: R2 by Market Share
Specification                                          Sample                            Fintech -
Controls        ZIP-YM FE      Market Share Quartile    Year    Fintech   Non-Fintech   Non-Fintech
Nonlinear          Yes                   1              2013     0.735       0.964       -0.229***
Nonlinear          Yes                   1              2014     0.947       0.908       0.039***
Nonlinear          Yes                   1              2015     0.878       0.936       -0.058***
Nonlinear          Yes                   1              2016     0.922       0.913        0.009***
Nonlinear          Yes                   1              2017     0.639       0.946       -0.307***
Nonlinear          Yes                   2              2013     0.871       0.865        0.006***
Nonlinear          Yes                   2              2014     0.773       0.844       -0.071***
Nonlinear          Yes                   2              2015      0.88       0.871        0.009***
Nonlinear          Yes                   2              2016      0.71       0.931       -0.221***
Nonlinear          Yes                   2              2017     0.799       0.853       -0.054***
Nonlinear          Yes                   3              2013     0.865       0.718        0.147***
Nonlinear          Yes                   3              2014     0.473       0.611       -0.138***
Nonlinear          Yes                   3              2015     0.866        0.7         0.166***
Nonlinear          Yes                   3              2016     0.844       0.674        0.170***
Nonlinear          Yes                   3              2017     0.769       0.593        0.176***
Nonlinear          Yes                   4              2013     0.926       0.564        0.362***
Nonlinear          Yes                   4              2014     0.665       0.548        0.117***
Nonlinear          Yes                   4              2015     0.517       0.494        0.023***
Nonlinear          Yes                   4              2016     0.534       0.366        0.168***
Nonlinear          Yes                   4              2017     0.524       0.351        0.173***

Notes: This table shows the R2 for the full specification of a regression similar to Table 5 Panel
B based on subsamples separated by individual lender's market share in a state in prior year
and origination year. Lender's market share is grouped into quartiles for fintech and non-fintech
lenders separately. Data includes all loans in our loan-level sample. In addition to nonlinear
splines of credit score and loan size, we also control for loan maturity, length of credit history,
number of accounts, revolving utilization, prior DLQ indicator, transactor indicator, mortgage
indicator, student loan indicator and age. Tests of significance of R2 differences follow Erickson
and Whited (2002). Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%)..




                                              A.12
               Table A.6: Loan Performance Using the Imputed Values
         Dep Var                                       I(Loan DLQi )× 100
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)
         Fintech Loan Indicator    0.845***    1.121***    1.152***    1.211***    1.204***
                                    (0.027)     (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.037)     (0.037)
         Loan Size                            -0.144***    -0.132***   -0.131***
                                                (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.023)
         Maturity                             -0.001***    -0.003***   -0.003***
                                                (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
         Credit Score                         -1.118***    -1.131***   -1.126***   -1.154***
                                                (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.015)     (0.015)
         Age of Credit                        -0.092***    -0.099***   -0.109***   -0.116***
                                                (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.010)
         No of Accounts                       -0.257***    -0.255***   -0.253***   -0.201***
                                                (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.009)
         Age                                  -0.074***    -0.067***   -0.071***   -0.058***
                                                (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.010)     (0.010)
         Time FE                     Yes         Yes          No         No          No
         County FE                   Yes         Yes          No         No          No
         County Time FE              No          No           Yes        No          No
         ZIP × Time FE               No          No           No         Yes         Yes
         Loan Size Bin FE            No          No           No         No         No Yes
         Maturity Bin FE             No          No           No         No          Yes
         N                        3,792,757   3,792,757    3,792,757   3,792,757   3,792,757
         R2                         0.007       0.016        0.039       0.225       0.226
Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the difference in the ex post perfor-
mance between the fintech and non-fintech loans in our sample. The dependent variable in all
regressions is an indicator whether the loan has even become delinquent from origination through
15 months after the origination. we also control for loan size and loan maturity, borrowers' credit
score, age of credit history, no of accounts, revolving utilization ratio, prior borrower delinquent
indicator at the time of loan origination and borrower age, as well as ZIP Code by origination
year-month fixed effects. In Column (5), we also include loan rate as additional control. All
the missing values in borrowers' credit score, age of credit history, age and loan note rate are
imputed using the predictive mean matching methodology. Missing values are imputed to values
randomly drawn from the distribution of the variable. Standard errors are double clustered at
county and origination year-month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                               A.13
                            Table A.7: PSM First-Stage Regression
           Dep Var                                 Fintech Loan Indicator
                                                              (1)
           Male Indicator          0.023***    No of Accounts                    0.059***
                                    (0.001)                                       (0.001)
           Married Indicator      -0.020***    Inquiries                        -0.027***
                                    (0.001)                                       (0.000)
           College Indicator       0.010***    Rev Utilization                   0.031***
                                    (0.001)                                       (0.000)
           High Income Indicator 0.015***      Prior DLQ Indicator                 -0.003
                                    (0.001)                                      (36.030)
           Young Indicator        0.022***     Change in Borrower DLQ               0.002
                                    (0.001)                                      (36.030)
           Professional Indicator 0.004***     Transactor Indicator             -0.023***
                                    (0.001)                                       (0.001)
           Total Balance          -0.010***    Student Indicator                 0.021***
                                    (0.000)                                       (0.001)
           Credit Score           -0.117***    Mortgage Indicator               -0.017***
                                    (0.001)                                       (0.001)
           Age of Credit          -0.007***    Prior Auto Purchase Indicator    0.0001***
                                    (0.000)                                       (0.000)
           ZIP FE                                            Yes
           Orig Time FE                                      Yes
           N                                               1,083,058
           R2                                                0.189
Notes: The table reports the results of pooled OLS regressions used in PSM. The dependent
variable is the fintech loan indicator. PSM is done by ZIP Code based on our loan sample to
construct the matched sample. We first restrict the sample to ZIP Codes that have at least 5
fintech and 5 non-fintech loans in our loan sample. Within each ZIP Code, we estimate a Logit
regression of fintech loan indicator on all the covariates, including all the demographic (male,
married, college, high income, young, professional) and consumer credit attributes (credit score,
age of credit history, no of accounts, no of inquiries, revolving utilization rate, prior delinquency
indicator, change in the borrower delinquency in the past 3 months, whether the borrower is
a transactor, whether borrower have any student loan or mortgage, whether the borrower had
an auto purchase in the 3 months before the origination) at the time of origination, as well as
origination year-month fixed effects. Loans are matched between fintech and non-fintech loans
using the nearest neighbor criteria.




                                               A.14
                   Table A.8: Dynamic Effect based on Subsamples
                     Panel A: Borrowers Facing a High Ex Ante Interest Rate
Dep Var                    Loan      Borrower      Credit          Total          New        Revolving
                           DLQ        DLQ          Score           Debt           Car          Debt
                            (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = -1                 0.250**     -0.564***      -465.957     6.390***    -539.651***
                                       (0.126)       (0.131)     (312.648)      (0.427)       (37.651)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 1                 1.940***      6.640***   -3,711.414***   0.225***        88.066
                                       (0.122)       (0.208)     (323.960)      (0.087)       (66.291)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 2    0.259***     4.206***     -2.476***   5,233.862***    0.219**      823.812***
                          (0.039)      (0.166)       (0.281)     (426.729)      (0.086)       (80.811)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 3    0.469***     6.276***     -7.701***   6,947.230***      0.043     1,307.554***
                          (0.055)      (0.197)       (0.346)     (497.158)      (0.086)       (92.608)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 4    0.844***     8.477***    -12.161***   8,390.635***      -0.082    1,547.387***
                          (0.070)      (0.218)       (0.400)     (562.532)      (0.087)      (106.946)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 5    1.424***    10.559***    -17.241***   9,093.286***     -0.151*    1,603.531***
                          (0.085)      (0.242)       (0.453)     (640.469)      (0.089)      (116.792)
Individual FE              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Time FE                    Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Relative Qtr FE            Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
N                        1,189,358   1,736,926    1,736,926      1,736,926     1,707,472     1,736,926
R2                         0.437       0.569        0.881          0.928         0.231         0.929
                            Panel B: Borrowers with Low Credit Score
Dep Var                    Loan      Borrower      Credit         Total          New        Revolving
                           DLQ        DLQ          Score          Debt           Car          Debt
                            (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = -1               -1.065***    -1.402***     -724.681***    7.385***     -275.797***
                                       (0.144)      (0.131)      (194.675)      (0.306)       (19.718)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 1                 5.474***    12.243***    -2,860.107***   0.489***    -1,677.513***
                                       (0.143)      (0.171)      (194.882)      (0.065)       (29.426)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 2    -0.420***   7.229***     5.192***     4,000.650***    0.614***     -769.520***
                           (0.062)     (0.189)      (0.257)      (254.190)      (0.063)       (36.908)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 3       0.043    9.083***      1.716***    5,417.106***    0.385***     -120.522***
                           (0.083)     (0.212)      (0.313)      (293.185)      (0.063)       (42.221)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 4     0.897***   11.175***    -1.052***    6,763.696***    0.324***     233.911***
                           (0.096)     (0.225)      (0.345)      (333.425)      (0.065)       (48.676)
Fintech × Rel Qtr = 5     1.912***   12.772***    -4.018***    7,830.457***    0.379***     438.327***
                           (0.106)     (0.239)      (0.378)      (370.938)      (0.066)       (56.564)
Individual FE              Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Time FE                    Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Relative Qtr FE            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
N                        2,768,020   4,276,368    4,276,368      4,276,368     4,204,149     4,276,368
R2                         0.593       0.593        0.744          0.909         0.229         0.924




                                                 A.15
                                Panel C: Borrowers with Thin Credit Files
    Dep Var                    Loan     Borrower      Credit         Total        New      Revolving
                               DLQ       DLQ          Score          Debt         Car        Debt
                                (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = -1                 -0.236        0.34        -104.073   6.278***   -269.992***
                                          (0.366)      (0.591)      (447.192)    (1.218)     (28.762)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = 1                2.977***     11.796***   -3,721.400***   -0.039   -324.585***
                                          (0.413)      (0.826)      (634.923)    (0.279)     (51.946)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = 2      -0.14     6.935***     -5.150***      697.006       0.06    446.975***
                              (0.295)     (0.634)      (1.247)      (833.541)    (0.257)     (81.401)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = 3    2.309***   10.608***    -15.963***      850.578      -0.005   765.243***
                              (0.406)     (0.770)      (1.589)      (952.169)    (0.261)    (103.657)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = 4    5.538***   14.472***    -23.610***      390.147      -0.152   842.961***
                              (0.495)     (0.875)      (1.839)     (1,095.455)   (0.266)    (112.979)
    Fintech × Rel Qtr = 5    8.775***   17.797***    -30.812***      -157.472     -0.385   691.858***
                              (0.561)     (0.976)      (2.023)     (1,221.238)   (0.276)    (129.962)
    Individual FE               Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
    Time FE                     Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
    Relative Qtr FE             Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
    N                         116,952    174,109      174,109       174,109     170,889     174,109
    R2                         0.614      0.512        0.751         0.843       0.123       0.709
    Notes: The table reports the difference in the dynamics of several credit attributes between the
    fintech and non-fintech loans in three subsamples. The regression is based on the loan-month
    panel from 3 month before through 15 months after the origination of the loan, restricted to
    the loans in the PSM­matched sample and borrower credit attributes. Panel A is based on a
    subsample of borrowers whose loan rate is higher than the average rate of the loans originated in
    the same county, year month and similar credit score (20-point bins) in our sample. Panel B is
    based on a subsample of borrowers whose credit score is below 700 at time of origination. Panel
    C is based on a subsample of borrowers whose length of credit history is less than 48 months at
    time of origination. The dependent variable is the column title. Our main explanatory variable
    is the fintech loan indicator interacted with the relative quarter dummies. In all regressions,
    we control for individual, calendar time and relative quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are
    double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. Asterisks denote significance levels
    (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




.




                                                    A.16
                            Table A.9: Repeat Bank Borrowers
Dep Var                                                    I(Banki )× 100
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Bank Indicator for Last Loan    0.140***    0.139***    0.136***     0.146***   0.138***    0.136***
                                 (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)
  × Low Credit                                                      -0.014***
                                                                      (0.001)
  × Thin Credit                                                                 -0.169***
                                                                                 (0.006)
  × Main Lender                                                                          -0.002**
                                                                                          (0.001)
Male Indicator                                0.0005  -0.002***     -0.003*** -0.002*** -0.002***
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)
Married Indicator                              0.001   0.004***      0.004*** 0.004*** 0.004***
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)
College Indicator                           -0.023*** -0.019***     -0.019*** -0.018*** -0.019***
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)
High Income Indicator                       -0.034*** -0.029***     -0.029*** -0.028*** -0.029***
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)
Young Indicator                             -0.015*** -0.012***     -0.012*** -0.012*** -0.012***
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)    (0.001)
Professional Indicator                      -0.021*** -0.017***     -0.017*** -0.017*** -0.017***
                                             (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.002)  (0.002)    (0.002)
Controls                          No          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
ZIP × Time FE                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
N                               1,695,511   1,695,510   1,650,172   1,650,172   1,650,172   1,650,172
R2                                0.546       0.548       0.551       0.551       0.553       0.551

Notes: The table report the regression results of likelihood of bank (non-fintech) borrowers taking
another bank loan in the future based on loan-level data. The dependent variable is the bank
loan indicator. Main explanatory variable is whether borrower's last loan is a bank loan. We
also interact this variable with indicators for low credit score ( 700), thin credit file (length of
credit history shorter than 48 months), and whether the fintech lender was the main borrower's
lender (highest loan balance). We also control for all the demographic (male, married, college,
high income, young, professional) and consumer credit attributes at the time of origination, as
well as zip code by origination year month fixed effects. Standard errors are double clustered at
county and origination year-month levels. The regression is based on loan-level data. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                               A.17
          Table A.10: Fintech Loans and Outcomes of the Unemployed Borrowers
Dep Var             Loan     Borrower     Credit       Total        New       Revolving       Log(       I(Income    Log(Base   Log(Other
                    DLQ       DLQ         Score        Debt         Car         Debt        Income)        5%)       Income)    Income)
                     (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)        (9)        (10)
Post Job Loss       0.027      -0.076     -0.051      182.669*      0.037    65.092***        -0.05         -0.278    -0.07        0.357
                   (0.023)    (0.099)    (0.130)      (94.225)     (0.053)    (12.969)      (0.093)        (0.220)   (0.092)     (0.920)
 × Post Fintech     0.004    0.347***     -0.257    -912.969***   -0.332*** -308.380***      -0.073       1.588***    0.003       -2.238
                   (0.062)    (0.119)    (0.189)     (232.130)     (0.082)    (33.044)      (0.149)        (0.337)   (0.151)     (1.520)
Post Fintech      1.426***   1.308***      0.017    9,243.88***   -3.589***   -55.399*     0.377***      -1.153***   0.321**    5.620***
                   (0.099)    (0.097)    (0.169)     (205.788)     (0.085)    (32.456)      (0.131)        (0.298)   (0.131)     (1.275)
Individual FE        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
N                 2,085,902 3,039,183   3,039,183    3,039,183    3,007,083   3,039,183     689,833      549,273     685,753     685,640
R2                  0.436     0.559        0.82        0.908         0.05       0.904        0.955        0.385       0.954       0.877

     Notes: The table reports the regression results examining the relationship between fintech loan
     origination and borrower outcomes for those that lost their jobs. The regression is based on
     our loan-month panel data matched with individual job loss data. We restrict the sample to
     borrowers who lost their job at some point. We restrict the borrower by year-month panel
     to 12 months before and 12 months after the job loss date. Dependent variables are column
     titles: those in the first six columns are similar those in Table 8; logarithm of total annual
     income in Column (7); an indicator whether borrower's total income has increased more than
     5% from last quarter in Column (8); logarithm of base income in Column (9); logarithm of
     variable income in Column (10). Regressions in Columns (7)-(10) are based on only individuals
     with income available. Post job loss is an indicator that takes 1 for individuals with job loss
     after their job loss date. Post fintech is an indicator that takes 1 for fintech borrowers after
     their loan origination date. We control for individual and time fixed effects in all regressions.
     Standard errors are double clustered at county and origination year-month levels. Asterisks
     denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                    A.18
