                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOG EAT DOG: MEASURING NETWORK EFFECTS USING A DIGITAL PLATFORM
                             MERGER

                                      Chiara Farronato
                                       Jessica Fong
                                      Andrey Fradkin

                                    Working Paper 28047
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28047


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Ian Meeker and Hirotaka Miura for outstanding research assistance. We thank the
company employees for sharing data and insights, and participants at INFORMS, the
Marketplace Innovation Workshop, Marketing Science, the Platform Strategy Research
Symposium, the Workshop in Information Systems and Economics, the Simons Institute, and the
NBER Summer Institute for valuable comments. We also thank seminar participants at Boston
University, Harvard University, University of Maryland, University of Michigan, Toulouse
School of Economics, the Bank of Italy, DIW Berlin, the Online Economics of Platforms
Seminar, the NYU Strategy Economics Workshop, and the CEPR Virtual IO seminar for very
helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chiara Farronato, Jessica Fong, and Andrey Fradkin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dog Eat Dog: Measuring Network Effects Using a Digital Platform Merger
Chiara Farronato, Jessica Fong, and Andrey Fradkin
NBER Working Paper No. 28047
November 2020
JEL No. D22,D43,L12,L41,L81,M21

                                         ABSTRACT

Digital platforms are increasingly the subject of regulatory scrutiny. In comparison to multiple
competitors, a single platform may increase consumer welfare if network effects are large or may
decrease welfare due to higher prices or reduction in platform variety. We study the net effect of
this trade-off in the context of the merger between the two largest platforms for pet-sitting
services. We exploit variation in pre-merger market shares and a difference-in-differences
approach to causally estimate network effects at the platform and market level. We find that
consumers are, on average, not substantially better off with a single combined platform than with
two separate and competing platforms. On one hand, users of the acquiring platform benefited
from the merger because of network effects. On the other hand, users of the acquired platform
experienced worse outcomes. Our results highlight the importance of platform differentiation
even when platforms enjoy network effects.

Chiara Farronato                                Andrey Fradkin
Harvard Business School                         Questrom School of Business
Morgan Hall 427                                 Boston University
Soldiers Field                                  Rafik B. Hariri Building
Boston, MA 02163                                595 Commonwealth Avenue
and NBER                                        Boston, MA 02215
cfarronato@hbs.edu                              fradkin@bu.edu

Jessica Fong
450 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Apt 618
Washington, DC 20001
jyfong@umich.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28047
1    Introduction

Economists and policy-makers are increasingly worried about market power and the poten-
tial for its abuse by digital platforms. Of the 10 most valuable companies, at least 7 are
platform companies.1 The typical justification for large dominant platforms has been the
assumption that they enjoy strong network eects. In platform businesses more so than in
other businesses, the argument goes, the value per user increases with the number of users
on the platform. A monopolistic platform may thus be e cient because it maximizes total
surplus. Less attention has been placed on the role of horizontal dierentiation across plat-
forms for welfare. In particular, users may vary in their preferences for platform attributes,
even when platforms intermediate very similar services.
    We study the relative importance of network eects and platform dierentiation in a
market for local services, in which the largest platform acquired its largest competitor. We
find that, on average, users are not significantly better o with a single platform compared
to two competitors. This is true despite significant e ciency improvements experienced
by the acquiring platform. At the market level, heterogeneity in user preferences across
platforms and user attrition post-acquisition counterbalance platform-level network eects.
    A large theoretical literature has made the presence of network eects an integral part
of the definition of digital platforms (Rochet and Tirole (2003) and Cusumano et al. (2019)
among many others). In the specific context of online platforms, network eects may
increase the level or quality of platform-intermediated exchanges following an increase in
the number of users. But network eects are di cult to quantify because platform growth is
typically endogenous. For example, an improvement in the design of the platform may aect
both the number of users and the types of interactions they experience on the platform, but
this is not evidence of network eects. The ideal variation to measure network eects would
be to randomly add or subtract users to a platform, which would allow the econometrician
to evaluate how interactions and thus user value change with market scale. This exogenous
manipulation of the number of users would need to be repeated multiple times, unless the
  1
    The ranking includes, from top to bottom: Amazon, Apple, Google, Microsoft, Visa, Facebook, Alibaba,
Tencent, McDonald's, and AT&T.
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/11/amazon-beats-apple-and-google-to-become-the-worlds-most-valuable-brand.
html.




                                                   2
platform can be broken down into isolated clusters that do not interact with each other.
   We have the unique opportunity to measure network eects from the combination of
two online platforms for pet sitting services, in which 1) a unique platform emerged from
the acquisition by the largest platform of its biggest platform competitor 2) we observe
data from both platforms before and after the acquisition, and 3) we are able to identify
the same users across the two platforms. This acquisition provides an excellent natural
experiment for measuring network eects at the market and the platform level. First,
the local nature of services exchanged means that interactions in one city do not aect
interactions in another city, so we can treat each geography as a separate market (Cullen
and Farronato (Forthcoming)). Second, the two platforms were as similar as they can be, at
least as to the services exchanged and the way in which buyers search for service providers.
These similarities imply that the potential for network eects to arise is high and the risk
of reducing product variety is low, as the two platforms are close substitutes. Third, prior
to the acquisition, the two platforms varied in their market shares across cities, which
means that some cities experienced bigger increases in the number of users interacting with
one another compared to other cities. Fourth, the acquiring platform did not increase its
nominal or actual commission fees, a main antitrust worry that may oset the benefits of
the acquisition to its users. The features of our setting allow us to quantify local network
eects, i.e., benefits arising to users living in the same geography from aggregating local
interactions on a single platform.
   The presence and size of network eects generated by combining the two platforms
depends on the level of competition before the acquisition. We show that the two platforms
are comparable in size and they are active in the same geographies. We also show that
multi-homing is limited, thus preventing market outcomes from fully equilibrating across
platforms. Prices, for example, tend to be persistently higher on one platform compared to
the other, even if providers charge identical prices when selling on both platforms. These
preliminary analyses show that combining the two platforms does aect the number of
people with whom each user can interact, implying that there is scope for network eects
to arise.
   There are several ways in which the presence and behavior of one user can aect the


                                             3
utility of other users in platforms like ours, which are essentially online marketplaces where
many buyers and sellers exchange goods or services. First, more buyers can increase the
profits of sellers through increased demand, and more sellers can improve the outcomes of
buyers by providing better matches and prices.2 These spillovers imply that the number of
buyers relative to sellers aects the surplus created by the platform and how it is distributed
across users. Second, and the specific focus of this paper, a change in the absolute number
of buyers and sellers holding constant their relative shares may make buyers and sellers
better o due to network eects. This may occur, for example, if greater variety on both
the demand and the supply side results in more and higher quality matches.
       Our identification strategy is motivated by a theoretical result and an empirical fact.
The theoretical result from the existing literature is that because of network eects, one
would expect that a single platform generates higher aggregate user value than two separate
platforms. The empirical fact is that pre-acquisition market shares vary across geographies
in ways that are partially explained by dierences in the growth strategies of the two
platforms. In a geography where each platform had 50% of the market, merging the two
platforms could lead to large increases in user value by doubling the number of users inter-
acting with one another. On the other hand, in a geography where one platform already
had 90% of the market, merging the two platforms would have a smaller eect on aggregate
user value because one platform was already dominant. We can thus use a dierence-in-
dierences strategy to measure the eect of merging the two platforms, comparing outcomes
before and after the acquisition, and across geographies with dierent market shares.
       We explicitly address selection into market shares and spillovers between geographies,
which may result in bias if left unaddressed. Specifically, we match geographies where
Rover, the acquiring platform, was not dominant before the acquisition -- our "treated"
units -- to geographies where Rover had more than 80% market share. We match these
geographies based on their pre-acquisition number of active sellers across the two platforms.
To address spillovers across geographies, in robustness checks we use market definitions that
are coarser than zip codes and are based on users' search behavior.
   2
    Some of these eects, namely changes in price as a function of aggregate demand and supply, are purely
competitive eects, but other externalities across buyers and sellers are often called cross-side or indirect
network eects.



                                                     4
   At the market-level, we find no evidence that the combined platform substantially im-
proves market outcomes more than the sum of the two separate platforms: not on the
extensive margins such as user adoption, retention or total transactions, nor on the inten-
sive margins, such as match rates or ratings.
   While we do not find evidence of large network eects at the market level, we do find
evidence of network eects at the platform level. When we look at user outcomes on the
acquiring platform, we find that the number of transactions and the match rate of requests
into transactions improves more in geographies that received a bigger influx of users from
the acquired platform. This increase is due to two main reasons. First, network eects
causally improve users' outcomes, in particular outcomes for existing users of the acquiring
platform. Second, the acquisition caused a change in the composition of users in the market.
We are able to provide separate evidence for both of these explanations by studying the
eects of merging the two platforms on three user groups: existing users of the acquiring
platform (Rover), existing users of the acquired platform (DogVacay), and new users.
   In support of the network eects explanation, we find that existing buyers and sellers on
Rover increased their usage of the platform. However, we fail to find evidence of increased
usage for DogVacay users and for new users. In fact, DogVacay users were more likely
to exit the market post-merger. Many of these users chose not to migrate their profile to
Rover and those who migrated transacted less frequently and matched at lower rates. This
attrition, which is consistent with horizontal dierentiation across platforms and switching
costs, was at least partially oset by increased usage of Rover users.
   Taken together, our results imply that even if network eects are strong in online plat-
forms, preference heterogeneity can oset the benefits of a single platform compared to
multiple competing platforms. Although we do not study this, there may be other bene-
fits from merging competing platforms related to the costs of user acquisition, technology
investments and employees' wages, which we discuss in the conclusion.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the relevant
literature. Section 3 describes the data and the natural experiment. Section 4 presents a
stylized model motivating our empirical specification and identification strategy, which are
described in Section 5. Empirical results are in Section 6. In Section 7, we conclude by


                                                5
discussing implications for platform competition and antitrust regulation.


2    Literature Review

In this section, we present the literature on the economics of platforms and describe how
the setting in this paper is ideal for studying network eects empirically.
    Early theoretical work focuses on competition in the presence of network externalities
and product compatibility (Katz et al. (1985) and Farrell and Saloner (1985)), but the
pioneering models of multi-sided platforms came with Rochet and Tirole (2003), Caillaud
and Jullien (2003), Parker and Van Alstyne (2005), and Armstrong (2006), which were later
generalized by Weyl (2010). In their models, two characteristics define platform businesses.
The first characteristic is that platforms attract multiple user groups and enable interactions
between them ­ e.g. buyers and sellers, or advertisers and social media users. The second
characteristic is the presence of positive network eects, which imply that surplus per user
is an increasing function of the number of participating users. These models typically focus
on cross-side network eects, where each user (e.g. buyer) is directly aected by the number
of users in other groups (e.g. sellers). The focus of these early models was to study platform
pricing strategies to attract multiple user groups. Other strategic choices, such as entry,
vertical integration, and degree of openness have been studied by Zhu and Iansiti (2012),
Hagiu and Wright (2014), and Boudreau (2010), among others. A crucial implication of
this theoretical literature is that because of network eects the value per user increases in
the number of platform users. Two other theoretical papers, Tan and Zhou (2020) and
Nikzad (2020), find that platform competition has ambiguous eects on consumer surplus
in the presence of product variety, prices, and network eects. Our work adds an empirical
focus to this literature, by estimating whether user outcomes improve with the number of
other participating users. Our results on the lack of market-level improvements emphasize
the importance of product variety in counterbalancing network benefits.
    Another related stream of theoretical literature on platforms focuses on multi-homing,
i.e. the propensity of users to join and use multiple substitute platforms. A couple of
papers look at multi-homing users on both sides of the interaction (Caillaud and Jullien



                                              6
(2003) and Bakos and Halaburda (2019)), while most papers either assume single-homing
or allow for multi-homing by one side of users. When multi-homing is limited to at most
one side, the strategic interdependence between the two sides implies that a platform may
maximize profits by subsidizing one side to charge the other (Weyl (2010)). We contribute
to this literature by providing empirical evidence on the extent of multi-homing in practice,
finding that multi-homing, albeit somewhat limited, is predominantly concentrated on the
seller side.
    The empirical literature on network eects dates back to Greenstein (1993), Gandal
(1994), and Saloner and Shepard (1995), which show early evidence that network eects
are present, respectively, in federal computer procurement, in the adoption of computer
spreadsheet programs, and in banks' adoption of ATMs. One of the first to empirically
study cross-side network externalities is Rysman (2004). In the market for Yellow Pages, the
paper finds that more advertising leads to more consumer usage which in turn leads to more
advertising. Despite the existence of network eects, Rysman (2004) finds that platform
competition is better for user surplus due to lower market power, although Chandra and
Collard-Wexler (2009) find that concentration in the Canadian newspaper industry did
not lead to higher prices for either newspaper subscribers or advertisers. Similar findings
of positive cross-side network eects are confirmed on Taobao by Chu and Manchanda
(2016). Other work includes Gowrisankaran and Stavins (2004), who study banks' adoption
of automated clearinghouse (ACH) electronic payment systems, and Berry and Waldfogel
(1999) and Jeziorski (2014a,b), who study radio stations. Dub´
                                                             e et al. (2010) study market
tipping and find that network eects can lead to a strong increase in concentration in the
market for video game consoles. More recently Kawaguchi et al. (2020) conduct simulated
merger analysis of mobile apps. In part because of data limitations, these papers often focus
on the extensive margins of user participation. In contrast, our ability to track individual
users and their behavior on each platform allows us to measure the intensive margin and to
isolate mechanisms through which network eects may materialize.
    Data on how users interact with each other on platforms have allowed recent studies
to estimate a particular manifestation of network eects, i.e. how the number of matches
between the two sides of users changes as a function of aggregate user participation. In the


                                             7
market for domestic tasks and errands, Cullen and Farronato (Forthcoming) do not find
evidence of increasing returns to scale in matching. Analogous findings were confirmed in
home sharing by Fradkin (2018) and Li and Netessine (Forthcoming), and in online dating
by Fong (2019). Kabra et al. (2017), on the other hand, find positive returns to scale in ride-
sharing. Reshef (2019) studies how new sellers on a platform aect established sellers using
data from the Yelp delivery platform and Grubhub. Another set of related papers focus
on search frictions in online marketplaces. As marketplaces grow and user heterogeneity
increases, search frictions can also go up. Even if more options are available, and thus a
match is more likely, finding that match may become harder with increases in market size.
Arnosti et al. (2018) study congestion in matching markets from a theoretical perspective,
and Fradkin (2018) and Horton (2019) find that consumer's inability to discern who is
available and who is unavailable reduces match rates in home-sharing and online labor
platforms, respectively.
    Our context is distinct from the existing literature for three reasons. First, similar to Li
and Netessine (Forthcoming), we exploit the combination of two platforms resulting from an
acquisition as an exogenous change in user participation on the combined platform. Unlike
Li and Netessine (Forthcoming), we are able to measure user behavior on the acquired
platform prior to the acquisition. This allows us to characterize the eects of merging
two platforms not only at the platform level, but also at the market level, accounting for
dierences in how users search and transact on competing platforms. Second, our data
allows us to understand the role of multi-homing, which to our knowledge has never been
possible before in the digital setting.3 Third, we can measure network eects on multiple
dimensions, from the extensive margins ­ i.e. number of transactions ­ to the intensive
margins ­ i.e. search costs and match quality.


3    Setting and Data

We have proprietary data from "A Place for Rover, Inc." (Rover). As of 2018, Rover,
founded in Seattle in 2011, was the largest online platform for pet care services in the
  3
    The exception is the known consumer and merchant behavior over credit card use. See Bakos and
Halaburda (2019) for survey evidence.



                                               8
                        Figure 1: Rover's and DogVacay's Landing Pages




        (a) Rover.com, March 2017.                                     (b) Dogvacay.com, March 2017.

The figures show the landing page of Rover and DogVacay before the acquisition. The screenshots are accessi-
ble on Wayback Machine (https: // web. archive. org/ web/ 20170307101746/ https: // www. rover. com/
and https: // web. archive. org/ web/ 20170228165616/ https: // dogvacay. com/ )


US, with a valuation of $970 million.4 At the time, Rover processed roughly one million
bookings per month. DogVacay was a nearly identical platform. Founded in 2012 in Santa
Monica, DogVacay spent five years building a business to help dog owners find aordable
sitters, until it was acquired by Rover in 2017.
       The pet industry market is large and growing. According to the American Pet Products
Association,5 in 2019 pet owners in the US spent $95.7 billion on their pets, including
$10.7 billion in services like boarding, grooming, training, pet sitting, and walking. That
constitutes a 5.5% increase over the previous year. In the US, 84.9 million households, or
68% of all households, own a pet. Of them, 75% own a dog.
       Dog owners (buyers) use Rover ­ and DogVacay before the acquisition ­ to find pet
care services from sitters (sellers).6 The services range from dog walking to in-home pet
grooming, but their largest category is dog boarding. Competitors include other online
platforms such as Wag, more traditional businesses like kennels and dog hotels, and more
informal alternatives such as friends and family.
   4
     https://www.wsj.com/articles/rover-raises-125-million-as-dog-sitting-war-heats-up-1527166801
(accessed July 2019).
   5
     https://www.americanpetproducts.org/pr (accessed April 2020).
   6
     It is fairly easy to join the platform as a pet sitter. One of us signed up on Rover by creating a sitter
profile. Platform approval was quickly granted after a general background check. Additional background
checks can be performed at the sitter's will (https://www.rover.com/background-checks/, accessed July
2020).




                                                     9
      A comparison of Figure 1a and Figure 1b highlights the high degree of similarity between
the two platforms before they combined into one. Rover still works in a similar way today.
When a buyer needs pet care services, they initiate a search for sellers available in the
preferred category,7 for a given location, and for the dates needed. As is typical in online
platforms for local services, buyers then see a list of search results for available providers
determined by the companies' proprietary algorithms. Importantly, the algorithms prioritize
sitters with frequent high ratings and repeat stays with the same customers in order to rank
the best sitters higher.8 For each provider, buyers see their name, picture, location, online
ratings, and nightly price. Buyers can then choose to contact sellers to discuss their needs
and confirm availability. An exchange is not finalized until both users accept the transaction.
After matching, Rover oers a series of services during and after the dog stay to ensure that
users find it in their best interest to transact on the platform. These services include the
Rover Guarantee,9 reservation protection, trust and safety support, and a secure payment
system. Except for the introduction of additional services over time, the way buyers search
for sellers has remained virtually unchanged since the platforms' beginnings.
      Just before the acquisition both Rover and DogVacay took about 20% of gross booking
value in commission fees, up from 15% when they first started. Sellers would set the prices
for their services. At the time of our study, the only price suggestion available was Rover's
"holiday rate" feature, which suggested sellers to increase their prices during holidays.
Currently on Rover, fees are divided into a provider (seller) fee and a owner (buyer) fee.
The provider fee is 15% for sitters who joined before March 2016, and 20% for sitters who
joined after March 2016. The owner fee is zero if the owner joined before September 2015,
while it varies but is never more than $25 per booking for owners who joined after September
2015.10 DogVacay had a very similar fee structure and its commissions closely tracked those
of Rover throughout the period between 2012 and 2017.
  7
     The service categories include pet overnight-boarding, sitting, drop-ins, daycare, and walking.
  8
     Details on how the current search algorithm works on Rover can be found at https://www.rover.com/
blog/sitter-resources/how-rover-search-works/ (accessed October 2020).
   9
     https://www.rover.com/rover-guarantee/ (accessed October 2020).
  10
     The      information     is     available    at    https://support.rover.com/hc/en-us/articles/
205385304-What-are-the-service-fees- (accessed July 2019).




                                                 10
3.1      The Acquisition

On March 29, 2017, Rover announced it would buy DogVacay.11 Rover decided that it
would shut down DogVacay and transfer all the business to the Rover platform rather than
maintaining both websites independently. While the acquisition did shut down the acquired
company, it was not a killer acquisition 12 because DogVacay was unlikely to be working on
an innovative alternative, it was already large, and it was already competing with Rover by
oering very similar services. Rather, DogVacay was reportedly struggling to keep up with
the recent cash injections that Rover had received from venture capitalists.13
       Rover acquired DogVacay in an all-stock deal.14 Additional terms were not disclosed,
so we do not know whether the deal was subject to merger review by the Federal Trade
Commission or the Department of Justice. However, neither the Federal Trade Commission
nor the Department of Justice have a publicly available case involving Rover.15
       In addition to the many similarities between the two platforms, three features create
a unique opportunity to study network eects from this acquisition: the acquisition led
to a single aggregate platform; users migrated to the post-acquisition platform within 3
months; and we can identify the same users across the two platforms. We describe the
three characteristics in order.
       First, it is rare to see a single platform survive after it acquires its competitor. For
example, even though Zillow acquired Trulia in 2015, the two platforms are still both active.
The same is true for Google Maps and Waze, and for many online travel booking sites, such
as Booking.com, Kayak, and Priceline, which are jointly owned by Booking Holdings. As
Aaron Easterly, the CEO of Rover, confirms in a public interview,16 the decision to fully
absorb DogVacay into the Rover brand was a consequence of the rapid growth that Rover
  11
     https://techcrunch.com/2017/03/29/rover-dogvacay-merge/ (accessed July 2019).
  12
     Cunningham et al. (2019) define killer acquisitions as those when an incumbent firm acquires an inno-
vative target and terminate development of the target's innovations to preempt future competition.
  13
     https://www.latimes.com/business/technology/la-fi-tn-dogvacay-rover-20170329-story.html
(accessed June 2020).
  14
     https://techcrunch.com/2017/03/29/rover-dogvacay-merge/ (accessed April 2020).
  15
     https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/media-resources/mergers-and-competition/merger-review
and https://www.justice.gov/atr/merger-enforcement (accessed April 2020).
  16
     https://soundcloud.com/acquiredfm/season-2-episode-10-the-rover               and      https://www.
geekwire.com/2018/inside-rovers-dogvacay-deal-former-rivals-went-one-brand-not-two-acquisition/
(accessed April 2020).




                                                 11
was experiencing during the acquisition. At the time, Rover chose not to slow its growth
to navigate the internal lobbying arising from two separate brands nor to integrate the
back-ends while keeping two separate front-ends.
      Second, the transfer of DogVacay's users to Rover happened quickly. In February 2017,
Rover agreed to buy DogVacay. The acquisition was announced at the end of March. In
early May, Rover announced that DogVacay would be shut down.17 By early July, DogVacay
ceased operations. If a buyer landed on DogVacay's landing page in July 2017, they were
immediately redirected to book on Rover.18
      Third, when Rover announced that DogVacay would be shut down, Rover also started
allowing DogVacay users to migrate their accounts to Rover. This meant that a user could
link their DogVacay account to their Rover account if they had been active on both platforms
before the acquisition, or to a new Rover account otherwise. The account migration meant
that a user would keep all their transaction and online rating history on the Rover platform,
regardless of where those transactions or ratings originated from. Among those users who
did not actively migrate their accounts, multi-homing users could still be identified from
their email address.


3.2      Data

We have proprietary data from Rover, which retained pre-acquisition data from DogVacay.
This allows us to have visibility into all service requests, buyer-seller booking inquiries,
matches, and reviews from both platforms before and after the acquisition. A request refers
to a buyer's need for a sitter (e.g. dog boarding in Seattle from August 16th until August
18th ) and it is created when a buyer initiates a search or contacts a sitter directly. Contacts
for the same request with dierent sellers are recorded as separate booking inquiries. If a
booking inquiry leads to a transaction, it is matched to a stay. Both DogVacay and Rover
have multiple service categories, but we restrict attention to dog overnight-boarding, which
constitutes 70% of gross transaction volume on Rover and 91% on DogVacay before the
acquisition.
      We consider all buyer-seller booking inquiries initiated between June 2011 and January
 17
      Based on the publish date of this website: https://www.rover.com/joining-forces/
 18
      Appendix Figure D.1 displays Rover's and DogVacay's landing pages after the merger.


                                                    12
                            Figure 2: Growth of Rover and DogVacay




The figure plots the number of monthly overnight-boarding stays on DogVacay and Rover in log scale. The
black line is the sum of matches on both platforms. The vertical line corresponds to March 2017, when the
acquisition between the two platforms was announced. The number of transactions does not completely fall
to 0 after July 2017 because some services scheduled to start after DogVacay's shutdown were booked before
the summer.


2018 for requests between January 2012 and January 2018 included. Out of all booking
inquiries, we remove those whose duration ­ i.e. number of nights requested ­ is recorded
as negative or greater than 1 month (0.6% of requests), those with lead times ­ i.e. time
between start date and request date ­ recorded as negative or greater than one year (1.1%),
price outliers in terms of total price or commission fee percentage (2.3%). In particular,
we remove prices lower than $1 or higher than $200 per night, and commission fees greater
than 30%. In total, we exclude 4.2% of total requests, and 3.8% of successful transactions
­ i.e. transactions that were recorded as "completed" or "pending reviews."
    We can use the pre-acquisition data to better understand whether merging the two
platforms is likely to generate network eects. The potential for these eects depends on
the nature of competition between the two platforms. In particular, if one platform is much
smaller than the other, or if one platform is active in geographies where the other is not,
then merging the two platforms is unlikely to aect the number of buyers and sellers who
interact with one another. Similarly, if users are active on both platforms at once, then
there is less scope for network eects to be generated by the merger.
    We first show that the two platforms were of approximately the same size before the
acquisition. Figure 2 plots the number of monthly stays on DogVacay since January 2012,



                                                   13
in log scale. DogVacay was founded in March 2012, after Rover, but immediately outgrew
Rover in overnight boarding services, before being surpassed again around March 2015.
Despite this, the two platforms were of similar sizes in the dog overnight boarding cate-
gory before the acquisition, with Rover transacting at a 25% higher volume compared to
DogVacay in the quarter before the acquisition.19
       The local nature of the services exchanged implies that buyers are typically interested
in transacting with sellers within the same city. Indeed, 79% of booking inquiries, and
81% of stays occur within a buyer's CBSA.20 We measure competition between Rover and
DogVacay at the local level to evaluate whether they divided the market, each owning
100% of a particular geography, or whether instead they competed in each geography. We
consider zip codes with at least 50 transactions in 2016. We compute Rover's market share
in a zip code as the ratio of Rover gross transaction volume in 2016 relative to the sum of
Rover and DogVacay's volumes. In the average zip code in 2016 Rover had about 53.6%
market share,21 but there was substantial variation across zip codes. In 48% of zip codes
Rover had market shares between 25% and 75%. Zip codes with more transactions tended
to be contested markets. Indeed 61% of zip codes with at least 200 transactions in 2016
had market shares between 25% and 75%.
       The facts that both platforms intermediated the same type of services, they were sim-
ilarly large, and they were present in the same geographies, suggest looking at how users
substituted between the two platforms prior to the acquisition. In particular, we look at the
extent to which users multi-home, i.e., actively use both platforms. Few users, and fewer
buyers than sellers, multi-home across platforms. However, they account for a dispropor-
tionate share of transactions. Only 3.3% of buyers and 7.6% of sellers multi-home. Not
surprisingly, multi-homing users tend to transact more frequently than single-homing users.
27% of transactions are made by a multi-homing seller, and 8% are made by a multi-homing
buyer.22
  19
     Across all service categories, Rover was 62% larger than DogVacay.
  20
     CBSA stands for Core-Based Statistical Area, which roughly coincides with metropolitan
and micropolitan areas.          See https://www.census.gov/topics/housing/housing-patterns/about/
core-based-statistical-areas.html for more details.
  21
     In the aggregate in these zip codes Rover has 54.49% market share.
  22
     Appendix Figure D.2 plots the share of a user's transactions occurring on DogVacay prior to the ac-
quisition, separately for buyers and sellers. On average, only 4.2% of users are both buyers and sellers of



                                                    14
                                Table 1: Prices on Rover and DogVacay


                                                                 Seller Price (log)
                                                 (1)              (2)                    (3)
                     DogVacay                 0.067            0.061                     0.003
                                               (0.004)          (0.004)                (0.004)

                     Stay Duration FE            Yes              Yes                    Yes
                     Zip code-year month FE      No               Yes                    No
                     Provider-year month FE      No               No                     Yes
                     Observations             1,567,740        1,567,740              1,567,740
                     R2                         0.814            0.884                  0.928

                     Note:                    Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.


Estimates from OLS regressions of seller prices on a dummy for whether the transaction occurred on Dog-
Vacay. The data include all successful transactions between 2012 and March 2017, when the acquisition was
announced. Controls include fixed eects for the duration of the stay (columns 1-3), zip code and year-month
fixed eects (column 2), and provider and year-month fixed eects (column 3). The variation that identifies
the coe cient in column 3 comes from 236,170 matches from multi-homing sellers who transacted on both
platforms within the same month.


    Multi-homing sellers treat the two platforms as perfect substitutes, at least judging by
the price they charge, even though DogVacay's prices are higher on average.23 On average,
across the months before the acquisition, DogVacay sellers were expected to receive about
$3.50 more than sellers on Rover, or 13% more. After controlling for geographic and time
observables, the price dierence is around 6% but it disappears once we compare prices
of multi-homing sellers transacting on both Rover and DogVacay within the same month
(see Table 1). This suggests that sellers on DogVacay may have dierent qualities or costs
compared to sellers on Rover, but that multi-homing sellers considered buyers from the
dierent platforms as close substitutes.
    Figure 3 plots the average commission fee on the two platforms, computed as the ratio
of platform total fees over the price paid by buyers. The figure shows that commission fees
were very similar across platforms, and they continued their pre-acquisition upward trend
after Rover acquired DogVacay. The upward trend is due to the higher fee schedule for
buyers and sellers who joined after September 2015 and March 2016, respectively, whose

services on any given year. Buyers rarely act as service providers on the platforms. In the years before the
acquisition, on average 4.8% of buyers also transacted as sellers on any given year. Sellers are more often
buying pet sitting services on the platforms. Indeed, 25.8% of sellers also transacted as buyers on any given
year.
  23
     The payment that a seller receives is equal to what the buyer pays minus the platform commission
fees. Tipping is not required, and is not recorded on the platform. However dog owners are not pre-
vented from tipping sitters outside of the platform (https://support.rover.com/hc/en-us/articles/
206199686-Should-I-tip-my-sitter- , accessed July 2019).



                                                          15
                                        Figure 3: Average Fees




The figure plots the average commission fee, as a percentage of the price that buyers pay. The vertical line
identifies March 2017, when the acquisition was publicly announced. Levels on the y-axis are hidden to
protect company information.


shares increased steadily over time. As is clear from the figure, commission fees did not
increase discontinuously after the acquisition, suggesting that Rover did not take advantage
of its increased market power to capture a higher share of surplus.


4         Theoretical Framework

This section presents a simple theoretical framework of online matching platforms. The
goal is to measure consumers' utility from using a platform and how their utility changes
as a function of a merger between two competing platforms. We will focus on buyers since
the data provide suggestive evidence that sellers do not have heterogeneous preferences for
dogs.24 The results of this section will provide us with tests for the existence of network
eects that we can take to the data.
         We define a market to be the activity of buyers and sellers within a local geography ­
e.g., a zip code ­ and short time period ­ e.g., a month. We assume buyers in a market
each have one need for pet sitting services. A buyer's ex-ante utility from finding help on a
platform is the probability of finding a match, denoted q , multiplied by the expected utility
v net of price p conditional on matching: u = (v            p)q . Buyer's utility is increasing in v and
    24
    Sellers' decision to reject service requests are not explained by observable request characteristics, but
rather their own schedule and availability.



                                                     16
q , and decreasing in p. The three components of buyer's utility are in turn a function of the
number of buyers and sellers participating on the platform. Let N denote the number of
participating sellers. We assume that the number of buyers relative to sellers is fixed and
equal across markets and competing platforms. This means that once we know N , we can
derive the number of buyers directly by multiplying N by the number of buyers for every
seller. Appendix A extends this model to allow for varying number of buyers relative to
sellers. We assume that each component of u(N ) is twice continuously dierentiable.
       We further let v (N ) and q (N ) be functions of the number of platform participants. We
assume that v (N ) is increasing in N . This means that doubling both buyers and sellers
allows buyers to find a better match ­ because for example, they find somebody living closer
to their home. We also assume that match probability q (N ) is increasing in N . This means
that doubling both buyers and sellers allows buyers to find a match with higher probability
­ because for example, it is more likely that they find somebody available for the required
dates. Finally, we assume that price is independent of N . This assumption means that
doubling both the number of buyers and sellers does not aect average prices.25 Given
these assumptions, we can define what we mean by network eects. Network eects exist
whenever u is increasing in N because of an increase in v or q or both.
       When two platforms exist, let              0.5 denote the share of sellers using the larger
platform in a market and let us further assume that the matching and pricing technologies
are not too dierent across the two platforms, so u is not platform specific. This means
that conditional on exactly the same number of buyers and sellers, the two platforms match
buyers and sellers at similar rates, with similar prices and average match quality levels. In
a geography where two platforms exist, the market-level match rates, values, and prices are
going to be a weighted average of the outcomes in the two platforms, where the weights
depend on the relative size of the two platforms. On average in the market, the per-person
surplus will be equal to  u( N ) + (1            )u ((1      )N ). Assuming all participants remain
active when the two platforms merge, the per-person surplus will increase to u(N ).
       We want to compare two geographies with dierent shares of users across the two plat-
  25
     Whether this assumption holds exactly depends on the nature of competition between sellers. On the
one hand, increasing N results in more options for buyers, which should decrease prices. On the other hand,
increasing N may result in buyers who have more idiosyncratic utility for a particular seller, increasing that
seller's market power and prices. In the data, we reject large changes in prices post-acquisition.


                                                     17
forms, but identical number of users in the market. In both markets we have N number of
sellers, but in market 1 the larger platform has a share of users 1 , while in market 2 it has
a share 2 , with 1 > 2      0.5. Let us first consider what happens to users in the acquiring
platform, which without loss of generality we assume is the larger platform. The surplus
created by the acquiring platform increases by u(N )        u(1 N ) in market 1. Network eects
at the platform level imply that the increase in consumer surplus for users of the larger
platform is bigger in market 2 than in market 1:


                             u( N )   u ( 2 N ) > u ( N )   u(1 N ).                          (1)


When Equation (1) holds, we say that platform e ciency increases after a merger because
of network eects.
    In addition to increasing platform e ciency, network eects have been used in the
literature to justify that a single platform can create more value for users than two competing
platforms, which is something that we can directly test. In our setting, with network eects,
users in market 2 would gain more from the merger than users in market 1. Indeed, because
of network eects, market 1 had higher utility ­ both aggregate and per person ­ with two
competing platforms than market 2. So we have that


u( N )   [2 u(2 N ) + (1   2 )u ((1   2 )N )] > u(N )       [1 u(1 N ) + (1   1 )u ((1   1 )N )] .
                                                                                              (2)
    When Equation (2) holds, we say that market e ciency increases after a merger because
of network eects.
    The inequalities in both Equations (1) and (2) motivate dierence-in-dierences tests
of the existence of network eects at the platform and market level. Equation (2) can be
tested by comparing outcomes for both platforms' users before and after the acquisition and
across markets with dierent pre-acquisition market shares. Equation (1) can be applied to
outcomes for users of a single platform, which is the acquiring platform in our case.
    Note that we could very well have a situation where we find support for Equation (1) but
not for Equation (2). This would imply that even if network eects exist so that platform
e ciency increases after a merger, other considerations ­ such as dierences in matching


                                               18
and pricing technologies, or heterogeneity in user preferences ­ counterbalance the benefits
of platform size at the market level. We discuss extensions to this model in Appendix A.
In the next sections, we empirically test Equations (1) and (2).


5         Empirical Strategy and Identification

The combination of two platforms aects many aspects of the acquiring company. We study
the eects of this merger on local marketplace e ciencies. We do not study the eects of
the acquisition that operate uniformly across the platform. For example, the acquisition
may have created operational e ciencies and cost savings. To the extent that these aect
all geographies, we cannot statistically dierentiate these eects from time eects. Instead,
we study dierences in outcomes across local markets that are dierentially aected by
combining the two platforms, in line with our theoretical framework.26

                              Figure 4: Rover Market Shares Pre-Acquisition




The figure plots the histogram of Rover market shares in 2016, the year prior to the acquisition. Each
observation is a zip code with at least 50 transactions in 2016. The zip code's Rover market share is defined
using gross transaction volume.


         Figure 4 shows the distribution of Rover's market shares (in terms of gross transaction
volume) across zip codes with at least 50 stays in 2016. There is substantial variation in
market shares, and at least part of that variation can be explained by the dierent expansion
strategies that Rover and DogVacay adopted years earlier when they just started out.27 The
    26
         Appendix Figure D.3 provides a graphical intuition of our theoretical framework.
    27
         We find that part of the variation in 2016 market shares can be explained by which platform was the first



                                                          19
substantial variation in market shares across geographies allows us to separate zip codes
into 5 groups: zip codes where in 2016 Rover had market shares below 20%; between 20%
and 40%; between 40% and 60%; between 60% and 80%; and above 80%.
    We would expect the largest benefits from network eects to arise in the zip codes with
shares between 40% and 60%. In a world where the two platforms are identical except
for their market shares, zip codes where Rover had 10% or 90% of the market would be
indistinguishable from one another. Since that may not be true in practice, we keep the
0-20% and 80%-100% market share groups separate. We do the same for the 20%-40% and
60%-80% market share groups.
    Merging the two platforms was eective in migrating DogVacay users to Rover. Zip
codes with Rover market shares smaller than 10% experienced a median increase in users
on Rover of 550% while markets above 90% had a median increase of 14% (Appendix
Figure D.4). To exploit this dierential user migration, we take a dierence-in-dierences
approach and compare outcomes in the months immediately before and after the acquisition
across market share groups.
    Zip codes where either Rover or DogVacay were dominant before the acquisition tend
to be rural, have fewer residents, lower population densities, and lower shares of college
graduates. Areas where Rover is particularly successful also tend to have higher pet own-
ership rates. Appendix Figures D.5 and D.6, together with Appendix Table D.2, provide
comparisons for a large set of observable characteristics, platform performance metrics, and
their evolution over time. Given these dierences, we may be concerned that the main as-
sumption behind our dierence-in-dierences approach, that zip codes with dierent market
shares have the same latent trends in platform performance, does not hold.
    To ensure that zip codes across market share groups are as similar as possible, we employ
a matching estimator that accounts for covariate imbalance across groups (Imai et al., 2018).
We consider zip codes with Rover market shares above 80% as the control group. Separately
for each of the other market share groups, we match one zip code from the control group
mover in the market. Appendix Table D.1 shows that on average, Rover tends to have a 7% higher market
share in zip codes where the first stay was booked on Rover rather than DogVacay. Due to confidentiality
terms, we cannot disclose how the expansion strategies diered between Rover and DogVacay, although the
two diered substantially in the way they targeted growth by expanding across geographies versus growing
their user base within particular geographies.



                                                  20
to each "treated" zip code using covariate balancing propensity score matching (CBPS),
introduced by Imai and Ratkovic (2014). Distances are calculated on the total number of
active sellers in each month up to a year before the acquisition.28 We find a separate control
group from zip codes with Rover market shares above 80% for each of the other "treated"
market share groups. Let yzt be the outcome in zip code z and year-month t. For each
market share group, we estimate the following regression


                                        yzt    yz 0 t =   t   + c,c0 ,t                                (3)


where z is the "treated" zip code, and z 0 is the matched "control" zip code. The coe cients

 t   should be interpreted as changes in the outcome variable relative to the "control" group,
and relative to February 2017, the month before the acquisition announcement.
       An econometric challenge that arises with this matching method is that a market in
the "control" group may be matched to multiple markets from the "treated" group. As
a result, each matched pair, or dyad, is no longer independently informative, as a single
"control" market can impact the estimates of multiple dyads. We account for the resulting
correlation in error terms with the cluster-robust variance estimation method from Aronow
et al. (2015).
       We look at a large number of outcomes. On the extensive margins, we look at total
number of transactions in a given zip code and month. On the intensive margins, we look
at the match rate of posted requests and the share of transactions leading to a repeated
stay in the future, which we take as a measure of match quality. We look at these outcomes
for the market as a whole and for the Rover platform only. So for example, when looking
at transactions, we look at transactions completed in a given zip code-month separately for
all buyers and only for buyers using Rover.29
       We hold the matched control groups constant as we measure the eects of combining
the two platforms across dierent outcomes of interest. Table 2, which provides descriptive
  28
     An active seller is defined as a seller who was involved in at least one booking inquiry in the given
month.
  29
     We explore other outcomes, such as total number of buyers and sellers, transaction prices, retention
rates, and share of stays whose sitter received a 5-star review. These additional analyses are presented in
Appendix B. The results are consistent with those presented in the main body of the paper.




                                                    21
                    Table 2: Comparison Across Matched Market Share Groups

                                            [0.0,0.2)              [0.2,0.4)              [0.4,0.6)              [0.6,0.8)
                                      Control      Treated   Control      Treated   Control      Treated   Control      Treated
                                        (1)           (2)      (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)      (7)           (8)
 Panel A: Population Demographics
 Population                           30,968     -2,320**    33,728       1,451     35,012      2,582**    33,775     3,720***
 Land Area (sq. miles)                 26.20       6.93**     22.83        1.42      22.94       -0.53     23.50         -4.04
 Population Density                   3,545        -517*      4,564     2,064***     4,819     2,620***     4,438     2,644***
 Share Asian                           0.09      -0.03***     0.08        -0.01      0.09        -0.01      0.08          0.00
 Share Black                            0.12       -0.02*     0.12        -0.01      0.12         0.00      0.11          0.01
 Share White                           0.70       0.06***     0.70        0.02*      0.70         0.00      0.71         -0.02
 Average Income ($)                   88,882        1,512    86,266      4,420*     88,104        -385     87,467         139
 Median Income ($)                    70,551        1,209    69,122       2,371     70,039        -179     68,977         906
 Unemployment Rate                      0.07        -0.00     0.07        -0.00       0.07       -0.00      0.07         -0.00
 Share Uninsured                        0.10        -0.00     0.11         0.00      0.10        0.01*      0.10        0.01*
 Share Non Citizen                     0.08      -0.02***     0.09        -0.00      0.08         0.01      0.08      0.01***
 Share with College                    0.26         -0.00     0.27         0.01      0.28        0.02*      0.28         0.01
 Share Poor                             0.04        -0.00     0.04       -0.00*      0.04        -0.00      0.04         -0.00
 Share with Pets                        0.43     -0.03***      0.44     -0.03***      0.44     -0.03***     0.44      -0.03***
 Vets/1,000 jobs                        0.47         0.02      0.49       -0.02       0.47        0.00      0.50       -0.03**
 Animal Caretakers/1,000 jobs           1.38         0.04      1.42       -0.00       1.39        0.02      1.42         -0.00
 Animal Trainers/1,000 jobs             0.11         0.01      0.12       -0.00       0.12      -0.01**     0.12        -0.01*
 Panel B: Market Performance
 Stays                                 125            5       153          18**      172         32***      164         30***
 Nightly Price (log $)                   ­        0.09***       ­        0.08***       ­        0.05***       ­        0.03***
 Match Rate                              ­        0.08***       ­        0.02***       ­          0.00        ­       -0.02***
 Share Repeat Transactions             0.58        -0.00      0.58        -0.01*     0.59      -0.02***     0.58        -0.00
 Share Requesting Again                0.38         0.01      0.36         -0.01     0.35        -0.01      0.35      -0.02***
 Share Transacting with Same Sitter    0.50       0.07***     0.48          0.01     0.47        -0.01      0.47      -0.02***
 Panel C: Rover Performance
 Stays                                 115       -102***      139        -83***      156        -49***      149          -11
 Nightly Price (log $)                   ­         0.02         ­        0.03**        ­          0.02        ­         0.02*
 Match Rate                              ­       -0.21***       ­       -0.09***       ­       -0.05***       ­       -0.03***
 Share Repeat Transactions             0.59      -0.11***     0.59      -0.03***     0.59       -0.01**     0.59        0.01
 Share Requesting Again                0.39      -0.15***     0.37      -0.06***     0.36      -0.03***     0.36      -0.02***
 Share Transacting with Same Sitter    0.51      -0.24***     0.49      -0.09***     0.49      -0.05***     0.48      -0.02***
 Panel D: DogVacay Performance
 Stays                                  10        107***       14        102***       16         81***       15         41***
 Nightly Price (log $)                   ­          0.03        ­        0.05***       ­         0.03*        ­        0.04***
 Match Rate                              ­        0.32***       ­        0.26***       ­        0.20***       ­        0.14***
 Share Repeat Transactions             0.47       0.12***     0.45       0.12***     0.48       0.07***     0.48       0.05***
 Share Requesting Again                0.26       0.15***     0.24       0.14***     0.24       0.11***     0.25       0.08***
 Share Transacting with Same Sitter    0.27        -0.02      0.26       0.21***     0.26       0.20***     0.27       0.13***
 N                                     323          577       376          560       372          639       414          692


The table compares zip-code-level demographics and platform performance across markets in each Rover
market share group and its respective matched control markets. Demographics data are obtained from the
US Census Bureau. For each of the "treated" market share groups, the odd-numbered columns display the
average value in the control group. The even-numbered columns display the dierence of the average of a
particular market share bin compared to the average of the corresponding control group markets, and whether
the dierence is statistically significant at standard confidence levels. Panels A through D separate variables
into the following 4 groups: population demographics; aggregate platform performance (Rover + DogVacay);
Rover performance; and DogVacay performance.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.

  :The level of nightly price is not displayed for the control group to protect company information. We only
show log dierences across market share groups. Analogously, the match rate is not displayed for the control
groups. The displayed match rates are the percentage point dierences between the respective treated and
control groups.

 : CBSA-level variables. Each zip code is assigned the value of its CBSA, and then mean and standard
deviation are computed with zip codes as units of observation.


statistics for the matched samples, shows that we are able to improve matching on many
covariates that we do not explicitly use in the matching procedure.30 However, platform
performance metrics that are not explicitly considered in matching (e.g. prices, matching
  30
       Appendix Table D.2 presents descriptives for the unmatched zip codes.



                                                             22
rates, and repeat transactions) fail to balance across treatment and control group. Some
of this imbalance is expected -- for example we know that prices are higher on DogVacay
and average prices will therefore be higher in markets with a higher DogVacay share. Other
dierences reflect the fact that platform performance metrics tend to positively correlate
with a platform's market share. We should note however, that our dierence-in-dierences
strategy does not require identical levels of pre-treatment outcomes, but rather parallel
trends, appropriately defined. The figures in the next section provide support for this
assumption.


6    Results

This section presents the main results on the eect of merging the two platforms on the
market as a whole and on Rover specifically. We then disaggregate results by user type and
present heterogeneous eects across dierent markets.31
    We start with market-level outcomes to test whether merging the two platforms in-
creased the overall number of matches, match rates, and match quality more in zip codes
where Rover and DogVacay split the market relatively equally before the merger compared
to zip codes in which Rover was already dominant.
    Figure 5a plots the results. The outcome in the first row is the (log) total number of
transactions (stays) in a given zip code-month, regardless of whether they were intermedi-
ated by DogVacay or Rover. Each column corresponds to a dierent treatment group, and
we would expect the largest increase in the number of transactions to occur in the zip codes
where Rover's market share was between 40% and 60% in 2016 (third plot in the first row).
The eect should then be monotonically decreasing for the plots to the right and to the left.
With symmetry of the two platforms, we expect that the group with Rover's market share
between 0 and 20% (first plot from the left) to be indistinguishable from the control group.
These patterns should be true not only for transactions, but also for the other outcomes:
number of transactions divided by number of requests (match rate, second row) and share
  31
     This section presents the results with event study plots. Appendix Tables B.1 through B.6 present the
results of dierence-in-dierences regressions, aggregating the months in the pre-acquisition announcement
period, those in between the announcement and the shut-down of DogVacay, and those after the shut-down
of DogVacay.


                                                   23
of new transactions leading to a repeat stay in the future (third row).32

                                Figure 5: Estimates of Merger Eects




                                           (a) Market Outcomes




                                            (b) Rover Outcomes



Regression estimates of Equation (3). An observation is a matched zip code-month. Panel (a) presents
market level outcomes, while Panel (b) presents Rover-level outcomes. In each panel the regressions come
from 3 dierent outcomes -- stays, match rates, and share of stays leading to a repeat transaction in the
future -- and 4 treatment groups -- zip codes with Rover's market shares in the following bins: 0-20%, 20%-
40%, 40%-60%, and 60%-80%. The control group includes zip codes with Rover's market shares greater than
80%. Grey vertical lines denote March and July 2017, the months when the acquisition was announced and
DogVacay was eectively shut down, respectively. Extensions, including other outcomes and estimates with
clusters of zip codes as markets are in Appendix B. For more aggregated dierence-in-dierences coe cients,
see Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2.


       The first row shows that indeed, there seems to be an uptick in the number of trans-
actions after merging the two platforms in the zip codes with 40-60% market shares, but
the estimated eect is noisy and often is indistinguishable from a null eect. Pooling to-
  32
     From this last outcome we exclude transactions between buyers and sellers who had transacted with
each other in the past. This is to avoid attributing relationships found in the past to current match quality.
Repeat transactions are a good measure of match quality, at least as measured by the dog owner's willingness
to transact again with a particular sitter. Although this is likely correlated with dog welfare, in this setting
we cannot directly measure the latter (Singer, 2015).


                                                      24
gether the months after DogVacay's shutdown to estimate a single dierence-in-dierences
coe cient for each treatment group (Appendix Table B.1) confirms that the eect is not
statistically significant. Zip codes with market shares away from 40%-60% are indistin-
guishable from the control group and, if anything, the dierence-in-dierences coe cient
for 0-20% and 20-40% market share groups implies a marginally significant 7.5% decrease in
the number of transactions. Similarly for the other outcomes, we don't find any dierential
eect of the merger across market share groups. For zip codes where Rover had less than
20% market share we even find a significant reduction in match rates of 3.5 percentage
points (Appendix Table B.1). The results suggest that buyers do not find matches of higher
quality or at higher rates with the single merged platform compared to when there were
two competing platforms. That is, we do not find evidence supporting the hypothesis that
a single platform is better for users than two separate and competing platforms.
   Does the absence of e ciency gains at the market level necessarily imply absence of
network eects? No, and in fact the results focusing on the Rover platform suggest that
there are network eects. Figure 5b plots the same outcomes for the Rover platform.
We now look at transactions occurring on the Rover platform only. Similarly, we look at
the match rate for requests submitted on the Rover platform only and the share of new
transactions leading to a repeated stay. Rover received a bigger influx of users in markets
where it had a smaller share of the market, so it's not surprising to see that the number of
transactions increases the most in markets with a low Rover market share pre-acquisition.
Relative to the control group, the number of Rover stays increase by 50% in markets where
Rover had 40-60% share, they increase by 70% in markets where Rover had 20-40% share,
and they increase by 130% in markets where Rover had only 0-20% share.
   What is more interesting are the estimates on the intensive margins: match rates and the
probability that a current transaction leads to a repeat stay. For both measures, the post-
acquisition improvement compared to the control group is larger where Rover was smaller
pre-acquisition, i.e., where Rover experienced a larger influx of users migrating from the
acquired platform. We find substantial eects, with up to 20 percentage point increase in
match rates for the zip codes where Rover had less than 20% market share. The results
are similar for other outcomes and for more aggregated market definitions based on zip


                                            25
code clusters, which are less prone to potential violations of the stable unit treatment value
assumption. Appendix B provides these and other extensions to our empirical results.
      What explains this apparently contradictory finding, that there exist network eects
at the platform level, but that users on average are not finding more and better matches
with a single platform compared to two competing platforms? We first note that DogVacay
users ­ both buyers and sellers ­ are more likely to leave the platform after the merger,
in particular in markets where DogVacay had a relatively larger market share. Appendix
Table B.5 indicates that markets experienced at least a 13 percentage point increase in
attrition after the merger compared to the control markets, and as high as a 36 percentage
point increase for buyers in markets where DogVacay had over 80% market share. This
level of attrition is consistent with switching costs, a preference for the DogVacay brand,
or an expectation of lower match quality on Rover.
      To investigate this further, we separately look at outcomes for dierent users: new
users, users who used DogVacay before the acquisition, and users who used Rover before
the acquisition. We first focus on new users. We define a user as new if they never engaged
in a booking inquiry or posted a request before. We want to explore whether new users
are better o when finding help after merging the two platforms compared to before and
whether the improvement was bigger in zip codes where Rover and DogVacay split the
market equally compared to markets where Rover was dominant. Figure 6a plots the
number of new buyers submitting requests in a zip code-month, as well as the match rate
of those requests. There are no significant dierences across zip codes with dierent market
shares on the extensive or the intensive margins.
      We then look at Rover and DogVacay users. We define these users according to their
activity across the two platforms. We consider all users who engaged in a booking inquiry
in a calendar year. We define them as Rover users if all their booking inquiries during the
year were on Rover, as DogVacay users if all their booking inquiries were on DogVacay, and
multi-homers otherwise.33 We then measure the number of those users who post requests
or engage in booking inquiries again in any given month of the following calendar year,
the total number of transactions they exchange, and the match rate of their requests. By
 33
      The analysis for multi-homing users is in Appendix Figure B.3.



                                                     26
                      Figure 6: Estimates of Merger Eects By User Type




                                              (a) New Users




                                             (b) Rover Users




                                           (c) DogVacay Users

Regression estimates of Equation (3). In the first panel the first row displays results where the outcome is
the (log) number of stays from buyers who never posted a request before. The second row displays results
for the match rate of new buyers, i.e., the number of stays divided by the number of requests by buyers who
never posted a request before. Panel (b) displays the same outcomes for users who, in the prior year, had
only engaged in booking inquiries on Rover. Panel (c) displays the outcomes for users who, in the prior year,
had only engaged in booking inquiries on DogVacay. Otherwise the figure is identical to Figure 5. Results
for other outcomes are in Appendix Figure B.2. Results for multi-homing users are in Appendix Figure B.3.
For more aggregated dierence-in-dierences coe cients, see Appendix Tables B.3, B.4, and B.5.


including 2016 and 2017 we can compare the behavior of 2015 users who came back in 2016
with 2016 users who came back in 2017 while the merger took place.
    Figure 6b shows that Rover users benefit from merging the two platforms when the
influx of users from DogVacay is larger. The eects imply a 26% increase in stays for the
markets with 0-20% market shares and around 17% increase in stays for markets with 20-
40% or 40-60% market shares. This increase in stays is consistent with a role of increased
variety of sellers on the platform due to the incoming DogVacay sitters, thus confirming the


                                                     27
presence of network eects. The increase in activity from Rover users entirely comes from
the extensive margins ­ more users posting requests ­ rather than match quality or match
rates.
       Figure 6c shows the opposite for DogVacay users, who experience higher attrition and
lower match rates compared to before the acquisition and compared to DogVacay buyers
in the zip-codes where Rover had 80-100% market share prior to the acquisition. The
eects are particularly large in the 0-20% market share group, where there was a 33%
reduction in the number of transactions. Appendix Figure B.2 shows that the reduction in
transactions is largely due to attrition. The number of DogVacay buyers participating in
the market decreases by 36% in the 0-20% market share group. Match rates of DogVacay
users migrating to Rover are also lower, up to 7 percentage points lower in the zip codes
where DogVacay was dominant.34
       Why do DogVacay users attrit more and match at lower rates? In general, buyers
prefer to engage in repeat transactions with prior sitters who were good matches and this is
especially true on DogVacay. On average, 50.8% of 2016 transactions are between a buyer
and a seller who had already transacted before. This share is a little higher on DogVacay
(54.5% versus 48%), and it's especially higher where the platform is successful. Indeed,
63.3% of DogVacay transactions in zip codes where DogVacay had at least 80% market
share were repeat transactions. This pattern is even more pronounced post-acquisition --
79.8% of DogVacay buyers' transactions on Rover in these zip codes are repeat transactions
with DogVacay sitters.
       When repeat transactions are so important, both buyers and sellers need to migrate to
the acquiring platform, but not all DogVacay sellers migrated to Rover. Buyers who did not
find their prior sitter may have been induced to stop searching or may have sent a request
to a worse quality match. The evidence in Table 3 is consistent with the above story. This
table displays regressions where an observation is a DogVacay buyer. We regress a series of
outcomes on the market share group of the buyer's zip code and whether the buyer's most
recent seller migrated to Rover. Buyers are more likely to migrate their profiles, initiate
  34
     Appendix C finds very similar results on match rates for new, Rover, and DogVacay users using search
data from Rover.
  34
     DogVacay buyers are defined as those who transacted on DogVacay in 2016 and repeat DogVacay sitters
are those with whom the buyer previously transacted on the DogVacay platform.


                                                   28
      Table 3: DogVacay Buyer Outcomes as a Function of Seller Migration to Rover


                                          Migrated         Conversed        Transacted       Repeat Stay         Matched

                                             (1)                 (2)            (3)                 (4)             (5)

   Seller Migrated                        0.102***         0.093***          0.117***          0.152***          0.157***

                                          (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.010)             (0.017)

   Seller Migrated * Share = [.2, .4]     -0.029**         -0.033**         -0.041***        -0.049***           -0.074***

                                          (0.015)          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.012)             (0.021)

   Seller Migrated * Share = [.4, .6]     -0.001           -0.009           -0.028**         -0.039***           -0.095***

                                          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.012)             (0.021)

   Seller Migrated * Share = [.6, .8]     -0.033**         -0.028*          -0.044***        -0.063***           -0.088***

                                          (0.015)          (0.015)          (0.014)          (0.013)             (0.022)

   Seller Migrated * Share = [.8, 1]      -0.054***        -0.048***        -0.067***        -0.083***           -0.099***

                                          (0.018)          (0.018)          (0.017)          (0.016)             (0.026)

   Mean of Y                              0.56             0.4              0.34             0.25                0.85

   Num.Obs.                               86478            86478            86478            86478               34588

   R-Squared                              0.107            0.131            0.134            0.150               0.030


This table displays coe cients of regressions for DogVacay buyer outcomes post-acquisition. Each observation
is a DogVacay buyer. The outcome `Migrated' indicated that the user has claimed or merged an account on
Rover. `Conversed' indicates that the user has started a booking inquiry, `Transacted' that the user has
successfully transacted, and `Repeat Stay' that a user has transacted with their previous seller on DogVacay.
`Matched' indicates that the user Transacted conditional on sending a booking inquiry. `Seller Migrated'
indicates that the buyer's last seller on DogVacay migrated their profiles. Fixed eects for market share group
and month of last DogVacay stay are included. The data used for this regression comprise all DogVacay buyers
between April 2016 and April 2017. Standard errors are clustered on the previous provider of the buyer.


booking inquiries, and transact if their most recent seller also migrated their profile to
Rover. Column 4 shows that this eect is driven by repeat transactions on Rover with the
seller previously found on DogVacay. The interaction terms with market share groups show
that the presence of prior sellers is less important for DogVacay buyers in high Rover share
markets. This can be explained by the fact that there are more Rover sellers in high Rover
share markets, which may provide good alternatives for the buyer. While this pattern
is consistent with buyers attriting and having lower match rates due to unavailability of
their previous sitter, the correlation may also be driven by reverse causality, coordination

                                                      29
or simply rational expectations that the other side of users will behave similarly when
deciding whether to migrate accounts.35
    Another potential explanation for increased DogVacay attrition post-acquisition is that
merging the two platforms may have caused DogVacay users to disintermediate the platform,
i.e., to transact with the same service provider outside of the platform. This mechanism
is important to consider because it would imply that our data is missing transactions and
underestimating market surplus. Since, by definition, disintermediation is hard to measure,
we cannot conclusively rule it out.
    When we look at match rates for Rover, DogVacay, and new buyers separately (second
row of plots in all panels in Figure 6), one thing jumps to our attention: no set of buyers see
their match rates increase after merging the two platforms. Then why do we see an increase
in match rates for the Rover platform in zip codes where Rover is smaller (Figure 5b)?
Compositional dierences are the main reason. Before the acquisition, DogVacay buyers
matched at higher rates in markets where DogVacay was dominant. The migration of these
buyers to Rover increases the average match rate, even though no user is more likely to
match after merging the two platforms compared to before. So the change in match rates
is not evidence of network eects in this case. The strongest evidence we have of network
eects is the increase in participation by users of the acquiring platform, which translates
into an increase in the number of their transactions.


6.1    Heterogeneous Eects Across Markets and Users

Network eects may manifest dierently across dierent markets. We explore three dimen-
sions of heterogeneity across markets: market size, propensity to multi-home, and dier-
ences in the buyer-to-seller ratio. We leave the theoretical discussion to Appendix A and
histograms of these characteristics across zip codes in Appendix Figure D.7.
    Markets dier in their total number of transactions. The average zip code has 171 stays
in 2016, but with a standard deviation of 146 there is substantial heterogeneity across zip
  35
     Nonetheless, we note that sellers have more of an incentive than buyers to join the new platform to make
money. Therefore, their participation decision should be less reliant on the presence of a previous buyer.
Indeed, more sellers migrate their profiles than buyers -- while 56% of buyers migrate their profile, 82% of
their sellers do so.




                                                     30
codes. It is possible that both platforms were already operating at an e cient scale in large
markets but not in small markets, which could benefit from merging the two platforms. This
would occur if the consumer surplus curve is more convex in smaller markets (Appendix
Figure D.3). If this were the case, we would expect that both Rover and market-level
e ciency change more in small markets than in large markets as a function of pre-acquisition
market shares.
       To test these hypotheses, we split zip codes into zip codes with more or fewer than 250
transactions in 2016. We focus on Rover-specific and market-level match rates although
Appendix B confirms that the conclusions do not change when we look at additional out-
comes. Figure 7a plots the estimates.36 The red estimates are for small markets, while the
black estimates are for large markets. We do not find much of a dierence between small
and large markets: the Rover match rate goes up monotonically in the influx of new users
from the acquired platform, while the market-level match rate does not improve relative to
the control group.
  36
    Note that the matched samples dier from Figures 5b and 5a because we constrain that each "treated"
zip code is matched to a control zip code within the same market size group.




                                                 31
           Figure 7: Estimates of Merger Eects ­ Heterogeneity by Market Type




                                     (a) Small versus Large Markets




                       (b) Markets with Little versus Substantial Multihoming




     (c) Markets with Large versus Small Dierences in Number of Buyers Relative to Sellers



Estimates of Equation (3) for dierent markets. In the top panel the zip codes are divided into two groups:
markets with at most 250 transactions in 2016 (in red), and market with more than 250 transactions (in
black). In the middle panel, the zip codes are divided into two groups: markets whose share of 2016 transac-
tions completed by multi-homing sellers is less than 10% (in red) and those whose share of transactions by
multi-homing sellers is greater than the cuto (in black). In the bottom panel, the zip codes are divided into
two groups: markets where the dierence between Rover and DogVacay in the number of buyers relative to
sellers is larger than 1.5 (in red) and those where the dierence is lower than the cuto (in black). We focus
on market-level match rates and match rates on the Rover platform. Across all panels, coe cients in red
denote zip codes where we would expect the improvements from the merger to be bigger (as per our theory
extensions in Appendix A). Otherwise the figure is identical to Figure 5. Other outcomes are presented in
Appendix Figures B.4, B.5, and B.6.


    A second dimension of heterogeneity is the propensity to multi-home. In the extreme
case and aside from capacity constraints, if one side of users--buyers or sellers--fully multi-
home, every user has access to every other user in the market, so combining the two plat-
forms should have no eect on the number and type of services available to each user. Given
that sellers are more likely to multi-home, we look at dierential eects of merging the two

                                                     32
platforms by sellers' propensity to multi-home. In the median zip code, 8.37% of 2016 trans-
actions were supplied by multi-homing sellers. The heterogeneity across zip codes, with an
average of 23.5% and a standard deviation of 29.9%, is quite large. We separate zip codes
at the 10% cuto, i.e., where 10% of transactions are supplied by multi-homing sellers. We
would expect larger benefits from merging the two platforms to occur in markets with a
smaller propensity to multi-home.
    Figure 7b displays the results of matched sample regressions for markets with low
propensity (red) and high propensity to multi-home (black). Similarly to what we found for
market size, Rover match rates increase monotonically in the market share of the acquired
platform, while market-level match rates are similar between treatment and control groups,
regardless of sellers' propensity to multi-home.
    Lastly, we consider heterogeneity by the dierences in the buyer to seller ratio. As
discussed in Appendix A, we would expect that the gains from merging the two platforms
are greatest for markets with the largest dierences in the number of buyers relative to
sellers across the two competing platforms. In Figure 7c we display the treatment eects
split by whether the dierences in the number of buyers for every seller is greater than 1.5.
We find some evidence that merging the two platforms led to larger benefits to the Rover
match rate in the markets with a larger dierence in the relative number of buyers per seller
(red), although the results are noisy.


7    Conclusions

There is a heated debate over antitrust regulation of online platforms (Scott Morton et al.,
2019). To maximize user surplus, should we increase competition or allow monopolies?
On one hand, competition among platforms may keep commission fees down so that the
share of total surplus going to platform users--buyers and sellers--is maximized. On the
other hand, if network eects are large enough such that it is more e cient to have all
users participating on a single platform rather than having users spread across multiple
platforms, e ciency may counterbalance the costs of a monopolistic position.
    In this paper, we show that there is another important dimension to consider in addition



                                             33
to network eects and pricing power when evaluating platform mergers ­ platform dieren-
tiation. Using the merger of the two largest platforms for pet sitting services into a single
platform, we evaluate how merging two platforms dierentially aects markets that were
already eectively experiencing a single platform--because the acquiring platform already
had over 80% of the market--versus markets where the two platforms were competing on
equal grounds.
   We find that the acquiring platform experiences network eects, as evidenced by in-
creased participation of existing users who see their choice sets expand from the influx of
users from the acquired platform. However, on average at the market level, users are equally
well o with one or two platforms, as evidenced by the constant number of transactions,
match rates, and proxies for match quality. Combined with our evidence that platform
prices did not increase post-acquisition, our results suggest that, on average, a single plat-
form does not provide substantially larger consumer surplus than the sum of two competing
platforms. The average market level result is a function of dierential eects of merging
the two platforms across users. In particular, we find that users of the acquiring platforms
benefit from the merger at the expense of users of the acquired platform, who are leaving
the market. Some of this attrition is likely driven by the importance of repeat transactions,
a reduction in product variety, and switching costs. These results do not take into account
the possibility that the merger caused some disintermediation--in which case measured ac-
tivity using platform data would underestimate the true amount of surplus created in the
market.
   Our study focuses on platforms that intermediate local and time-sensitive services.
These platforms are well-suited for causal analysis of network eects because they allow
us to observe geographically separate markets exchanging services under similar platform
rules. Our results and methods are most likely generalizable to other local platforms such
as Lyft and Uber, or Doordash and Uber Eats. Many important platforms also enjoy global
network eects across geographies, such as platforms for virtual work like Upwork, or app
platforms like iOS and Android. For these platforms, a dierent empirical strategy would
be required to estimate network eects.
   These results have important implications for platform competition and antitrust regula-


                                             34
tion. In our context, competition between two platforms and a single platform is comparable
in terms of prices charged as well as the quantity and quality of services exchanged. To-
gether with the fact that platform commission fees did not increase after the acquisition
and that kennels and dog hotels still constitute a large share of the market for pet sitting
services, our results point to the merged platform being better able to compete with in-
cumbents by reducing fixed and customer acquisition costs. These considerations would of
course be dierent in a context where the acquiring platform were the only option to access
pet sitting services.
   The null eect at the market level occurs despite the presence of network eects that exist
at the platform level, and despite the fact that the two platforms appear so similar in the
way they intermediate services. In other contexts where mergers occur between platforms
that are not as close substitutes, horizontal preferences and user attrition are likely to play
an even bigger role when comparing a single dominant platform versus multiple competitors.
In those cases, it may be particularly important to ensure platform competition. Beyond
the context of pet sitting platforms, we provide a road-map to measure network eects
in other settings and to evaluate important heterogeneities across user groups and market
types.
   We have also focused on local, as opposed to global eects. We are able to measure
whether people living in the same geography are better o with two competing platforms
versus a single platform. Our paper does not speak to whether it is better for consumers
to have two platforms with non-overlapping geographic presence or a single platform active
in all geographies (Zhu et al., 2019), nor are we able to measure cost e ciencies from the
acquisition. Extending our analysis to estimate externalities across geographic clusters and
cost savings is a fruitful avenue for future research.




                                              35
References

Armstrong, M. (2006): "Competition in two-sided markets," The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 37, 668­691. 6

Arnosti, N., R. Johari, and Y. Kanoria (2018): "Managing congestion in matching
  markets," Working Paper. 8

Aronow, P. M., C. Samii, and V. A. Assenova (2015): "Cluster­robust variance
  estimation for dyadic data," Political Analysis, 564­577. 21

Bakos, Y. and H. Halaburda (2019): "Platform competition with multihoming on both
  sides: Subsidize or not?" Working Paper. 7, 8

Berry, S. T. and J. Waldfogel (1999): "Free entry and social ine ciency in radio
  broadcasting," RAND Journal of Economics, 30, 397­420. 7

Boudreau, K. (2010): "Open platform strategies and innovation: Granting access vs.
  devolving control," Management science, 56, 1849­1872. 6

Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien (2003): "Chicken & egg: Competition among intermedia-
  tion service providers," RAND journal of Economics, 309­328. 6

Chandra, A. and A. Collard-Wexler (2009): "Mergers in two-sided markets: An
  application to the Canadian newspaper industry," Journal of Economics & Management
  Strategy, 18, 1045­1070. 7

Chavent, M., V. Kuentz-Simonet, A. Labenne, and J. Saracco (2018): "Clust-
  Geo: an R package for hierarchical clustering with spatial constraints," Computational
  Statistics, 33, 1799­1822. 44, 45

Chu, J. and P. Manchanda (2016): "Quantifying cross and direct network eects in
  online consumer-to-consumer platforms," Marketing Science, 35, 870­893. 7

Cullen, Z. and C. Farronato (Forthcoming): "Outsourcing tasks online: Matching
  supply and demand on peer-to-peer internet platforms," Management Science. 3, 8


                                            36
Cunningham, C., F. Ederer, and S. Ma (2019): "Killer acquisitions," Available at
  SSRN 3241707. 11

Cusumano, M. A., A. Gawer, and D. B. Yoffie (2019): The Business of Platforms:
  Strategy in the Age of Digital Competition, Innovation, and Power, HarperBusiness. 2

   ´, J.-P. H., G. J. Hitsch, and P. K. Chintagunta (2010): "Tipping and con-
Dube
  centration in markets with indirect network eects," Marketing Science, 29, 216­249.
  7

Farrell, J. and G. Saloner (1985): "Standardization, compatibility, and innovation,"
  Rand Journal of Economics, 16. 6

Fong, J. (2019): "Search, selectivity, and market thickness in two-sided markets," Working
  Paper. 8

Fradkin, A. (2018): "Search, matching, and the role of digital marketplace design in
  enabling trade: evidence from Airbnb," Working Paper. 8

Gandal, N. (1994): "Hedonic price indexes for spreadsheets and an empirical test for
  network externalities," the RAND Journal of Economics, 160­170. 7

Gowrisankaran, G. and J. Stavins (2004): "Network externalities and technology
  adoption: lessons from electronic payments," RAND Journal of Economics, 35, 260­276.
  7

Greenstein, S. M. (1993): "Did installed base give an incumbent any (measureable)
  advantages in federal computer procurement?" The RAND Journal of Economics, 19­39.
  7

Hagiu, A. and J. Wright (2014): "Marketplace or reseller?" Management Science, 61,
  184­203. 6

Holtz, D. M. and S. Aral (2018): "Limiting Bias from Test-Control Interference in
  Online Marketplace Experiments," Working Paper. 44



                                           37
Horton, J. J. (2019): "Buyer uncertainty about seller capacity: Causes, consequences,
  and a partial solution," Management Science. 8

Imai, K., I. S. Kim, and E. Wang (2018): "Matching methods for causal inference with
  time-series cross-section data," Working Paper. 20

Imai, K. and M. Ratkovic (2014): "Covariate balancing propensity score," Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 76, 243­263. 21

Jeziorski, P. (2014a): "Eects of Mergers in Two-Sided Markets: The US Radio Indus-
  try," 6, 35­73. 7

------ (2014b): "Estimation of Cost E ciencies from Mergers: Application to US Radio,"
  45, 816­846. 7

Kabra, A., E. Belavina, and K. Girotra (2017): "Designing promotions to scale
  marketplaces," Working Paper. 8

Katz, M. L., C. Shapiro, et al. (1985): "Network externalities, competition, and com-
  patibility," American economic review, 75, 424­440. 6

Kawaguchi, K., T. Kuroda, and S. Sato (2020): "Merger Analysis in the App Econ-
  omy: An Empirical Model of Ad-Sponsored Media," . 7

Li, J. and S. Netessine (Forthcoming): "Higher Market Thickness Reduces Matching
  Rate in Online Platforms: Evidence from a Quasiexperiment," Management Science. 8

Nikzad, A. (2020): "Thickness and Competition in On-demand Service Platforms,"
  Working Paper. 6

Parker, G. G. and M. W. Van Alstyne (2005): "Two-sided network eects: A theory
  of information product design," Management science, 51, 1494­1504. 6

Reshef, O. (2019): "Smaller Slices of a Growing Pie: The Eects of Entry in Platform
  Markets," . 8

Rochet, J.-C. and J. Tirole (2003): "Platform competition in two-sided markets,"
  Journal of the european economic association, 1, 990­1029. 2, 6

                                            38
Rysman, M. (2004): "Competition between networks: A study of the market for yellow
  pages," The Review of Economic Studies, 71, 483­512. 7

Saloner, G. and A. Shepard (1995): "Adoption of technologies with network eects:
  an empirical examination of the adoption of automated teller machines," The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 26, 479­501. 7

Scott Morton, F., P. Bouvier, A. Ezrachi, B. Jullien, R. Katz, G. Kimmelman,
  A. Melamed, and J. Morgenstern (2019): "Committee for the Study of Digital
  Platforms: Market Structure and Antitrust Subcommittee-Report," Chicago: Stigler
  Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, University of Chicago Booth School
  of Business. 33

Singer, P. (2015): Animal liberation: The definitive classic of the animal movement, Open
  Road Media. 24

Tan, G. and J. Zhou (2020): "The Eects of Competition and Entry in Multi-sided
  Markets," The Review of Economic Studies. 6

Weyl, E. G. (2010): "A price theory of multi-sided platforms," American Economic
  Review, 100, 1642­72. 6, 7

Zhu, F. and M. Iansiti (2012):           "Entry into platform-based markets," Strategic
  Management Journal, 33, 88­106. 6

Zhu, F., X. Li, E. Valavi, and M. Iansiti (2019): "Network Interconnectivity and
  Entry into Platform Markets," Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Mgt.
  Unit Working Paper, 19­06. 35




                                            39
