                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT:
                         TAKING THE LONG VIEW

                                 Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
                                       Michael R. Strain

                                      Working Paper 28041
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28041


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2020, Revised November 2020




The authors thank Jacob Bastian, Jeffrey Clemens, Bob Greenstein, Hilary Hoynes, Jonathan
Meer, Bruce Meyer, Robert Moffitt, Jesse Rothstein, Daniel Shoag, and Stan Veuger for helpful
discussions. We thank Abigail Pitts and Sachin Shukla, and especially Duncan Hobbs, for
excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Michael R. Strain. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employment Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit: Taking the Long View
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Michael R. Strain
NBER Working Paper No. 28041
October 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. H2,J08,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is the cornerstone U.S. anti-poverty program for families
with children, typically lifting millions of children out of poverty each year. Targeted to low-
income households with children, and only available to those who work, the EITC contains
strong incentives for non-workers to become employed. Most of the existing economics literature
focuses on federal EITC expansions in the 1980s and 1990s. This paper takes a longer view,
studying all federal expansions since the program's inception in 1975. We find robust evidence
that EITC expansions increase the extensive margin of labor supply.


Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

Michael R. Strain
American Enterprise Institute
1789 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and IZA
michael.strain@aei.org
       The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has been widely hailed as one of the most
successful anti-poverty programs in the United States. The EITC provides a financial benefit to
low-income, working households, raising their annual incomes through a refundable tax credit
that varies based on total labor market earnings and household size. In addition, by raising the
financial returns to paid employment, the EITC provides an incentive to low-income individuals
who are not working to participate in the labor market.
       Whether this incentive leads to an increase in labor supply among the EITC's target
population has been studied by economists, primarily by investigating individual credit
expansions (e.g., Bastian, 2020, and Eissa and Leibman, 1996) or groups of selected expansions
together (e.g., Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001). Most of the literature has focused on the
expansions of the 1980s and 1990s.
       This paper takes a longer view, studying all federal EITC expansions together, with a
unified empirical framework, using modern econometric methods. This approach has several
advantages. It allows for a reexamination of the expansions of the 1980s and 1990s using
difference-in-differences and event-study techniques, including studying the dynamic effect of
the EITC on the extensive margin of labor supply. By using the same sample definitions and
methods, it allows readers to compare how different expansions have affected employment. It
also allows us to study all five federal expansions in the same specifications.
       We find broad support for the hypothesis that the EITC's labor supply incentives increase
employment. We first study each of the five EITC expansions separately. Our preferred
specification allows for business cycle effects to vary by the presence of children in the
household. It is clearly important to control for the business cycle, and to allow for business
cycle effects to vary by household composition, since EITC expansions increase employment
incentives for some households with children relative to household without children. As a result,
EITC effects are identified here (and in the literature) by comparing employment outcomes
across years and between households with children and those without children. We find evidence
that four of the five EITC expansions -- the program's introduction in 1975, and the 1986, 1990,
and 1993 expansions -- increased the share of women with lower education levels who reported
working in the previous year. This conclusion is based both on difference-in-differences analyses
and on an event-study approach.




                                                                                                   2
        We then examine the 1993 expansion more closely. The credit expansion in 1993 was
large, and it occurred during a period in which many states were experimenting with changes to
their welfare policies that were designed to increase employment -- for example, implementing
time limits on the receipt of cash welfare. 1 Because these policy changes happened concurrently,
estimates of the 1993 EITC expansion's employment effect could be confounded by the effects
of state-level welfare reform policies on employment. We use a straightforward method to study
whether the 1993 ETIC expansion increased employment independent of changes to state
welfare policies: We estimate the credit expansion's effect only in states that did not enact
welfare reforms. We find strong EITC impacts on employment in these states, building
confidence that the 1993 EITC expansion increased employment separate and apart from any
employment effects from state welfare reform policies.
        We then attempt to estimate "the" EITC-employment effect by pooling all expansions
together in one difference-in-difference model. The purpose of this exercise is to study whether
the program as a whole -- apart from individual expansions -- affects labor supply, and to
quantify the magnitude of the effect. We use variation over time and states in the size of the
maximum EITC credit to estimate the employment response and find robust evidence of an
extensive-margin effect. When studying all federal expansions together, we find that a $1,000
increase in the size of the maximum credit is associated with a 3.0 to 3.3 percentage point
increase in employment among unmarried mothers with low levels of education. When
examining both federal and state expansions together, we find a 2.6 to 2.9 percentage point
increase in employment.
        These magnitudes are reasonable. For example, for unmarried mothers with two children,
the maximum credit increased by $2,045 (in nominal dollars) following the 1993 expansion, and
by 1996, among the population of unmarried women with a high school diploma or less,
employment among those with two children increased by 11 percentage points relative those
without children. Applying our estimates suggests that the EITC expansion explains 83 percent
of the increase in employment rates among this group during this period.
        Finally, we study the dynamic effect of all five federal expansions simultaneously in an
event-study framework. We find strong evidence that the EITC increased employment, as a


1
 Meyer and Rosenbaum (2000) offer a comprehensive summary and analysis of the social-policy changes of the
1990s.


                                                                                                             3
whole and when pooling all federal expansions. The dynamic effect of the EITC in the pre-
expansion period suggests that the treatment and control groups were evolving similarly and
supports a causal interpretation of the post-period estimates. On average, we find the EITC
increased employment among low-education unmarried mothers with children by around
3.9 percentage points.
       To our knowledge, the only other paper to look comprehensively at all five federal EITC
expansions is Kleven (2019), a working paper. Kleven notes that the large increase in
employment among unmarried mothers in the 1990s occurred concurrently with both the EITC
expansion and many states' implementation of cash welfare reforms aimed at reducing welfare
rolls. He attempts to separate the impacts of state welfare reforms from the EITC expansion and
concludes that the EITC benefit increase did not cause the employment increase. Kleven also
finds that no other federal EITC expansion is associated with employment increases among the
targeted population.
       We are able to reconcile our results by adopting his methodological choices. Specifically,
by omitting business cycle controls, broadening the sample to include all unmarried women, and
by defining the outcome variable as whether single mothers overall reported working in the
previous week as opposed to during the year. We argue that our empirical approach is preferable
because the business cycle likely affects employment decisions, and indeed may impact single
women with children differently than those without children. Further, we argue it is preferable to
investigate the impact of the EITC on individuals with low levels of education, as the credit's
target population is low-income households. Including individuals with high education levels,
who generally earn too much to be eligible for the EITC, attenuates the true policy effect.
Studying whether the EITC affects labor supply over the year helps to ensure that the outcome
variable is more representative of actual labor supply behavior than studying whether the
respondent worked in the week prior to the survey. In addition, the EITC is a policy that operates
on an annual frequency, so studying whether it affects employment at any point in the year,
rather than in the week prior to the survey week, better aligns the outcome variable with the
structure of the policy. Regarding the 1993 expansion specifically, Kleven (2019) relies upon a
three-way fixed effect controlling for whether a state had welfare waivers interacted by year
interacted by whether children are present in the household. We argue that this approach absorbs




                                                                                                  4
much of the true employment effect of the EITC, which is identified by comparing households
with and without children before and after credit expansions.
        The paper proceeds as follows. In section 1, we provide background on the EITC and a
brief review of the prior literature. Section 2 provides an overview of the data we use. Section 3
studies the impacts of individual EITC expansions separately, using difference-in-differences
and event study approaches. We then study the 1993 expansion in more detail and attempt to
reconcile our findings with other recent work. Section 4 considers all five EITC reforms
together, and section 5 concludes.


    1. Background on the EITC
        The EITC lifts millions of people, including several million children, out of poverty each
year (Renwick & Fox 2016, Bitler, Hoynes & Kuka 2017, Meyer & Wu 2018, Jones & Ziliak
2019). 2 About 1 in 6 tax returns (17.6 percent) claimed the EITC in 2017, receiving a total of
$66.4 billion in tax credits. The calculation of the credit depends on a household's earnings, their
filing status (married or unmarried), and the number of eligible children in the household. In
2020, the maximum tax credit ranges from $3,584 for those with 1 child to $6,660 for those with
3 children and can make up as much as 45 percent of a family's pre-tax income. The average
credit received for unmarried parents is about $2,400 for those with 1 child, $3,850 with 2
children, and $4,250 for a single parent with 3 children (Crandall-Hollick & Falk, 2020).
        The EITC is structured with three ranges of payments, with a payment schedule that is
shaped like a trapezoid (see Appendix Figure 1). The incentives and impacts of the EITC on
workers vary across these ranges. In the phase-in range, the tax credit increases with every
additional dollar of earnings -- meaning that for every additional hour worked, a recipient's
income will increase by more than their hourly wage. Currently the phase-in range extends to
annual earnings of just over $10,000 for a single parent with 1 child (and just below $15,000 for
those with 2 or more children). Over the next range of earnings, the tax credit remains constant
-- unchanged at the maximum payment level regardless of additional earnings. From a


2
  EITC receipt is imputed in the Current Population Survey, but captures fewer than half of EITC dollars reported in
IRS administrative data, possibly due to underreporting of earnings in the CPS or payments to ineligible claimants
included in the IRS data (Meyer, 2010). Jones and Ziliak (2020) show that the anti-poverty effects of the EITC are
overstated in standard simulations. They estimate using administrative records that 3.1 million persons were lifted
out of poverty by the EITC in 2016, about one-third fewer than estimated by survey-based tax simulators.


                                                                                                                   5
recipient's perspective, having earnings in this range of the EITC payment schedule means that
every additional hour worked increases a recipient's income by the hourly wage amount, but a
worker's total income is increased quite substantially by the EITC payment -- 31 to 39 percent
for a single worker with 2 children, depending on where in the range they fall. Once earnings
pass $19,330 ($25,220 for married couples with children), the worker moves into the phase-out
range in which the tax credit is slowly reduced with each additional dollar earned. From the
worker's perspective, this means that each additional hour worked results in a total income
increase that is less than the wage amount, because the EITC payment is reduced as earnings
rise. Those earning in excess of $43,000 to $56,000 (depending on marital status and number of
children) are no longer eligible for the EITC.
       For unmarried potential low-earning workers who are not currently employed, the
incentives are clear: by raising the payoff to working, the EITC increases incentives to become
employed. Since EITC payments are calculated based on annual earnings, economic theory
predicts that low-income workers will be more likely to be employed over the course of the year
but there is no prediction about how earnings will be spread throughout the year. (For example, a
worker may get to 1000 hours of work through full-year part-time work or partial-year full-time
work.) The EITC likely has a much larger impact on the labor supply decisions of individuals
with low levels of education, as those individuals are more likely to be heading low-income
households.
       EITC payment levels have increased over time in response to discrete policy changes,
including substantial expansions as part of the tax acts of 1975, 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2009, as
shown in Figure 1. Some expansions have been large -- for example, over 3 years the 1993
reform more than doubled the maximum EITC payment for those with 2 or more children --
while others have been more modest. In some cases (1993 and 2009), expansions increased the
EITC disproportionately for families with different numbers of children. In addition, 29 states
plus the District of Columbia have adopted supplemental state EITC programs. Together, these
policy changes have provided ample variation for researchers to isolate the impact of the EITC
on employment, income, and a wide range of other outcomes.
       Of course, it is worth noting that families do not receive the EITC until the following
calendar year, after they file their taxes. To the extent that there is learning about EITC
parameters, it may take multiple years because of the delay in timing between work effort (in



                                                                                                   6
calendar year t) and payment receipt (in calendar year t+1). Recent results from a randomized-
controlled trial of the Paycheck Plus program in New York City, similar in structure to the EITC
but available to those without children, finds that the program's impacts on employment rates are
zero the first year, but positive in years two and three, suggesting there may be a delay between
policy implementation and behavioral response on the extensive margin (Miller et al. 2018). We
examine timing of employment effects in our event-study analyses below.
       There have been many papers studying the EITC and a number of comprehensive
reviews of the literature (Hotz & Scholz 2003; Eissa & Hoynes 2006; Nichols & Rothstein 2015;
Hoynes & Rothstein 2017). Researchers have utilized variation across tax years and family sizes,
generally comparing outcomes among low-educated unmarried women with and without
children. As shown in Figure 2, in the 1970s and 1980s, unmarried childless women with a high
school diploma or less education on average were 15 percentage points more likely to be
employed than those with children, with the gap narrowing and expanding at various points.
Starting around 1988, the difference in employment rates began to sharply close so that by 1999
and continuing through 2018 unmarried mothers with low education levels were more likely to
be employed than childless women.
       Using a range of data sources and approaches, studies nearly universally find substantial
positive impacts of the EITC on employment among single mothers with low levels of education.
Notably, Eissa and Liebman (1996) find that the 1986 EITC expansion increased employment
among single women with children by 2.8 percentage points compared to those without children.
Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) find that the 1986, 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions increased
employment among unmarried mothers relative to unmarried childless women by 7.2 percentage
points. Hoynes and Patel (2018) estimate that the 1993 expansion increased employment by 6.1
percentage points among unmarried mothers with some college or less compared with childless
women with the same education, with larger impacts for single mothers with 2 or more children.
Bastian (2020) investigates the 1975 introduction of the EITC, finding that maternal employment
increased by 6 percent relative to childless women. Bastian and Jones (2000) find weakly
positive impacts of the 2009 federal expansion on women with 3 or more children (including
married and unmarried, and all education levels), in comparison to women without children as
well as mothers with 1 or 2 children.




                                                                                                    7
       While much of the prior literature is based on the CPS and federal EITC expansions,
prior research using a wider range of data and research designs also find positive impacts on
employment. Neumark and Wascher (2002) use variation in state-level EITC payments,
comparing low-income families with children across states with different state-EITC payments,
and find it increases employment and raises families out of poverty. Bastian and Lochner (2020)
use the American Time Use Survey to examine the 2009 federal expansion and find that
maternal employment time increases among unmarried mothers. Gelber and Mitchell (2012) find
in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) that unmarried women were more likely to
participate in the labor force in response to changes in the EITC that increased the average net-
of-tax share of income kept. Importantly, their results are robust to the inclusion of individual
fixed effects. Neumark and Shirley (2020) find in the PSID that exposure to a more generous
EITC when mothers were unmarried and had older school-age children leads to higher earnings
in the longer-run; that longer-run exposure of unmarried mothers to a more generous EITC
increases cumulative labor market experience; and that exposure to a more generous EITC when
women had children while married leads to lower earnings and hours in the longer-run. Kuka and
Shenhav (2020) use linked CPS and Social Security administration data and a research design
that uses both EITC expansions and the timing of a woman's first birth, finding that mothers who
were exposed to an EITC expansion when their children were younger were more likely to
become employed than those first exposed when their children were somewhat older.
       The EITC's impact has also been widely studied along other dimensions, including its
(small) effects on marriage and fertility (Dickert-Conlin & Houser 2002; Holtzblatt & Rebelein
2000; Michelmore 2014; Baughman & Dickert-Conlin 2009), its effects on economic indicators
of economic self-sufficiency in disadvantaged neighborhoods (Neumark, Asquith & Bass 2019),
its ability to improve health outcomes among infants as well as mothers (Evans & Garthwaite
2014; Baughman & Duchovny 2016; Hoynes, Miller & Simon 2015), and its positive impacts on
children's school test scores and educational attainment (Dahl & Lochner 2012; Chetty,
Friedman & Rockoff 2011), as well as college enrollment (Bastian & Michelmore 2018; Manoli
& Turner 2018) and adult health (Braga, Blavin & Gangopadhyaya 2020). It has also been
shown to have only a small impact on hours worked among those already employed (Saez 2010),
but instead most of the impact on labor supply comes through moving individuals from not
working to working. The prior literature has found no impacts of the EITC on employment rates



                                                                                                    8
of married fathers (who have employment rates in excess of 95 percent) and either small
negative or no impact on employment among married mothers (Eissa & Hoynes, 2004).


    2. Data
         We use data from the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC) for the years 1971-2015 for our primary analysis. These data include
information on annual employment in the year prior to the survey as well as demographic
characteristics as of the interview date (marital status, presence of children, education level)
required to determine likely EITC eligibility. Following Kleven (2019), we supplement this
analysis with information on whether the respondent worked in the week prior to the interview
date, drawn from both the ASEC and CPS monthly files from 1989-2015. 3 Recall that the CPS
ASEC asks about whether a respondent worked in the prior year, so data on employment in year
t come from the ASEC survey in year t+1. Our primary analysis sample includes unmarried
women ages 20-50 with a high school diploma or less education, as this is the group most
impacted by the EITC. 4 We drop observations with missing weights, state (or state group prior to
1977) identifiers, or educational attainment. Summary statistics are presented in Appendix
Table 1.
         Data on federal EITC parameters come from the Tax Policy Center and are graphed in
Appendix Figure 1. 5 We code the expansions enacted in 1975, 1987 and 2009 with binary
indicators. Since the EITC expansions passed in the tax acts of 1990 and 1993 were phased in
over multiple-year periods, we assign treatment in proportion to the phase-in amount. In
particular, for those with 1 child, the 1993 expansion was phased in over 2 years, with 92 percent
of the eventual increase implemented in 1994 and the expansion complete in 1995; we code the

3
  Although CPS monthly files are available starting in 1976, it is not possible to accurately identify the presence and
number of own children in the household (which is necessary for determining the relevant EITC parameters) for
years prior to 1989. We link children to parents using household ID and mother location to determine if a woman is
living with any children eligible for the EITC, which includes own children in the household under age 19, or under
24 and a full-time student. Throughout, we use "children" to refer to EITC-eligible children, and we drop the small
fraction of single women who have EITC-ineligible children living at home.
4
  Prior to 1992, respondents were not specifically asked whether they received a high school diploma, so it is
impossible to determine whether someone who reported schooling through 12th grade had a diploma or not. The CPS
codes those who report 12th grade education prior to 1992 as "12th grade diploma unclear." We code this group as
high school graduates; results are qualitatively unchanged if we include a separate control for "12th grade diploma
unclear" as a separate education category.
5
  We cross-checked the Tax Policy Center parameters with the 1994 and 1996 Green Books, and the law as passed
by Congress.


                                                                                                                     9
EITC expansion variable to be 0.92 in 1994 and 1 in 1995. For those with 2 or more children, the
1993 expansion was phased in over 3 years, with 50 percent of the eventual total implemented in
1994, 78 percent by 1995, and full implementation by 1996; we code those expansions 0.5, 0.78,
and 1 for years 1994, 1995 and 1996, respectively. Similarly, the 1990 expansion was phased in
over 3 years, with 50 percent of the eventual increase by 1991, 77 percent by 1992, and full
implementation by 1993. 6 We also include information on state EITC parameters over time,
drawn from the Tax Policy Center and the National Bureau of Economic Research, compiled in
Kleven (2019), and presented in Appendix Table 2. We also include data on whether a state had
an Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) welfare waiver approved prior to the 1996
welfare reform law, drawn from the Department of Health and Human Services. Thirty-six states
had a welfare waiver, as shown in Appendix Table 3. Unemployment rates by state and year are
calculated from the CPS.


    3. Examining the Effects of Individual EITC Expansions
        In this section, we estimate the effects of individual federal EITC expansions on
employment, first using difference-in-differences approaches and then studying the dynamic
effect of each individual expansion using event studies. Then, we more closely examine the 1993
reform, attempting to disentangle the EITC's impact on employment from that of states'
experiments with welfare reform prior to the 1996 federal welfare reform legislation. We next
reconcile our results with Kleven (2019) by adopting the methodological choices used in that
paper, which finds that the only EITC expansion which might have increased employment was
1993, and that employment increases in the mid-1990s are better explained by state welfare
waivers than by the credit expansion. We find the opposite. Specifically, we find evidence that
multiple credit expansions, not just 1993, are associated with employment increases, and we find
that the 1993 EITC expansion had a significant effect on employment, independent from welfare
reform experiments.




6
 These are parameters for 1-child families; for those with 2 or more children, 51 percent was implemented by 1991
and 77 percent was implemented by 1992.


                                                                                                               10
    a. Difference in differences estimates
        We first examine the employment effects of each of the federal EITC expansions
adopted, respectively, by the tax acts of 1975, 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2009. We examine each
expansion in separate regressions, limiting the sample to five years before and after the EITC
expansion took effect. In each case, we compare employment rates of unmarried mothers to
those of unmarried childless women, before vs. after the EITC expansion. This natural
experiment was first used by Eissa and Liebman (1996). We adopt a standard and transparent
difference-in-differences framework for this analysis:


          =  +  +   +  + (   ) +  +  +  .                                                             (1)


        The outcome,  , is an indicator for whether individual i living in state s is employed in
year t, and EITC is the EITC-eligible variable coded as described above. Explanatory variables
include an indicator variable ( ) for the presence of EITC-eligible children living at home,
the vector  includes individual characteristics including the woman's age (dummied out into 5-
year age groups, plus 45-50), their education level (less than high school, high school only, more
than high school), and the age of their youngest child (0-1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-9, 10-13, 14-17, 18-23).
We include state and year fixed effects ( and  ) to account for time-invariant differences
across states, and annual shocks that are common across states. In most specifications we add
controls for the annual average state unemployment rate  to account for general economic and
labor market conditions, and further augment it with the state unemployment rate interacted with
the presence of children (   ) to account for potential differential business cycle effects
on those with and without children.
        The coefficient of interest is on the indicator variable equal to one for the five years after
the EITC expansion and equal to zero otherwise. 7 Recall EITC is a binary variable for the
expansions passed in 1975, 1986 and 2009, and phases in with the 1990 and 1993 expansions. 8
Where appropriate, the EITC variable differs by number of children in the household.


7
  We tested and found that shortening the post-EITC expansion window to 4 years for the 1986 and 1990 expansions
so the post-periods would not overlap with a subsequent expansion does not meaningfully change the results.
8
  Results that specify the 1990 and 1993 expansions using binary indicators instead of phased-in shares are shown in
Appendix Table 4. The magnitudes are slightly attenuated relative to the phased-in approach, but the findings are
still positive and statistically significant.


                                                                                                                 11
         Results are displayed in Table 1. Panel A limits the sample to women with low levels of
education, defined as having completed high school or less. This is the most appropriate of the
two samples we use, since the EITC is targeted to those with low levels of earnings -- although
still of course EITC takeup is far from universal. Columns (1) through (3) present our preferred
outcome measure of the two we study, which equals one if the individual was employed during
the year and zero if not. This outcome variable, as opposed to the outcome variable measuring
whether the respondent was employed in the week prior to the survey, is likely the more
representative of labor supply patterns throughout the year, and because the frequency of the
EITC is annual, studying annual employment is the better analytical choice. The first column
omits controls for unemployment rates, while column (2) includes the annual state
unemployment rate, and column (3) interacts state unemployment rate with the presence of
children, allowing the business cycle to affect mothers and childless women differently, and is
our preferred specification.
         As shown in column (3), our preferred difference-in-differences estimate finds that the
1975 introduction of the EITC increased annual employment rates among single mothers with
low education levels by 6.2 percentage points. 9 The 1986 expansion increased single mothers'
annual employment by 2.3 percentage points. Estimates of the 1975 and 1986 EITC impacts are
more sensitive to the inclusion of unemployment rate interacted with presence of children than
later expansions are, as unmarried mothers' employment is less strongly correlated with overall
employment during these early periods than for the expansions in the 1990s and 2000s.
         Next, we consider the 1990 EITC expansion, which as described above was phased in
over a 3-year period (1991-93). The difference-in-differences estimate indicates that the EITC
expansion increased low-education single mothers' annual employment by 4.9 percentage
points. 10
         The 1993 EITC expansion was larger than prior boosts, especially for mothers with 2 or
more children. Employment among unmarried mothers increased by 9.3 percentage points in the
post-expansion period, after accounting for state unemployment rates and allowing their impacts

9
  From 1968-1972, 32 states cannot be separately identified and from 1973-1976, 38 states cannot be separately
identified in the CPS. We calculate unemployment rates for all identified state-groups. Note that for the 1975 and
1986 expansions the estimates are more affected by the inclusion of controls for the state unemployment rate
interacted with the presence of children.
10
   Both the 1986 and 1990 expansion 5-year post-periods run up against the next EITC expansion. Results are
qualitatively similar if we limit the analysis to 4 years after the expansions.


                                                                                                                     12
to differ for women with and without children in the home. Each of these individual EITC
expansions (1975, 1986, 1990 and 1993) show positive, statistically significant effects on
mothers' annual employment.
        The exception to this pattern is the 2009 EITC expansion. In this case, the EITC was
expanded among unmarried women only for those with three or more children. For this
expansion, we code the control group to include only unmarried women with two children. 11 We
do not find that this expansion has a significant impact on treated women's employment rates,
although other recent papers employing different research designs do find weakly positive
employment effects (Bastian & Jones, 2020; Bastian & Lochner, 2020). It is worth noting that
this expansion occurred during a period of high unemployment and a subsequent slow jobs
recovery, and it is plausible that some women who wanted to work could not find employment.
        Because the EITC is based on annual earnings, we concur with the prior literature and
conclude that annual employment rates are the most appropriate outcome measure. However, to
address concerns raised by Kleven (2019), we augment these results with information on
employment in the prior week, including additional data from the CPS monthly files where
possible. We find that this alternative outcome variable does not change the general conclusion
from using annual employment. The general patterns shown for annual employment persist when
we examine weekly employment in columns (4)-(6). The 1975, 1990 and 1993 expansions
continue to have a positive, significant impact on mothers' employment, but the 1986 EITC
expansion no longer has a statistically significant impact once state unemployment rates are
interacted with presence of children.
        Panel B expands the analysis to all single women, regardless of education level. Fewer
women with higher levels of education have earnings in the range that would make them eligible
for EITC payments, so we would not expect them to have strong responses to EITC incentives.
By including these women in the treatment group, we expect the estimates to be attenuated
relative to Panel A. Moreover, the presence of higher-educated women in the control group also
muddles the comparison between treatment and control groups.




11
   The 2009 expansion also extended the range over which married filers receive the maximum EITC. Meyer (2010)
finds that trends in employment between unmarried women who are childless, and have 1, 2 or 3 children are not
different from 1999-2007, indicating the parallel pre-trend assumption holds in 2009.


                                                                                                            13
        Even so, using this approach, the 1975, 1990 and 1993 expansions are individually
statistically significant for both annual and weekly employment. The 1986 expansion is no
longer statistically significant once the impact of state unemployment rates is allowed to vary by
presence of children.


    b. Event-Study Estimates
        Figure 3 displays event-study estimates using our preferred set of control variables and
sample. Specifically, they present estimates of the dynamic effect of individual EITC expansions
on the annual employment of women with low levels of education, controlling for state
unemployment rate interacted with an indicator variable for the presence of children in the
household (i.e., Table 1, Panel A, Column 3). We graph estimates of  from the following
equation, estimated over years -5 to 4 (where year 0 is the first year in which the EITC reform is
implemented):


                      =   =    +  +   + 
                            -1

                           + (   ) +  +  +  .                         (2)


        Panel A displays results from the 1975 EITC expansion. Notice that the estimates of
event-time prior to the expansion are all zero and display no trend. The EITC expansion
increases unmarried mothers' employment rates. In each post-expansion year, the yearly
coefficient is individually statistically significant. Panel B shows results from the 1986
expansion. Again, there are no pre-trends, and strong increases in employment in the post period,
with the exception of the first post-expansion year which is smaller and not individually
significant.
        Panel C displays results from the 1990 expansion, which was phased in so that in 1991,
50 percent of the eventual expansion was available to those with one child and 51 percent was
available to those with two or more children, and 77 percent was available to both groups in
1992. The full credit was available in 1993. Note here that unmarried mothers' relative
employment was increasing during the pre-expansion period, in keeping with the effects of the
1986 expansion shown in Panel B, but that the 1990-expansion pre-period increase had leveled


                                                                                                   14
out by 3 years prior to the 1990 expansion. The post period shows a discrete increase in
employment, with each of the 5 post-years individually significant except year 3.
        Panel D repeats the analysis for the 1993 expansion, which was also phased in. For those
with one child, 92 percent of the eventual expansion was available in 1994 and it was fully
expanded in 1995. For those with two or more children, 50 percent was available in 1994, 78
percent in 1995 and it was fully available in 1996. Here, too, there are pre-trends occurring, in
keeping with the effects found for the 1990 expansion. But there is also a discrete increase in the
yearly event-study coefficients when the expansion's phase-in began. Each post-expansion year
is individually statistically significant, including those implemented prior to the PRWORA
federal welfare reform law's passage. We explore the potential confounding role for welfare
reform in the next section. 12
        Panel E shows the impact of the 2009 EITC expansion, which only affected those with 3
or more children. As in Table 1, we compare employment rates among unmarried women with 3
or more to those of a control group including those with only 2 children. There is no statistically
significant impact of the 2009 EITC expansion in any year. We speculate that particularly weak
labor demand during the period following the 2008 financial crisis and Great Recession may
have swamped any EITC-driven labor supply effect. (We return to discuss Panel F in section 4,
below.)
        When we examine the impacts on the group most likely to be impacted by the EITC
(unmarried women with low levels of education) on the most relevant margin of interest (annual
employment), we find strong, consistent, positive and statistically significant impacts on
employment rates for each expansion, except the narrowly targeted expansion during the Great
Recession. This pattern is evident in both the difference-in-differences results in Table 1, and the
event study estimates in Figure 3. We turn to further analysis of the 1993 expansion below,
which we examine in greater detail because of the potentially confounding effects of the mid-
1990s welfare reform.




12
  For each expansion, we estimated models limiting the pre-period to three years, which is roughly where the pre-
period trends in the 1986, 1990, and 1993 expansions level out. The difference-in-difference results using this
specification are not materially different than those we present.


                                                                                                                15
   c. Is the 1993 Effect Driven by Welfare Reform?
       The impacts of the 1993 phased-in EITC expansion were particularly strong. During that
time period there were a number of factors that may have also contributed to increasing
employment rates, making it difficult to disentangle the separate impact of the EITC. In
particular, in the years leading up to the 1996 welfare reform law, many states were granted
waivers to existing AFDC rules in order to experiment with reforms to limit access to cash
welfare payments and encourage work.
       A substantial literature evaluated the impact of state welfare waivers and subsequent
transition at the federal level to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) on a
variety of outcomes, including welfare participation and labor market outcomes. Many studies
investigate hours and weeks worked, but fewer study the extensive margin of whether or not an
individual is employed at all. A notable exception is Schoeni and Blank (2000), who find that
unmarried women with dependent children who are high school dropouts increased their
employment rates by 2.0 to 4.5 percentage points in waiver states relative to non-waiver states.
They find no additional impact of TANF on employment for high school dropouts. They also
find no impact of either welfare waivers or TANF on employment among unmarried mothers
with a high school diploma, or with higher levels of education.
       It is a generally accepted conclusion among economists that welfare reform increased
employment, and decreased participation in welfare programs. In his 2003 review of the
literature, Moffitt summarizes that welfare waivers had positive effects on most measures of
labor supply, with the few random-assignment studies generally finding smaller impacts than the
quasi-experimental ones. Ziliak, in his 2015 review, concludes that the literature, as a whole,
finds that welfare reform had a positive impact on employment, but notes that the estimated
magnitude varies widely between studies. More recently, Mead (2018) argues that these state
welfare policies, which he describes as changes authorizing caseworkers to provide a
combination of "help and hassle" to move women from welfare to work, were the primary driver
of increased employment rates in the mid-1990s. Similarly, Kleven (2019) argues that the
increase in employment rates among unmarried mothers was likely due to welfare reform, and
not the sizable 1993 EITC expansion.
       We use a simple and intuitive approach to test whether welfare waivers are confounding
estimates of the 1993 EITC expansion's effect on employment: we omit states from the analysis



                                                                                                   16
sample that ever had a welfare reform waiver at any point in time, and estimate the effect of the
1993 EITC expansion only on the remaining states that did not have early changes to their cash
welfare systems designed to encourage employment. In addition to controlling directly for the
effect of waivers, these estimates help to hold constant hard-to-measure factors like state-level
culture and attitudes towards low-income women and assistance programs that might drive both
state-level safety net policy and labor market outcomes among unmarried women.
         As shown in Table 2, we first estimate the impact of the 1993 EITC expansion on the full
panel of states. In our preferred specification, reported in column (3), the EITC expansion is
estimated to have increased employment rates among unmarried mothers with a high school
diploma or less by 9.3 percentage points. Omitting the 36 states with any welfare waiver
(including a handful of states with minor waivers not likely to impact overall employment rates),
the EITC impact is essentially unchanged, with a statistically significant 10.2 percentage point
increase in employment after the 1993 expansion. 13
         As shown in columns (4)-(6), the same general patterns hold when we measure the EITC
impact on weekly employment rates. Panel B, which includes unmarried women of all education
levels (including many who would not be expected to respond to EITC or welfare incentives
because their incomes would be too high), generally shows smaller point estimates that are about
half as large as they are among the low-education sample, and are all statistically significant.
         We conclude that the 1993 EITC expansion increased employment separate and apart
from any employment effect due to pro-work changes to the cash welfare system. Our
straightforward test of estimating the impact of the 1993 EITC expansion only on states that did
not adopt early welfare reform policies shows that in states without early welfare reform,
unmarried mothers' employment increased substantially when the EITC was expanded.


     d. Reconciling our Findings with Other Recent Studies
         As shown in Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 3, we find strong and consistent evidence that
EITC expansions from 1975 to 1993 increased employment among unmarried mothers,
especially among those with a high school diploma or less education, and that the 1993 EITC
expansion had an impact separate from welfare reform. Recent work by Kleven (2019) comes to


13
  Results are substantively unchanged if we limit the analysis period to 3 years before and after the reform, or to 1
year prior and 3 years after the reform.


                                                                                                                    17
a different conclusion, arguing (1) that only the 1993 expansion is associated with consistent
employment increases, and (2) that employment increases following the 1993 expansion are
more likely driven by welfare reform than by the increased generosity of the EITC. To our
knowledge, Kleven (2019) is the only other paper to look comprehensively at all five federal
EITC expansions, so it is important that we reconcile these disparate findings. In Table 3, we
attempt to reconcile our findings on the first point. In Table 4, we attempt to reconcile our
findings on the second point.
        Table 3, Panel A, Column (1) reproduces our preferred specification from Table 1,
measuring the difference-in-differences estimate of each EITC expansion on annual employment
among a sample of women with a high school diploma or less, in the 5 years before and after the
expansion. The specification includes state and year fixed effects, demographic characteristics
including age and education level, state unemployment rates and the interaction between the
unemployment rate and the presence of children in the household. As before, specification of the
1990 and 1993 expansions accounts for their phase-in period. Each EITC expansion, with the
exception of 2009, results in a statistically significant increase in employment.
        Following Kleven, column (2) limits the time period considered to a one-year pre period
and a three-year post period. The point estimates move around somewhat -- becoming larger for
the 1975 and 1986 expansions, and smaller for the 1990 and 1993 ones -- but are still positive
and of significant magnitudes, with only 1990 losing statistical significance. In column (3) we
further reconcile our approach with Kleven's by dropping the interaction between the state
unemployment rate and the presence of children in the household, which eliminates the statistical
significance of the 1975 expansion. In column (4) we drop state and year fixed effects, state
unemployment rates, demographic characteristics and replace the phase-in for the 1990 and 1993
expansions with a binary indicator, in a specification similar to the ones Kleven employs. Even
without these controls for the labor market factors, the 1986 and 1993 expansions remain
statistically significant.
        Columns (5) through (8) repeat the exercise with an alternate dependent variable, an
indicator variable for whether the respondent worked in the prior week. This is the employment




                                                                                                  18
outcome variable used by Kleven. 14 In this case, in our preferred specification presented in
column (5), the 1975, 1990 and 1993 expansions show a statistically significant increase in
employment and are of sizeable magnitude, while the estimates of the 1986 expansion are small
and not significant in the weekly results. The 1990 expansion also loses statistical significance
when the sample period is narrowed in column (6), and the 1975 introduction's impact is
eliminated when controls for state unemployment interacted with the presence of children are
omitted in column (7).
         Column (8) removes additional controls and specifies the phased-in EITC with a binary
indicator, finding that when other factors are left uncontrolled and employment is measured
weekly, only the 1993 EITC expansion is statistically significant. These coefficients precisely
replicate the coefficient estimates for low-education unmarried mothers in Table 2, Column (1)
of Kleven (2019). 15
         Panel B expands the analysis to include all unmarried women, including those with
higher levels of education who are unlikely to be eligible for the EITC. Consistent with Kleven
(2019), we find that only 1993 remains statistically significant once controls for the business
cycle and other demographic characteristics are dropped. Column (8) precisely replicates the
results for unmarried mothers of all education levels in Table 2, Column (1) of Kleven (2019).
         Table 4 more closely examines the 1993 EITC expansion, using specifications in line
with Kleven's (2019) approach. In the most restrictive specification, Kleven controls for the
effect of state welfare waivers by allowing that effect to vary by year interacted with whether
children are present in the household. This is a tight control, estimating the EITC's employment
effect using variation within year by whether children are present in the household by whether
the state implemented welfare waivers. Because it absorbs variation in year by the presence of
children in the household, it is controlling in part for the effect of the EITC, as whether a
household has children or not in the years following an EITC expansion is used to identify the
credit expansion's employment effect. Of course, it is important to establish whether the 1993
credit expansion had an effect on employment independent of state experiments with welfare


14
   To replicate Kleven's results in Table 3 and Appendix Table 5, we omit March monthly files from the analysis
sample. In practice, the inclusion or exclusion of March monthly files makes very little difference to the results, and
only impacts the "worked last week" results for 1993 and 2009.
15
   Our standard errors differ, because we cluster the standard errors by state, which gives us larger standard errors
than clustering by individual in specifications using annual employment. Kleven (2019) clusters by individual.


                                                                                                                     19
reform. We argue that the method we use for Table 2 -- simply omitting states that ever had a
welfare waiver from the estimation sample -- is a cleaner and more intuitive test.
       Table 4 reports difference-in-differences estimates of the 1993 expansion (which was
phased in from 1994-1996), on data from 1993-1996, following the approach of Kleven to use
one year of pre-period data and three years of post-period data. Column (1) employs a basic
regression, with controls for unemployment rates that are allowed to differ by presence of
children, state and year fixed effects, and individual characteristics. The impact of the EITC
expansion is strong and consistent, with low-education mothers increasing their annual
employment by 5.5 percentage points (6.8 points for worked last week) and the overall sample
increasing by 5.0 points (5.2 points for worked last week). Column (2) adds as further controls
fixed effects for the interaction between the state having a welfare waiver in place at the time
with presence of children, and welfare waivers times year. The estimates on the EITC's effect
remain quite robust and are largely unchanged by these additional controls. This is evidence that
the 1993 EITC expansion had an independent and significant effect on employment, separate and
apart from the effect of state experiments with pro-work welfare reforms.
       Column (3) adds fixed effects for the interaction between year and presence of children.
Recall that the fundamental identification approach in studying the EITC is the interaction of
year and whether a household had children present, so the inclusion of these fixed effects absorbs
most of the variation in the EITC, leaving only the differences across family sizes for those with
children to identify the effects. When these controls are added, the EITC's impact on annual
employment is no longer significant in either the low-education sample or among all
observations, though the impact on worked last week is still significant in this specification.
Following Kleven, column (4) adds a three-way fixed effect, interacting presence of waivers
with presence of children with year. Once this additional control is added, coefficients on the
EITC variable lose statistical significance in all four specifications. It is unsurprising that these
fixed effects that absorb most of the variation used to identify the EITC's impact also absorb its
impact on employment.
       Instead of employing a differences-in-differences approach, Kleven (2019) estimates an
event study which allows the coefficient on indicators for presence of welfare waivers (which
vary at the state and year level) to vary by children-times-year. We exactly replicate his findings
(column 3 of Table 6) in Appendix Table 5. Kleven shows estimates on the year-3 and year-10



                                                                                                        20
post-EITC expansion coefficients; we also include year 5. We present estimates separately for
the low-education sample and the overall sample of unmarried women, and for annual
employment as well as whether the respondent worked in the prior week. When
waivers*children*year fixed effects are included, year 3 effects are small and not statistically
significant, though those in years 5 and 10 are. When this three-way fixed effect is omitted, we
find consistent, positive impacts of the EITC on employment.


   4. Considering the EITC Holistically
       Finally, we take a different approach and attempt to study the EITC holistically. We do
this in two ways: by studying the employment effect all five federal EITC expansions utilizing
one event study, and by exploiting continuous variation in the maximum size of the EITC
benefit.
       The methodology we use to estimate the event study is the same used for the individual
EITC expansions that are presented in the other Panels A through E of Figure 3 and discussed in
Section (3)(b) above, but in this case data from the 5 years before and after each expansion are
stacked and event-time interacted with EITC eligibility are the coefficients of interest.
Specifically, Panel F presents estimates of a variant of equation (2), the dynamic effect of all five
EITC expansions, pooled together and using an event-study framework, on the annual
employment of unmarried women with low levels of education, controlling for state
unemployment rate interacted with the presence of children in the household. We allow the
coefficients on the control variables to differ across expansions.
       Pooling all expansions, we see that in the first year after an expansion there is a positive,
statistically significant increase in targeted women's employment rates. This effect increases
somewhat in the second year and is relatively stable in subsequent years; by the final year of the
post period employment has increased by 5 percentage points. Event study graphs for the sample
of all unmarried women are included as Appendix Figure 2 and show results that are consistent
with those in Panel B of Table 1.
       Finally, we use continuous variation in the size of the maximum EITC credit to estimate
the credit's employment elasticity. We pool across all sample years (1971-2015) and estimate
regressions of the following type:




                                                                                                   21
                           =   +  ( ) +   + 
                              +(   ) +  +  +  .                     (3)


       Equation (3) is similar to equation (1) except that the coefficient of interest is on the
maximum EITC benefit available to a woman with children in each year. Household income and
EITC receipt are endogenous with respect to the decision to work. In contrast, our Max_EITC
variable represents exogenous variable in EITC policy. Specifically, it is defined as the
maximum credit available to households based on their marital status, the number of children in
their household, the year, and their state of residence.
       We present two sets of estimates using data 1967-2017: one considers only federal EITC
payments, while the second includes federal and state EITC payments, taking advantage of an
additional source of variation. Results are presented in Table 5. Panel A limits the sample to
unmarried women with a high school diploma or less education. Column (1) presents results
based on maximum federal EITC payments across all years and finds that a $1,000 increase in
the inflation-adjusted (2019 dollars) maximum EITC benefit increases annual employment rates
by 3.0 percentage points. Column (2) repeats this approach, dropping from the sample states
after they received approved welfare reform waivers in 1992-96. The results are largely
unchanged, with an estimated coefficient of 3.0 percentage points. Column (3) includes all states
but omits the years 1994-1999 in order to remove the 1993 EITC expansion and estimate the
combined effects of the other 4 federal expansions. For every $1,000 increase in maximum EITC
benefits, unmarried mothers' employment increases by 3.3 percentage points. The results are
quite similar in magnitude and statistical significance across all columns. We conclude that the
effect of EITC benefits on employment is robust and is neither driven by the particularly large
1993 expansion nor by welfare reform.
       Columns (4)-(6) add in state EITCs payments, which are available in 26 states plus the
District of Columbia and are generally calculated as a percentage of the federal credit. Across the
three specifications, the estimates are consistent and robust, indicating that a $1,000 increase in
maximum EITC payments increase employment among unmarried mothers with low levels of
education by 2.6 to 2.9 percentage points relative to childless women with low levels of
education.




                                                                                                   22
       Panel B repeats the analysis on the full sample of women. As expected, the estimated
impacts are smaller with the inclusion of women with higher levels of education who are not
likely to be affected by EITC parameters. Using variation from the federal credit only, each
$1,000 increase in maximum EITC benefits increases unmarried mothers' employment by 1.9 to
2.2 percentage points. When state credit variation is also included, the impacts range from 1.7 to
2.0 percentage points.


   5. Discussion and Conclusions
       In this paper, we examine the five federal expansions of the EITC, including its creation
in 1975. We take a longer view than the existing literature, studying all five expansions together
with a unified empirical framework using modern econometric methods. This approach allows
for a reexamination of the credit expansions of the 1980s and 1990s using difference-in-
differences and event-study techniques, including studying the dynamic effect of the EITC on
employment. By using the same sample definitions and methods to study all five credit
expansions, it allows for more direct comparisons across credit expansions.
       We find robust evidence that four of the five credit expansions increase employment
among unmarried mothers. The exception is the 2009 expansion, which was targeted on
households of a specific size and occurred during a period of historically weak labor demand
following the 2008 financial crisis and Great Recession. We also look more closely at the 1993
expansion and conclude that this generous credit expansion increased the extensive margin of
labor supply separate and apart from any pro-work reforms to state welfare systems that occurred
at the same time. Finally, we study the EITC holistically, pooling all five expansions into one
event-study framework and using continuous variation in the size of the maximum EITC benefit
to estimate its employment elasticity.
       To our knowledge, the only other paper to look comprehensively at all five federal EITC
expansions is Kleven (2019), which comes to different conclusions. Specifically, Kleven finds
little evidence for an EITC extensive margin effect. We find the opposite, reconcile our findings
with Kleven, and argue that our analytic approach is most appropriate.
       The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is the cornerstone anti-poverty policy for families
with children in the United States. Designed to fight poverty by encouraging and rewarding
work, decades of research on the EITC has found that the program meets its goals by increasing



                                                                                                  23
employment among targeted women, and by successfully raising their annual incomes, lifting
millions of families out of poverty. This paper confirms and extends that consensus.




                                                                                             24
References
Bastian, J., 2020. The rise of working mothers and the 1975 earned income tax credit. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(3), pp.44-75.
Bastian, J. and Jones, M.R., 2020. Do EITC Expansions Pay for Themselves? Effects on Tax
Revenue and Public Assistance Spending. Rutgers University Working Paper.
Bastian, J. and Lochner, L., 2020. The EITC and Maternal Time Use: More Time Working and
Less Time with Kids? NBER Working Paper 27717.
Bastian, J. and Michelmore, K., 2018. The long-term impact of the earned income tax credit on
children's education and employment outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(4), pp.1127-
1163.
Baughman, R. and Dickert-Conlin, S., 2009. The earned income tax credit and fertility. Journal
of Population Economics, 22(3), pp. 537-563.
Baughman, R.A. and Duchovny, N., 2016. State earned income tax credits and the production of
child health: Insurance coverage, utilization, and health status. National Tax Journal, 69(1),
p.103.
Bitler, M., Hoynes, H.W. and Kuka, E. 2017. Do in-work tax credits serve as a safety net?
Journal of Human Resources 36(2): 358-89.
Braga, B., F. Blavin and A. Gangopadhyaya, 2020. The long-term effects of childhood exposure
to the earned income tax credit on health outcomes. Journal of Public Economics 190: 104249.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N. and Rockoff, J., 2011. New evidence on the long-term impacts of tax
credits. IRS Statistics of Income White Paper.
Crandall-Hollick, M. and Falk, G., 2020. The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC): How It Works
and Who Receives It. [online] Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service. Available at:
<https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43805.pdf>
Dahl, G.B. and Lochner, L., 2012. The impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence
from the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review, 102(5), pp.1927-56.
Dickert-Conlin, S. and Houser, S., 2002. EITC and Marriage. National Tax Journal, pp.25-40.
Eissa, N. and Hoynes, H.W., 2004. Taxes and the labor market participation of married couples:
the earned income tax credit. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10), pp.1931-1958.
Eissa, N. and Hoynes, H.W., 2006. Behavioral responses to taxes: Lessons from the EITC and
labor supply. Tax Policy and the Economy, 20, pp.73-110.
Eissa, N. and Liebman, J.B., 1996. Labor supply response to the earned income tax credit. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), pp.605-637.
Evans, W.N. and Garthwaite, C.L., 2014. Giving mom a break: The impact of higher EITC
payments on maternal health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2), pp.258-90.
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,
2020. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V7.0




                                                                                                25
Gelber, Alexander M., and Joshua W. Mitchell. Taxes and time allocation: Evidence from single
women and men. The Review of Economic Studies 79, no. 3 (2012): 863-897.
Holtzblatt, J. and Rebelein, R., 2000. Measuring the Effect of the EITC on Marriage Penalties
and Bonuses. National Tax Journal, pp.1107-1133.
Hotz, V.J. and Scholz, J.K. 2003. The earned income tax credit. In Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States (pp. 141-198). University of Chicago press.
Hoynes, H., Miller, D. and Simon, D., 2015. Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant
health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), pp.172-211.
Hoynes, H.W. and Patel, A.J., 2018. Effective policy for reducing poverty and inequality? The
Earned Income Tax Credit and the distribution of income. Journal of Human Resources, 53(4),
pp.859-890.
Hoynes, H. and Rothstein, J., 2017. Tax Policy Toward Low Income Families. The Economics of
Tax Policy, p.2.
Jones, M.R. and Ziliak, J.P., 2019. The antipoverty impact of the EITC: new estimates from
survey and administrative tax records. US Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies,
Working Paper, (19-14).
Kleven, H., 2019. The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 26405.
Kuka, E. and Shenhav, N., 2020. Long-Run Effects of Incentivizing Work After Childbirth.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 27444.
Manoli, D. and Turner, N., 2018. Cash-on-hand and college enrollment: Evidence from
population tax data and the earned income tax credit. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 10(2), pp.242-71.
Mead, L.M., 2018. Can Benefits and Incentives Promote Work? Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 37(4), pp.897-903.
Meyer, B.D. and Rosenbaum, D.T., 2000. Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and
Welfare Policy and its Effects. National Tax Journal 53, no. 4 (2000): 1,027-1,061.
Meyer, B.D. and Rosenbaum, D.T., 2001. Welfare, the earned income tax credit, and the labor
supply of single mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), pp.1063-1114.
Meyer, Bruce D. The effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit and recent reforms. Tax Policy
and the Economy 24, no. 1 (2010): 153-180.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Derek Wu. The poverty reduction of social security and means-tested
transfers. ILR Review 71, no. 5 (2018): 1106-1153.
Michelmore, K., 2014, January. EITC and Union Formation. In Proceedings. Annual Conference
on Taxation and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax Association (Vol. 107, pp.
1-32). National Tax Association.
Miller, Cynthia, Lawrence F. Katz, Gilda Azurdia, Adam Isen, Caroline B. Schultz, and Kali
Aloisi. Boosting the Earned Income Tax Credit for Singles: Final Impact Findings from the
Paycheck Plus Demonstration in New York City. New York: MDRC (2018).



                                                                                                26
Moffitt, R.A., 2003. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States (pp. 291-364). University of Chicago Press.
Neumark, D., Asquith, B., and Bass, B., 2019. Longer-Run Effects of Anti-Poverty Policies on
Disadvantaged Neighborhoods. Contemporary Economic Policy, v38 (3, July), 409-434.
Neumark, D. and Shirley, P., 2020. The Long-Run Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on
Women's Labor Market Outcomes. Labour Economics, 66.
Neumark, D. and Wascher, W, 2002. State-Level Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects: New
Evidence And Interpretations From Disequilibrium Methods. Journal of Human Resources,
v37(1, Winter), 35-62.
Nichols, A. and Rothstein, J., 2015. The Earned Income Tax Credit. In Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States, Volume 1 (pp. 137-218). University of Chicago Press.
Renwick, T. and Fox, L., 2016. The supplemental poverty measure: 2015. Current Population
Reports, pp.1-23.
Saez, E., 2010. Do taxpayers bunch at kink points? American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 2(3), pp.180-212.
Schoeni, R.F. and Blank, R.M., 2000. What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on
welfare participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure (No. w7627). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Ziliak, J.P., 2015. Temporary assistance for needy families. In Economics of Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1 (pp. 303-393). University of Chicago Press.




                                                                                               27
Table 1. Effects of Federal EITC Reforms on Employment of Unmarried Mothers
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                  Worked in year                       Worked prior week
                             (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
 1975 expansion            -0.149     -0.144     6.225***       1.208        1.195     6.193***
                          (0.992)    (0.995)      (1.681)      (1.041)     (1.053)       (1.549)
  N                       51,667     51,667       51,667       48,691       48,691       48,691

 1986 expansion          3.132***    3.148***     2.280**      1.548**        1.566**      0.660
                          (0.665)     (0.652)     (1.076)      (0.728)        (0.737)     (1.293)
  N                       70,216      70,216       70,216       70,678         70,678     70,678

 1990 expansion          4.927***     4.833***    4.857***    4.296***        4.146***   4.163***
                          (0.952)      (0.955)     (0.986)     (1.051)         (1.034)    (1.062)
  N                       65,031       65,031      65,031      66,882          66,882     66,882


 1993 expansion          9.863***    9.846***     9.264***    9.442***    9.404***       8.903***
                          (0.933)     (0.926)      (0.965)     (0.603)     (0.601)        (0.681)
  N                       59,798      59,798       59,798      732,104     732,104        732,104

 2009 expansion            -0.551      -0.551       0.246       -0.898         -0.897     -1.084
                          (2.062)     (2.062)      (2.679)     (1.143)        (1.145)    (1.495)
  N                       21,494      21,494       21,494      168,203        168,203    168,203

 State UR                   No          Yes         Yes          No             Yes           Yes
 State UR x Has
                            No          No          Yes          No             No            Yes
 Children




                                                                                         28
Table 1, Continued
 Panel B: All observations
                                            Worked in year                                Worked last week
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)                    (4)         (5)          (6)
 1975 expansion                      -0.944     -0.928     4.379***                -0.973      -0.944      3.353**
                                    (0.838)    (0.834)      (1.529)               (0.828)     (0.830)      (1.396)
   N                                83,547     83,547       83,547                77,304      77,304        77,304

 1986 expansion                    1.769**        1.773***         0.400           1.296*          1.288*          -0.014
                                   (0.666)         (0.657)        (0.933)         (0.662)         (0.661)         (1.112)
   N                               130,572         130,572        130,572         128,950         128,950         128,950

 1990 expansion                    3.291***       3.159***        3.210***        2.218***        2.043***        2.095***
                                    (0.822)        (0.819)         (0.900)         (0.779)         (0.759)         (0.750)
   N                                131,115        131,115         131,115         132,405         132,405         132,405


 1993 expansion                    7.875***       7.861***       6.988***        7.271***        7.230***        6.400***
                                    (0.578)        (0.575)        (0.584)         (0.484)         (0.479)         (0.523)
   N                                128,429        128,429        128,429        1,577,135       1,577,135       1,577,135

 2009 expansion                      -1.013         -1.013          -0.462         -1.024          -1.032          -1.781
                                    (1.018)        (1.018)         (1.354)        (0.866)         (0.875)         (1.112)
   N                                41,029         41,029          41,029         317,028         317,028         317,028

 State UR                             No             Yes             Yes             No              Yes               Yes

 State UR x Has Children              No              No             Yes             No              No                Yes


Notes: Each regression includes data on unmarried women ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after the federal
EITC expansion. All expansions use CPS ASEC data; the 1993 and 2009 expansions also include CPS monthly files
in the specifications based on worked last week. Panel A limits to women with a high school diploma or less. All
columns include indicators for the woman's education and age, and age bin of youngest child, plus state and year
fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is the interaction of post-EITC expansion and whether the woman has
EITC-eligible children. The 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions are phased in over time, and we code the phase-in
years to be the share of the expansion implemented by that year with full phase-in equal to 1 as described in text.
The 2009 control group is unmarried women with 2 children. Not all individual states are identified in the CPS prior
to 1977, so following Bastian (2020) we control for consistently defined state-group fixed effects and
unemployment rates from 1970-79 around the 1975 expansion. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                 29
Table 2. Effects of the 1993 EITC Expansion, Overall and for Non-Waiver States

 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                               Worked in year                                      Worked last week
                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                  (4)           (5)                  (6)


 All states                      9.863***         9.846***        9.264***             9.442***        9.404***            8.903***
                                  (0.933)          (0.926)         (0.965)              (0.603)         (0.601)             (0.681)
                                   59,798           59,798          59,798              732,104         732,104             732,104

 States without waivers          9.666***         9.678***        10.225***            9.295***        9.283***            9.622***
                                  (1.669)          (1.675)         (1.964)              (0.929)         (0.939)             (1.516)
                                   16,973           16,973          16,973              207,670         207,670             207,670

 State Unemployment                  No              Yes              Yes                  No              Yes               Yes

 State Unemployment x
                                     No               No              Yes                  No              No                Yes
 Has Children

 Panel B: Overall sample
                                               Worked in year                                      Worked last week

 All states                      7.875***         7.861***        6.988***            7.271***         7.230***            6.400***
                                  (0.578)          (0.575)         (0.584)             (0.484)          (0.479)             (0.523)
                                  128,429          128,429          128,429           1,577,135        1,577,135           1,577,135

 States without waivers          6.630***         6.631***        6.382***             6.873***        6.817***            6.580***
                                  (0.801)          (0.810)         (0.907)              (0.621)         (0.641)             (1.077)
                                   36,565           36,565          36,565              447,242         447,242             447,242

 State Unemployment                  No              Yes              Yes                  No              Yes               Yes

 State Unemployment x
                                     No               No              Yes                  No              No                Yes
 Has Children


Notes: Each regression includes CPS ASEC data on unmarried women ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after
the 1993 federal EITC expansion. Columns (4) through (6) also include CPS monthly files. Panel A limits to women
with a high school diploma or less. All columns include indicators for woman's education and age, and age bin of
youngest child, plus state and year fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is the interaction of post-EITC expansion
and whether the woman has EITC-eligible children. The 1993 EITC expansion was phased in over time and varied
by number of children; as described in the text we code the phase-in years to be the share of the expansion
implemented by that year with full phase-in equal to 1. Non-waiver states include AL, AK, CO, DC, KS, LA, MN,
NV, NM, NY, ND, OK, PA, RI, WY. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.



                                                                                                                     30
Table 3: Effects of Federal EITC Reforms on Employment of Unmarried Mothers: Alternate Specifications
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
 Dependent Variable                   Worked in year                           Worked last week
                            (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
 1975 expansion          6.225***   7.096***    -1.364   -1.417     6.193***   8.166**    -0.147     -0.118
                          (1.681)    (2.422)   (1.407)   (1.461)     (1.548)   (3.068)    (1.758)    (1.867)
  N                       51,667     20,897    20,897    20,897      48,691     19,272    19,272     19,272

 1986 expansion          2.280**    3.732*** 3.307*** 3.135***        0.660      0.713     0.513     -0.411
                         (1.076)     (1.089)  (0.893)  (1.103)       (1.292)    (1.506)   (1.168)    (1.229)
  N                       70,216     27,734   27,734   27,734        70,678     27,688    27,688     27,688

 1990 expansion         4.857***     2.070      1.970     1.188     4.163***     1.163     1.245     -0.170
                         (0.986)    (1.769)    (1.494)   (1.172)     (1.062)    (2.026)   (1.673)    (1.244)
  N                      65,031     26,236     26,236    26,236      66,882     27,331    27,331     27,331

 1993 expansion         9.264***    5.539*** 6.878*** 4.866***      8.995***   6.839*** 7.148*** 3.538***
                         (0.965)     (1.837)  (1.517)  (1.455)       (0.679)    (1.044)  (0.992)  (1.132)
  N                      59,798      22,314   22,314   22,314        676,828    254,912 254,912 254,912

 2009 expansion           0.246     -0.086     -2.712    -1.935       -1.082   -4.941**   -3.642**    -2.170
                         (2.676)    (3.232)    (2.075)   (2.180)     (1.513)    (2.249)    (1.554)   (1.385)
   N                     21,494      8,593      8,593    16,507      155,987    61,660     61,660    140,032
 Pre and post period      5&5        1&3        1&3       1&3         5&5        1&3        1&3         1&3
 State UR * has
                           Yes        Yes        No        No         Yes        Yes        No
 Children                                                                                                No
 State and Year FE         Yes        Yes        Yes      No          Yes        Yes        Yes          No
 State UR                  Yes        Yes        Yes      No          Yes        Yes        Yes          No
 Phase-in 1990, 1993       Yes        Yes        Yes      No          Yes        Yes        Yes          No
 2009 control group       2 kids     2 kids     2 kids   0 kids      2 kids     2 kids     2 kids       0 kids
 Individual Controls       Yes        Yes        Yes      No          Yes        Yes        Yes          No



                                                                                                                 31
Table 3, Continued
 Panel B: All observations
                                      Worked in prior year                    Worked in prior week
                                (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)      (8)
 1975 expansion              4.379*** 6.702***    -0.871     -0.421    3.353**     6.818**       -0.793   -0.713
                              (1.529)  (2.101)   (0.935)     (1.032)   (1.396)     (2.921)      (1.351)   (1.372)
  N                           83,547   34,134     34,134     34,134     77,304      31,106      31,106    31,106

 1986 expansion               0.400      1.406     1.282      1.501     -0.014      -0.405     -0.121     -1.028
                             (0.932)    (0.962)   (0.797)    (0.948)   (1.112)      (1.282)    (0.936)    (1.165)
  N                          130,572    51,538    51,538     51,538    128,950      51,038     51,038     51,038

 1990 expansion              3.210***    0.893    -0.302      0.003    2.095***      0.482     -0.452     -0.347
                              (0.900)   (1.489)   (1.119)    (0.985)    (0.750)     (1.533)    (0.956)    (1.015)
  N                           131,115   54,769    54,769     54,769     132,405     54,857     54,857     54,857

 1993 expansion              6.988*** 4.965*** 6.072*** 4.388***       6.492***    5.241***   5.863***    3.060***
                              (0.584)  (1.013)  (0.946)  (0.935)        (0.522)     (0.749)    (0.575)     (0.604)
  N                           128,429  50,039   50,039   50,039        1,457,816    581,511   581,511      581,511

 2009 expansion              -0.462     -1.514    -2.200     -1.251     -1.710     -6.463*** -4.052*** -3.554***
                             (1.353)    (2.693)   (1.547)    (1.522)   (1.156)       (1.828)   (1.292)   (0.996)
   N                         41,029     16,567    16,567     48,252    294,094      117,527   117,527   426,414
 Pre and post period          5&5        1&3       1&3        1&3       5&5           1&3       1&3       1&3
 State UR * has Children       Yes        Yes       No         No        Yes           Yes       No        No
 State and Year FE             Yes        Yes       Yes        No        Yes           Yes       Yes       No
 State UR                      Yes        Yes       Yes        No        Yes           Yes       Yes       No
 Phase-in 1990, 1993           Yes        Yes       Yes        No        Yes           Yes       Yes       No
 2009 control group           2 kids     2 kids    2 kids     0 kids    2 kids        2 kids    2 kids    0 kids
 Individual Controls           Yes        Yes       Yes        No        Yes           Yes       Yes       No




                                                                                                                     32
Notes: Each regression includes data on unmarried women ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after the federal EITC expansion. This table uses data from the
replication file for Kleven (2019), which for all expansions use CPS ASEC data; the 1993 and 2009 expansions also include CPS monthly files (worked last
week) for months other than March. Panel A limits to women with a high school diploma or less. Columns (1) and (5) are slightly different from columns (3) and
(6) of Table 1 due to small changes in sample and education definitions made to match Kleven's approach. Demographic controls, where included, are for a
woman's education and age, and age bin of youngest child. The coefficient of interest is the interaction of post-EITC expansion and whether the woman has
EITC-eligible children. The 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions are phased in over time unless otherwise noted. The 2009 treatment group is unmarried women
with 3 children, with control group either unmarried women with 2 children or unmarried women without children, as indicated. Not all individual states are
identified in the CPS before 1977; following Bastian (2020) we control for consistently defined state-group fixed effects and unemployment rates from 1970-79
around the 1975 expansion. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                           33
Table 4. Effects of the 1993 EITC Expansion on Employment of Unmarried Mothers: Alternate
Specifications
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                                        (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
 Worked in year                                      5.539***         5.664**           3.794           -1.256
                                                      (1.837)         (2.480)          (3.312)          (3.867)
   N                                                  22,314           22,314          22,314           22,314


 Worked last week                                    6.839***        6.851***         4.571***          1.403
                                                      (1.044)         (1.233)          (1.468)         (1.860)
   N                                                  254,912         254,912          254,912         254,912


 Welfare Waivers X Has Children                         No              Yes              Yes             Yes
 Welfare Waiver X Year                                  No              Yes              Yes             Yes
 Has Children X Year                                    No              No               Yes             Yes
 Welfare Waivers X Has Children X Year                  No              No               No              Yes
 Panel B: All observations
                                                        (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
 Worked in year                                      4.965***        4.776***           2.887           -0.735
                                                      (1.013)         (1.401)          (1.767)          (1.789)
   N                                                  50,039          50,039           50,039           50,039


 Worked last week                                    5.241***        5.513***         3.597***          1.150
                                                      (0.749)         (1.015)          (1.244)         (1.146)
   N                                                  581,511         581,511          581,511         581,511


 Welfare Waivers X Has Children                         No              Yes              Yes             Yes
 Welfare Waiver X Year                                  No              Yes              Yes             Yes
 Has Children X Year                                    No              No               Yes             Yes
 Welfare Waivers X Has Children X Year                  No              No               No              Yes
Notes: Each regression includes CPS ASEC data on unmarried women ages 20-50, for 1993-1996. Panel A limits to
women with a high school diploma or less. All columns include indicators for woman's education and age, and age
bin of youngest child, plus state and year fixed effects, state unemployment rate, and the unemployment rate
interacted with whether the woman has EITC-eligible children. The 1993 EITC expansion was phased in over time
and varied by number of children; as described in the text we code the phase-in years to be the share of the
expansion implemented by that year with full phase-in equal to 1. Welfare waivers coded by state and year for all
years following the first approval, as shown in Appendix Table 3. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                    34
Table 5. Effects of Pooled EITC Reforms on Annual Employment of Unmarried Mothers
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                                      Federal Credit Only                     Federal + State Credit
                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)               (4)        (5)         (6)
 Maximum EITC Credit (Thousands)               0.030*** 0.030*** 0.033***                0.026*** 0.028*** 0.029***
                                                (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)            (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)

 Observations                                   323,393      202,924      291,853         323,393      202,924      291,853
 Drop Welfare Waiver States                       No           Yes          No              No           Yes          No
 Drop Years 1994 - 1999                           No           No           Yes             No           No           Yes
 Panel B: Overall sample
                                                     Federal Credit Only                      Federal + State Credit
 Maximum EITC Credit (Thousands)               0.019*** 0.022*** 0.022***                0.017*** 0.020*** 0.019***
                                                (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)             (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)

 Observations                                   633,869      368,175      561,861         633,869      368,175      561,861
 Drop Welfare Waiver States                       No           Yes          No              No           Yes          No
 Drop Years 1994 - 1999                           No           No           Yes             No           No           Yes

Notes: This table displays estimates of the employment effects of EITC expansions using the maximum EITC value allowed defined by number of children, state,
and year, and measured in thousands of dollars, inflation-adjusted 2019 dollars using PCEPI. The coefficients report the marginal effect of an additional thousand
dollars of maximum EITC benefits on the probability of annual employment. Sample includes unmarried women ages 20-50, from the ASEC with and without
EITC-eligible children, 1967-2017. Low education defined as high school diploma or less. All columns include demographic controls, state, year, and controls
for state annual unemployment rates, and state unemployment rates interacted with presence of EITC-eligible children. State-group fixed effects are included for
years 1967-79 when individual states are not disclosed in the data. In columns 2 and 5 we drop states from the sample after they first approve a welfare waiver as
indicated in Appendix Table 3. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                               35
Figure 1. Maximum Federal Earned Income Tax Credit for Single Adults, by Number of Eligible Children (1968-2018)




Notes: Federal EITC parameters come from the Urban Institute-Brookings Institution Tax Policy Center.



                                                                                                                   36
Figure 2. Annual Employment Among Unmarried Women with a High School Diploma or Less, by Presence of Children
                                      100




                                                                                            without
                                       80
                                                                                            children
  Employment rate (annual, percent)




                                       60
                                                                                                   with
                                                                                                   children


                                       40




                                       20


                                                                                                         difference

                                        0
                                            1967   1971   1975   1979   1983   1987      1991    1995     1999   2003   2007   2011   2015



                                      -20
                                                                                      Employment year

Notes: Authors' calculation of annual employment rates from CPS ASEC 1968-2018 data.




                                                                                                                                             37
Figure 3. Event Studies: EITC Impact on Annual Employment of Unmarried Mothers with Low Education Levels




                                                                                                           38
Notes: Each panel includes data on unmarried women with a high school diploma or less, ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after the federal EITC expansion,
using CPS ASEC data on annual employment status. All event studies include controls for woman's education and age, age bin of youngest child, state and year
fixed effects, state unemployment rate and (except panel E) unemployment rate interacted with presence of children. In the pooled specification (panel F), the
coefficients on the control variables are allowed to vary across each expansion. The 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions are phased in over time, and we code the
phase-in years to be the share of the expansion implemented by that year with full phase-in equal to 1 as described in text. The 2009 expansion only impacted
unmarried women with 3 children, and we use unmarried women with 2 children as the control group. States are grouped in the CPS prior to 1977, so state-group
fixed effects are included for those years and the weighted average unemployment rate is included as a control variable. Figures present estimates of an indicator
variable for the 5 years before and after the EITC expansion, with the year prior to expansion omitted. Standard errors are clustered at the state level, and 95
percent confidence intervals are displayed.




                                                                                                                                                               39
Table A1: Sample Summary Statistics: CPS and Supplemental Data for Samples Around Each Federal EITC Expansion
                                                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Expansion                                                                   1975                 1986                1990                 1993                 2009
Years                                                                    1970-1979            1982-1991           1986-1995            1989-1998            2004-2013

Annual Employment, All Unmarried Mothers                                    66.58               68.21                69.92                72.54               74.35
                                                                           (47.17)             (46.57)              (45.86)              (44.63)              (43.67)


Annual Employment, Unmarried Mothers with High                              63.21               62.42                63.03                65.38               66.87
School Diploma or less                                                     (48.22)             (48.43)              (48.27)              (47.58)              (47.07)


                                                                            84.41               85.53                85.04                83.90               75.58
Annual Employment, All Unmarried Childless Women
                                                                           (36.27)             (35.18)              (34.05)              (36.75)              (42.96)


Annual Employment, Unmarried Childless Women with                           80.43               79.88                77.62                75.44               64.12
High School Diploma or less                                                (39.67)             (40.09)              (41.68)              (43.05)              (47.97)


Average Maximum Federal and State EITC Benefit (2019                        349.4               596.3               1105.3               1534.6               2139.6
Dollars)                                                                   (650.3)             (825.0)             (1429.9)             (1777.4)             (2231.0)


Average Maximum Federal and State EITC Benefit (2019                        349.4               602.9               1125.6               1571.2               2270.7
Dollars)                                                                   (650.3)             (838.8)             (1468.1)             (1833.8)             (2382.3)


Observations                                                               83,547              130,572             131,115              128,429              184,632
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for our regression samples using 10-year windows around each federal EITC expansion. Column 1 reports averages and standard
deviations (in parentheses) for years around the 1975 expansion. Column 2 reports averages and standard deviations (in parentheses) for years around the 1986 expansion.
Column 3 reports averages and standard deviations (in parentheses) for years around the 1990 expansion. Column 4 reports averages and standard deviations (in parentheses)
for years around the 1993 expansion. Column 5 reports averages and standard deviations (in parentheses for years around the 2009 expansion. Entries for annual employment
come from the March CPS files and data on federal and state EITC benefits come from the Tax Policy Center and NBER.




                                                                                                                                                                             40
Table A2: Year First State EITC Supplements Approved
States with EITC Supplements                      Year First Approved
             California                                  2015
             Colorado                                    1999
            Connecticut                                  2011
             Delaware                                    1995
        District of Columbia                             2000
              Hawaii                                     2018
               Idaho                                     1996
              Indiana                                    1999
              Illinois                                   2000
               Iowa                                      1990
              Kansas                                     1998
             Louisiana                                   2008
               Maine                                     2000
             Maryland                                    1987
           Massachusetts                                 1997
             Michigan                                    2008
             Nebraska                                    2006
            New Mexico                                   2007
             New York                                    1994
           North Carolina                                2008
               Ohio                                      2013
              Oregon                                     1997
            Rhode Island                                 2001
           South Carolina                                2018
              Vermont                                    1993
              Virginia                                   2006
               Wisconsin                                       1984
Notes: Data on state EITC supplements from NBER and Kleven (2019). The year
reported is the year the first state EITC supplement was approved.




                                                                              41
Table A3: List of States with Approved Welfare Waivers During the
1990s
States Approving Welfare Waivers                  Year First Approved
              Arizona                                     1995
             Arkansas                                     1994
             California                                   1992
            Connecticut                                   1994
             Delaware                                     1995
              Florida                                     1994
              Georgia                                     1993
              Hawaii                                      1994
               Idaho                                      1996
              Indiana                                     1993
              Illinois                                    1994
               Iowa                                       1993
               Maine                                      1996
             Maryland                                     1995
          Massachusetts                                   1995
             Michigan                                     1992
            Mississippi                                   1995
              Missouri                                    1995
              Montana                                     1995
             Nebraska                                     1995
         New Hampshire                                    1996
            New Jersey                                    1992
          North Carolina                                  1996
           North Dakota                                   1996
               Ohio                                       1996
              Oregon                                      1992
          South Carolina                                  1996
           South Dakota                                   1994
             Tennessee                                    1996
               Texas                                      1996
                Utah                                      1992
              Vermont                                     1993
              Virginia                                    1995
            Washington                                    1995
          West Virginia                                   1995
             Wisconsin                                    1994
Notes: Data on welfare waivers from Kleven (2019) table A.III. The year reported
is the year the first welfare waiver was approved. Data originally sourced from:
Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation (1997). Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers.




                                                                                   42
Table A4: Effects of Federal EITC Reforms on Employment of Unmarried Mothers, Alternate
Specifications with No Phase-in for 1990 and 1993 Expansions
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                     Worked in year                   Worked prior week
                              (1)         (2)          (3)      (4)          (5)          (6)
 1990 expansion           3.875*** 3.782***         3.872*** 3.305***    3.172***      3.251***
                           (0.844)      (0.844)      (0.905)  (0.984)     (0.967)       (1.035)
   N                        65,031      65,031       65,031   66,882       66,882       66,882

 1993 expansion                 7.807***      7.789***        6.878***        7.277***         7.238***        6.376***
                                 (0.780)       (0.774)         (0.781)         (0.601)          (0.598)         (0.618)
   N                             59,798        59,798          59,798          732,104          732,104         732,104

 State UR                          No             Yes            Yes              No              Yes                Yes

 State UR x Has
                                   No             No             Yes              No              No                 Yes
 Children

 Panel B: All observations
                                         Worked in year                                Worked last week
                                   (1)       (2)           (3)                   (4)         (5)           (6)
 1990 expansion                 2.597*** 2.467***       2.641***              2.028***    1.868***      2.043***
                                 (0.726)   (0.721)       (0.832)               (0.698)     (0.675)       (0.713)
   N                             131,115   131,115       131,115               132,405     132,405       132,405

 1993 expansion                 6.227***      6.212***        5.094***        5.347***        5.305***        4.157***
                                 (0.556)       (0.553)         (0.619)         (0.449)         (0.444)         (0.448)
   N                             128,429       128,429         128,429        1,577,135       1,577,135       1,577,135

 State UR                          No             Yes            Yes              No              Yes                Yes

 State UR x Has
                                   No             No             Yes              No              No                 Yes
 Children


Notes: Each regression includes data on unmarried women ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after the federal
EITC expansion. The 1990 expansion uses only CPS ASEC data; the 1993 expansion also includes CPS monthly
files in the specifications based on worked last week. Panel A limits to women with a high school diploma or less.
All columns include indicators for woman's education and age, and age bin of youngest child, plus state and year
fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is the interaction of post-EITC expansion and whether the woman has
EITC-eligible children. This table differs from Table 1 because in Table 1 the 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions are
phased in over time, and we code the phase-in years to be the share of the expansion implemented by that year with
full phase-in equal to 1 as described in text. In this table, the 1990 and 1993 expansions are coded as a binary



                                                                                                                43
indicator in 1991 and 1994, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                                                                                       44
Table A5. Event-Study Coefficients for 1993 EITC Expansion, with and without
Waiver*Children*Year Fixed Effects
 Panel A: Low Education Sample
                                  Worked in Year             Worked last week
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)


 Year 3                        -0.349       4.581**         1.060        4.061***
                               (2.976)       (1.968)       (1.511)        (1.019)


 Year 5                       8.798***     10.605***      7.656***       8.509***
                               (3.129)       (2.078)       (1.575)        (1.080)


 Year 10                      9.705***     12.840***      12.021***     13.669***
                               (2.753)       (1.830)       (1.563)        (1.001)
 Waivers*Kids*Year               Yes           No            Yes            No


 Panel B: Overall Sample
                                  Worked in Year             Worked last week
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
 Year 3                        -0.287       3.601***        0.836        2.986***
                               (1.865)       (1.227)       (0.996)        (0.668)


 Year 5                       6.128***      8.853***      5.715***       6.806***
                               (1.923)       (1.282)       (1.008)        (0.699)


 Year 10                      9.163***     10.284***      9.017***      10.311***
                               (1.651)       (1.119)       (0.982)        (0.640)


 Waivers*Kids*Year               Yes           No            Yes            No

Notes: This table shows estimates of the effects of the 1993 EITC expansion in years 3, 5, and 10 years after the
implementation began. The estimates are based on comparing single women with children to those without children.
All specifications include demographic controls and state fixed effects. The columns show results for employment
with different controls, Panel A shows results for women with a high school diploma or less, while Panel B includes
all unmarried women ages 20-50. Column (3), estimates for years 3 and 10 replicate results from column 3 table 6 in
Kleven (2020). Data from CPS-ASEC and basic monthly CPS files. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                45
Appendix Figure 1. Income with and without EITC



                                                                                          Above EITC
                                                                                            range


                                                                             Phase-out
                                                                              region
  Total income




                                     Maximum
                                    credit region
                                                                                Income
                                                                                without
                                                                                  EITC
                 Phase-in
                  region
                                              Income
                                             with EITC



                                                            Hours worked
Notes: Income with EITC based on 2020 parameters for unmarried filer with two children.



                                                                                                       46
Appendix Figure 2. Event Studies: EITC Impact on Annual Employment of All Unmarried Mothers




                                                                                              47
Notes: Each panel includes data on unmarried women, ages 20-50, for the 5 years before and after the federal EITC expansion, using CPS ASEC data on annual
employment status. All event studies include controls for woman's education and age, age bin of youngest child, state and year fixed effects, state unemployment
rate and (except panel E) unemployment rate interacted with presence of children. In the pooled specification (panel F), the coefficients on the control variables
are allowed to vary across each expansion. The 1990 and 1993 EITC expansions are phased in over time, and we code the phase-in years to be the share of the
expansion implemented by that year with full phase-in equal to 1 as described in text. The 2009 expansion only impacted unmarried women with 3 children, and
we use unmarried women with 2 children as the control group. States are grouped in the CPS prior to 1977, so state-group fixed effects are included for those
years and the weighted average unemployment rate is included as a control variable. Figures present estimates of an indicator variable for the 5 years before and
after the EITC expansion, with the year prior to expansion omitted. Standard errors are clustered at the state level, and 95 percent confidence intervals are
displayed.




                                                                                                                                                               48
