                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MAKING RALLIES GREAT AGAIN:
THE EFFECTS OF PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN RALLIES ON VOTER BEHAVIOR, 2008-2016

                                       James M. Snyder Jr.
                                          Hasin Yousaf

                                       Working Paper 28043
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28043


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2020




 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by James M. Snyder Jr. and Hasin Yousaf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Making Rallies Great Again: The Effects of Presidential Campaign Rallies on Voter Behavior,
2008-2016
James M. Snyder Jr. and Hasin Yousaf
NBER Working Paper No. 28043
October 2020
JEL No. D72

                                         ABSTRACT

Populism has surged around the world in recent decades. One campaign activity that may be
especially important for populist leaders is holding large rallies to gain unmediated support from
"the people." In this paper, we explore whether populist leaders are particularly effective in
gaining support via their rallies. We do this by studying the effect of campaign rallies held by
Donald Trump and other U.S. Presidential candidates since 2008. To measure the short-run
causal impact of rallies, we exploit the fact that some respondents in the CCES were surveyed a
few days before a rally, while others were surveyed a few days afterwards. We find that Trump's
rallies produced a short-lived increase in his support over Clinton (especially among leaning
Republicans), intention to vote (especially among strong Republicans), and individual campaign
contributions for him. We do not find consistent, robust effects for other candidates. In terms of
channels, we find that local media coverage of all candidates increased around their rallies,
suggesting that the quantity of media coverage alone does not explain the findings.


James M. Snyder Jr.
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS
Knafel Building Room 413
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jsnyder@gov.harvard.edu

Hasin Yousaf
School of Economics
UNSW
Sydney, NSW 2052
Australia
h.yousaf@unsw.edu.au



An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28043
1   Introduction

The rise of populism in recent decades has raised concerns about the future of
liberal democracy, especially in the United States and Western Europe (Hawkins
et al., 2019). The vote share of populist parties has tripled in Europe from 1998
to 2018 (The Guardian, 2018). The success of these parties is often attributed to
individual leaders, figures such as Jorg Haider in Austria, Mateo Salvini in Italy,
Recep Tayyip Erdogen in Turkey, and Narendra Modi in India. Commentators
have even coined terms such as the "Trump effect", "Le Pen effect" or the "Haider
phenomenon" to highlight their importance.
    One campaign activity that is especially important for many populist leaders
is holding large rallies (Jansen, 2011). These rallies help populists appeal to "the
people" for their direct and unmediated support and promote the idea that they
are themselves "one of the people." (Albertazzi and McDonnell, 2007; Mudde and
Kaltwasser, 2017). As Lichtenstein (2019) notes: "Almost by definition, populists
are unorganized in any meaningful sense. They do not function through and
with an institution, except perhaps via intense engagement in partisan politics
at the height of the campaign season. Mass rallies offer an emotive substitute
for substantive political organization and engagement. This kind of populism
is, therefore, the label attached to protest sentiment unmoored by institutional
loyalties."
    In this paper, we provide evidence that populist leaders are particularly effec-
tive in gaining support via their campaign rallies, at least temporarily. We do
this by studying the effect of campaign rallies held by U.S. Presidential candidates
since 2008. While the Republican Party is not easily characterized as populist,
the current Republican U.S. President, Donald Trump, is. Hawkins et al. (2019)
analyze the speeches of 215 world leaders around the world and find that Donald
Trump is a populist leader with a score of 0.78 (87th percentile). The previous
two presidents, Barack Obama and George W. Bush, have scores of 0.15 and 0.21,
respectively.1
    Further evidence of Trump's populistic style and appeal can be seen by exam-
ining the many ways his 2016 presidential campaign and unlikely victory represent
a break from the past. Trump won the Republican nomination even though he
was opposed by virtually all Republican elites (MacWilliams, 2016), and spent
much less than the other leading contenders (National Public Radio, 2016).2 And,
    1
      Among 215 leaders from 66 countries analyzed by Hawkins et al. (2019), only Vladim´    ir
Me ciar (Slovakia), Recep T. Erdogan (Turkey), Mirek Topolanek and Vaclav Klaus (Czech Re-
public), Silvio Berlusconi and Giuseppe Conte (Italy), Andr´
                                                           es Manuel L´
                                                                      opez Obrador (Mexico),
Viktor Orban (Hungary), and Beate Szydlo (Poland) have a higher score than Donald Trump.
    2
      For instance, for the New Hampshire primary, Donald Trump spent a total of $ 3.1 million
on TV advertisements. As a comparison, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Chris Christie, Bernie Sanders,


                                              2
Trump won the presidency despite spending much less on his general election cam-
paign than Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, and even less, relatively, on paid
television advertisements. Clinton outspent Trump by $769 million to $440 million
overall, and she outspent him by about 3 to 1 in TV advertisements (The Center
for Responsive Politics, 2017).3 In the popular media, Trump was widely referred
to as a populist.4 Observers often draw comparisons between Trump and other
nationalistic and anti-immigrant populist leaders, such as Matteo Salvini in Italy,
Marine Le Pen in France, or Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orb´        an.
    Trump's campaign rallies were different from those of his opponents and other
recent presidential candidates. At these rallies, Trump's skills as a reality-TV
star were on full display. The crowds often became passionate and broke into
chants ­ "Build the Wall" or "Drain the Swamp" or "Lock Her Up" as well as the
more mundane "Trump, Trump, Trump." These rallies were described as "identity
festivals" that "enacted how Trump and his followers would like the country to be."
(Scientific American, 2017). The Atlantic (2018) asserts that: "At the president's
rallies, his devotees find the relief of belonging." According to Topic Magazine
(2019), "Donald Trump's rallies are one of his greatest political tools."5
    We study the impact of Trump's rallies on citizens' preferences over candidates,
policy issues, and their intention to vote. To better isolate the effects of the rallies
from other events, we use data from a large survey ­ the Cooperative Congressional
Elections Study (CCES) ­ to exploit both time and geography. Some respondents
in the CCES were surveyed a few days before a rally, while others were surveyed
a few days afterwards. In addition, for many rallies, some of the respondents
surveyed around the time of the rally lived near the rally site.6 Thus, we compare
the average change in political preferences and voting intentions around the time
of the rally among respondents who live near a rally site, with the changes among
and Hillary Clinton spent $ 34.0, 16.7, 14.6, 9.1, and 4.9 million, respectively.
     3
       As a comparison, the past presidential winners in 2012 and 2008 raised $ 769 and $ 730
million, respectively.
     4
       For instance, see National Public Radio (2015), Newsweek (2015), and Politico Magazine
(2016).
     5
       Jones (1998) describes the goals of campaign rallies as follows: "Though, on the surface,
campaign appearances may appear to be strictly theater, these do serve several important polit-
ical purposes. First and foremost, campaign appearances are designed to attract the attention
of both voters and local news media. Candidates want to alert people of the impending election
and the stakes involved. Second, candidates intend for their visits to serve as a call to action
­ to encourage people to participate by voting or joining the local campaign effort. Last, but
not least, campaign appearances serve as an attempt to directly persuade citizens to vote for
the candidate. The candidate's stump speech serves as a ready-made justification for voting for
the candidate and their fellow partisans." (Jones, 1998, p. 397). Despite being written nearly 20
years beforehand, this description seems to apply perfectly to Trump's campaign.
     6
       As we show below, local newspaper and television news coverage of rallies were significantly
higher in the media market areas where the rallies were held than in other areas, so respondents
living near the rally sight were likely exposed to more coverage than other respondents.



                                                3
those who live far away from the site. Since the 2016 CCES has a total sample size
of almost 65,000, and since Trump held 71 rallies in 15 states during the survey
period, mostly at sites in large media markets, even after restricting the sample
we have many thousand respondents. Our identification strategy is similar to that
employed by Chiang and Knight (2011) in their study of presidential newspaper
endorsements in 2000 and 2004.7
    Our findings are straightforward. First, we find that Trump rallies appear
to have increased his support over Clinton by about 4.5 percentage points on
average. The effects are short-lived, lasting about one week. Moreover, the ef-
fects are especially large for respondents who identify as "weak" Republicans and
Republican-leaning independents. Second, Trump rallies also appear to have in-
creased the intention to turn out for "strong" Republicans and Democrats, but not
for other respondents. Third, rallies by Trump increased the individual campaign
contributions for him. The effect is short-lived and dies out in less than six days.
To compare how the effect of rallies by Trump differs from rallies by other presi-
dential candidates, we use the same approach to study the rallies held by Hillary
Clinton in 2016, as well as those held by Barack Obama and Mitt Romney in 2012,
and by Obama and John McCain in 2008. For these candidates ­ none of whom
could be called a populist ­ we find no consistent, robust effects.8
    To explore the channels that may explain why Trump's rallies generate changes
in voting intention and turnout, unlike rallies by other presidential candidates, we
first analyze the local media coverage of rallies around the time these rallies were
held. We find evidence that Trump's local media coverage increased around the
time of his rallies, both on television news and in newspapers. We do not find
similar effects on the amount of paid television advertising by either Trump or
Clinton. So, it is possible that respondents' changed their vote intentions due to
the additional coverage of the candidate on media. However, we find increases
of similar magnitude in the coverage of almost all other presidential candidates
around their rallies as well. This suggests that either the quality of Trump's
coverage was different from that of other candidates, or that the effect of the
additional coverage on respondents was different.
    Our paper contributes to the growing literature on the political economy of
populism. Most of the literature has focused on the theoretical underpinnings
explaining the recent rise of populism. For instance, politicians may choose a
    7
      One feature in Chiang and Knight (2011) that does not apply here is the distinction between
"surprising" vs. "unsurprising" endorsements. It is possible that some of Trump's rallies were
more surprising than others, but we do not attempt to measure that here. Hungerman et al.
(2018) also employs a similar research design to study a completely different type of behavior:
voluntary donations to churches.
    8
      We do not find consistent changes in respondents' issue positions or the relative importance
they give to different issues, nor on their perceptions of the candidates' issue positions.


                                                4
populist platform either when voters perceive that politicians are influenced by
the rich elite (Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin, 2013) or when they are electorally
disadvantaged (Eguia and Giovannoni, 2019). Pastor and Veronesi (2018) show
that voters' dislike for inequality and a rise in inequality due to globalization may
lead to an increase in support for populist leaders. There are limited empirical
studies understanding the recent success of populist leaders (Hawkins and Littvay,
2019). Existing papers have shown that economic factors such as unemployment
(Algan et al., 2017), economic insecurity (Guiso et al., 2017), and skilled-biased
trade (Guriev, 2018) have lead to an increase in populism. We contribute to
this literature by providing evidence that populist leaders' success may depend
on connecting with voters via rallies. Since the effects seem short-lived, our find-
ings might also help account for the fact that many populist leaders hold them
frequently and not only during the months leading up to elections.
    Our paper also contributes directly to a large literature that seeks to estimate
the electoral effects of political rallies and campaigns in the U.S. The evidence
from existing studies is mixed overall. For example, Heersink and Peterson (2017)
using county-level election results from 1948 find that Truman's vote-share was
significantly higher where he made campaign visits, but the same was not true for
Dewey. Jones (1998), Althaus, Nardulli and Shaw (2002) and Gerber et al. (2011)
study campaign visits and advertisements during presidential elections from 1972
to 2000 and conclude that the visits had a significant impact on the vote. Herr
(2002) studies the 1996 election and finds that visits by Bill Clinton later in the
electoral campaign were significantly related to his vote-share, but earlier visits
were not; and visits by Dole were not related to the vote. Wendland (2017) studies
campaign visits and advertising during the presidential primaries of 2008, 2012 and
2016, and finds mixed results.9 For 2016, neither Clinton's nor Sanders's campaign
visits were significantly related to vote choice. Among Republicans, Trump's visits
were significantly related to vote choice, but visits by Cruz and Rubio were not.10
Finally, Devine (2018) regresses county-level vote-share on campaign visits by
Trump and Clinton and finds that no candidate's visits had a significant effect on
the overall voting outcomes.11
   9
      Also see Shaw and Gimpel (2012) for a field experiment in which they randomized Texas
governor Rick Perry's schedule of visits for 3 days in January 2006.
   10
      For 2008, visits by Clinton were significantly related to vote choice, but visits by Obama
were not; nor were visits by McCain, Romney, or Huckabee. For 2012, Romney's visits were
significantly related to vote choice, but visits by Santorum and Gingrich were not. Note that we
refer here to statistical significance and Wendland's interpretation of the results. In many cases,
the point estimates are quite large but so are the standard errors.
   11
      However, analyzing the data separately by state, he finds that Clinton's visits appear to have
affected the vote in Pennsylvania and, possibly, also in Michigan. He concludes that "Donald
Trump did not win in Pennsylvania, Michigan, or Wisconsin as a direct result of his campaign
visits to those decisive states" (Devine, 2018, p. 1).


                                                 5
    Our findings contribute to this literature, both substantively and methodolog-
ically. Methodologically, our identification strategy is tighter than previous work
­ other than field experiments ­ since we exploit both geographical variation and
high-frequency variation over time. This identification type of research design
might be useful for studying the effects of other types of campaign activities as
well. Substantively, we find that rallies have heterogeneous effects. In particu-
lar, as noted above, we find significant effects for Donald Trump but not for the
five other presidential candidates studied. These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that rallies are a more important tool for more populist candidates.
    Finally, our paper is also related to the political economy of media and per-
suasion. Prat and Str¨   omberg (2013) provide a recent review of the literature.
Extensive research has shown that political advertising (Spenkuch and Toniatti,
2018), introduction of Fox News (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007), and newspaper
endorsements (Chiang and Knight, 2011) impact the partisan vote share. Our
paper shows that (i) rallies are one way for politicians to gain free media cov-
erage, but (ii) media coverage of rallies does not appear to translate into higher
vote share for all candidates. This suggests that something other than the sheer
amount of coverage is involved.


2     Data

In the following section, we first describe in detail the data sources used in the
paper. We then provide summary statistics for the key variables employed in the
paper.

2.1      Data source

Presidential Rallies: We obtain the location and date of presidential rallies
for 2008, 2012, and 2016 Presidential candidates from the Democracy in Action
website (Appleman, 2019). The website documents the information on each phase
of the presidential campaign ranging from the pre-campaign to the presidential
inauguration since 2000. Importantly for us, it contains a record of the travel
calendar of all the presidential candidates from more than three months before
the presidential elections up to the election day. We use this information to geo-
code all the presidential rallies up to one week prior to the first interview date
in our survey sample. That is, we geo-code all the presidential rallies on or af-
ter September 22nd, September 26th, and October 1st for 2016, 2012, and 2008
presidential elections, respectively.12 Additionally, for the presidential rallies by
    12
     The first set of interviews were conducted on September 28th, October 1st, and October
8th in 2016, 2012, and 2008 CCES survey, respectively.


                                            6
Donald Trump, we manually collect information on the estimated attendees for
each presidential rally. We collect information on the swing states in 2016, 2012,
and 2008 presidential elections from the Ballotpedia (2016), Cillizza (2012), and
Post (2008), respectively.13
    Figure A1 shows the location of rallies by the Republican and Democratic
presidential candidates in 2016 (Panel (a)), 2012 (Panel (b)), and 2008 (Panel
(c)), on or after September 22nd, September 26th, and October 1st for the 2016,
2012, and 2008 presidential elections. In terms of numbers, we have a total of 76
rallies by Trump, 51 rallies by Romney, 55 rallies by McCain, 58 rallies by Clinton,
35 rallies by Obama in 2012, and 55 rallies by Obama in 2008. This translates
into, on average, 1.65 rallies per day for Trump, McCain, and Obama in 2008, 1.28
rallies per day by Romney and Clinton, and 0.88 rallies per day by Obama in 2012.
Most of the presidential rallies in the days leading up to the general elections are
concentrated in the swing states. For example, all but two of the 76 rallies by
Trump (one in New Mexico on October 30th, and one in Minnesota on November
5th) were held in swing states. Similarly, all of the 58 rallies by Clinton (except
one in Massachusetts on September 28th and one in New York on October 20th)
were held in the swing states.14
    Survey data: We use 2008, 2012, and 2016 Cooperative Congressional Elec-
tion Study (CCES) to measure the intention to vote for each presidential can-
didate and intention to turn out for a vote in the upcoming general elections
(Ansolabehere, 2011, 2013, 2017). The CCES is a large sample survey that seeks
to understand the voters' perception of the politicians and government, and how
it varies over time and geography during the elections. Two features of the CCES
survey make it especially useful for studying the effect of rallies by presidential
candidates on voting intentions. First, the survey is conducted on a rolling basis
over the 6 weeks leading up to the elections. The first set of interviews in the
2016, 2012, and 2008 CCES surveys were conducted on September 28th, October
1st, and October 8th, respectively. The last set of pre-election interviews were
conducted one day before the general elections. The staggered nature of the in-
terview provides us with an estimate of the voting intention for each presidential
candidate before the rallies, which helps us gauge the changes in voting intentions
  13
      The swing states in the 2016 presidential elections are: Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Iowa,
Maine, Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and
Wisconsin. The swing states in the 2012 presidential elections are: Colorado, Florida, Iowa,
Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia, and Wisconsin. The swing states in the
2008 presidential elections are: Colorado, Florida, Indiana, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire,
North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.
   14
      None of the rallies by Romney and Obama in 2012 were held in non-swing states. In
2008, Obama held rallies in the following non-swing states: Iowa, Michigan, New Mexico, and
Wisconsin; and McCain held rallies in Arizona, Iowa, New Mexico, and Wisconsin.



                                               7
for the same presidential candidate. We exploit this staggered nature of the inter-
view structure in our empirical strategy by performing an event study around the
date of the rally. Second, the sample size of CCES is much larger than most other
political surveys ­ in 2016, 2012, and 2008, the CCES interviewed 64, 600, 54, 500,
and 32, 800 individuals, respectively. We require a large-scale survey to have suffi-
cient power to detect the impact of presidential rallies on voting intentions. This
is because we employ a demanding empirical specification, and potentially the
impact of presidential rallies may not be large.
    We combine the CCES data with the exact date of the presidential rallies to
define the number of days at which each respondent is interviewed from the closest
rally for each presidential candidate. This variable resets once there is another
presidential rally by the same presidential candidate in the same geography. The
increase in media coverage of the presidential candidates around their rally may
be an important channel through which voters may hear about the rallies. The
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates the media market into local
television market areas. Since local broadcast television is the primary method
used by political candidates to reach the electorate, in the main analysis, we take
media markets as the "treatment" geography level.
    The rallies by presidential candidates may influence the voting outcomes through
a change in voting intention for the candidate or through an increase in the
intention to turn out to vote. We measure intention to turn out to vote in
the coming elections as the answer to the question: "Does R intend to Vote in
2008/2012/2016". The variable takes on a value of one if respondent answers
"Yes, definitely", and is zero otherwise. We measure the intention to vote for a
candidate as one response to the question asking respondents their preference for
the presidential candidate.15
    To understand whether the presidential rallies impact the salience and pref-
erence over different policy dimensions, we also use the questions on the most
important problem. The most important problem is asked as: "What is the most
important problem facing the country today?". The question is not asked in the
2012 wave. In addition, we use the question asking respondents their preference
over different policy issues such as immigration, trade policy, and environmental
policy.
    To understand whether the presidential rallies impact the valence of the can-
didate and the opponent, we also use questions on the candidate characteristics.
  15
     The question takes different wordings across 2008, 2012, and 2016 waves. In 2008, the
question was stated as: "For which candidate for President of the United States would you
vote?". In 2012, the question is asked as: "In the race for President of the United States, who do
you prefer?". In 2016, the question was stated as: "Which candidate for President of the United
States do you prefer?".


                                                8
2008 is the only year in which respondents are asked about candidate characteris-
tics. We use the following questions to measure three different candidate charac-
teristics: (i) Do you consider this candidate to be "Honest," (ii) Do you consider
this candidate to be "Knowledgeable," and (iii) Do you consider this candidate to
be "Experienced." We create a binary indicator equal to one if the respondent
answers "yes", zero if the respondent answers "no", and missing if the respondent
answers "don't know" or skips the question.
    Advertisement data: We collect the information on the political advertise-
ment for each political candidate during the 2008 and 2012 presidential campaigns
from the Wesleyan Media and Wisconsin Advertising Projects, respectively (Gold-
stein et al., 2011; Fowler, Franz and Ridout, 2015). The data contains a complete
record of all political advertisements aired on any national TV or cable networks.
The data includes information on the ad length, date, and time when it was aired,
the candidate favored by the ad, and some additional manually coded information
on its content. Crucially for us, it also contains information on the media market
where the ad was aired. We use the information on the date and the candidate
favored by each ad to construct a daily measure of the number of advertisements
aired by each political candidate in each media market. We use this measure to
analyze whether the presidential candidates and their opponents use the politi-
cal advertisement as substitutes or complements to their on-ground presidential
campaign.
    Media coverage and advertisement for 2016: To study how media cover-
age of candidates varies with presidential rallies, we collected data from an on-line
archive of close-captioned TV clips from local TV stations.16 The database con-
tains the content of all news, advertisement, and TV shows segments broadcasted
on the local TV stations that are affiliated with one of the major television net-
works: ABC, CBS, Fox or NBC. Altogether, we collected information for 103
TV stations across 26 media markets for the entire 2016. We perform an auto-
mated search to measure the media coverage and TV advertisement intensity of
the presidential candidates for every half-an-hour bin during the day. We perform
a search for the name of the candidate and the word "rally" to measure their media
coverage. Additionally, we search for the name of the candidate and the word "I
approve" to measure the advertising intensity of the candidate. We then aggregate
the data to construct a daily measure of the media coverage and advertisement
intensity of each candidate.
    Newspaper articles: We collect the information on the newspaper coverage
of each presidential candidate using the website newslibrary.com. We perform
an automated search for the intersection of the term "rally" and name of the
  16
       For details about the archive see Moskowitz (2018).


                                                9
presidential candidate for each date in October and November of the election year.
For example, for the news coverage of rallies of Donald Trump during October and
November 2016, we perform a search for the terms "Donald Trump" and "rally".
We use the results from this search to construct a state-level daily measure of
newspaper coverage for each presidential candidate in the weeks leading up to the
election, from October 1st to the day before election day.
    Campaign contributions data: We use the data on 2008, 2012, and 2016
individual political contributions from the Federal Election Commission (2019).
FEC records all individual campaign contributions over $200 given to a political
candidate, political party, or political action committee (PAC). The data contains
information on the name, occupation, and zip-code of the donor, the date and
amount of contribution, and the receiving PAC, candidate, or party committee.
We use the information on the date of the contribution and the receiving commit-
tee to construct a daily measure of the campaign contributions received by each
presidential candidate up to two months before the general elections.
    Election results: We collect the data on the 2004 to 2016 presidential election
outcomes at the county level from David Leip's Atlas of U.S. Elections (Leip,
2018). The data contains information on the total number of votes received by the
Republican and Democratic presidential candidate and total votes in each election.
We use the data to construct vote share and lagged vote share for the Republican
and Democratic presidential candidates from 2008 to 2016. We use county to
media markets crosswalk provided by Sood (2016) to construct contemporaneous
and lagged votes received by Republican and Democratic presidential candidates
and total votes in the presidential elections.
    American Community Survey (ACS) data: We construct the data on
socio-economic and demographic characteristics of media markets from 2009, 2012,
and 2016 5-year county-level estimates of American Community Survey (ACS). We
use county to media markets crosswalk provided by Sood (2016) to create measures
of local characteristics at the media market level.

2.2   Summary statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main variables used in the paper in
the swing states. Panel A presents the summary statistics for the main dependent
variables. In 2016, 49.7% of the respondents surveyed during our sample period
stated that they intended to vote for the Republican candidate; the correspond-
ing percentages for 2012 and 2008 are 44.3 and 44.9, respectively. In our main
analysis we restrict to respondents who either intend to vote for the Republican
or Democratic candidate, so among the percentage of respondents who intend to


                                        10
vote for the Democratic candidate in each election is always 100 minus the Repub-
lican percentage. The intention to turn out was similar in 2016 and 2012 ­ 82.8%
and 81.8%, respectively ­ and even higher in 2008 at 89.8%. On average, Trump
received $1, 513 in daily individual campaign contributions from media markets in
swing states. Panel B shows the summary statistics for the socio-economic vari-
ables. In terms of partisan self-identification, 20% of the respondents are strong
and weak Democrats, 25% of the respondents are strong and weak Republicans,
and 10% of the respondents are independents.

3   Empirical Strategy

In this section, we discuss the main empirical strategy used in the paper to estimate
the impact of presidential rallies. The basic specification is as follows:

                       Yijt = j + t +  Post -Rally jt + uijt ,                   (1)

where the dependent variable Yijt measures the intention to vote for a particular
candidate, or the intention to cast a vote, for respondent i living in geographic
unit j and interviewed on the date t. The variable Post -Rally jt is an indicator
variable equal to one for all respondents in the geography j on all dates on or after
a rally by a presidential candidate, and zero otherwise. To capture heterogeneity
in the effectiveness of rallies across different presidential candidates, we estimate
the Equation 1 separately for each candidate.
    All specifications include daily fixed effects, denoted via the term t , and geo-
graphic area fixed effects, denoted via the term j . The former captures national
trends, political campaign shocks, and other events that are common to all the
individuals. It accounts for changes in the voter intention to vote for a candi-
date and turnout across the campaigning period. For example, voters interviewed
closer to the date of the general election may have more information about the
candidates' platforms relative to the voters interviewed several weeks earlier. The
latter controls for the geographic-level factors that do not change over time or that
evolve slowly, including demographic and socio-economic characteristics, electoral
competitiveness, and average partisanship.
    The coefficient  is the main parameter of interest. Since we include geographic
and daily fixed effects, the estimation of  comes from changes in voting intention
across treated and control geographies over time. That is, the estimation of 
comes from comparing daily changes in the intention to vote for a candidate or
intention to turn out to vote between geography where a presidential candidate
organized a rally relative to other geographies. To further isolate the effects of
rallies, we restrict attention to respondents interviewed within a narrow window

                                         11
of 10 days around the time of each presidential rally. Thus, the idea behind our
estimation strategy is roughly as follows: for each rally, compare average changes
in Yijt among voters living in the geographic unit where the rally takes place, all
of whom were surveyed within 10 days of the rally, with average changes in Yijt
among voters living in other geographic areas interviewed on the same days (since
we include fixed effects for each day); then average across all rallies to obtain the
overall average effect.
    Our preferred geographic units are media markets. This is for two main reasons.
First, media markets strike a suitable balance between defining geography too
finely or too coarsely. If we define the treatment at a geographically coarse level,
say the state, then we may be classifying areas not affected by a presidential rally
as if they were "treated." This is especially likely for large states such as Florida
or Pennsylvania ­ individuals in Jacksonville or Tallahassee might not even know
about rallies held in Miami. On the other hand, if we define the treatment at
a geographically granular level, say the zip-code, then we may have the opposite
problem. That is, many neighboring zip-codes around the rally site might be
affected by a presidential rally, but we would be classifying them as "untreated."
In addition, we may have very few "treated" individuals if the geographic units are
too small.
    Second, media coverage of the presidential candidates around their rallies may
be an important channel through which voters learn about these events. The
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates broadcast, cable and satel-
lite television using local television market areas. Since local television news is
one of the primary sources of political information for voters, presidential rallies
in the area within a media market are likely to receive greater media coverage.
In Appendix Section A1.3, we present and discuss the main results considering
alternative treatment geographies ­ county, commuting zone, and state.
    We cluster the standard errors at the media market level to allow for arbitrary
correlation in the residuals among respondents from the same media market. To
ensure that a few outliers do not influence the results, we restrict attention to
media markets with at least fifty respondents. Moreover, as noted above, in the
media markets with a presidential rally, we only include respondents who were
interviewed within a 10-day window around the rally. For media markets without
a presidential rally, we keep all the respondents. In our baseline sample, we use the
respondents who intend to vote for either Republican or Democratic presidential
candidates.
    To define the comparison group of "non-treated" respondents, we consider sev-
eral different sub-samples of respondents who do not reside in the media market
with a presidential rally. To begin, for each candidate we keep only the sample of

                                         12
respondents who live in media markets where that presidential candidate held a
rally at some point during the campaign. We then gradually increase the sample
by including: respondents who live in media markets where either the candidate
or his/her opponent held a rally during the campaign; those who live in media
markets where at least one presidential candidate from the candidate's party held
a rally since 2008; and those who live in media markets where at least one major-
party presidential candidate held a rally since 2008. We also consider the analogous
samples based on states rather than media markets: respondents living in states
where the presidential candidate held a rally during the campaign; in states where
either the candidate or his/her opponent held a rally during the campaign; and
so on. Finally, we also estimate models that include all swing states, and models
that include all states.
    It is plausible that areas where a presidential candidate organizes a rally may
be systematically different from areas where they do not. Presidential candidates
focus heavily on battleground states during the final weeks of their campaigns.17
For this reason, battleground states are much more likely to have a presidential
rally relative to non-battleground states. Between September 22 and election
day in 2016, only 2 out of the 76 rallies by Donald Trump, and 2 out of the 58
rallies by Hillary Clinton, were in non-battleground states. Since the dynamics of
the voter behavior are potentially different in battleground and non-battleground
states, among the different geographies mentioned above, respondents living in
battleground states would seem to be an especially relevant comparison group.
Thus, in our main specification, we focus on the media markets within a swing
state.
    If media markets in battleground states with and without presidential rallies
differ systematically, then our estimates may not capture the causal effect of rallies.
In Table A1, we compare media markets in the battleground states with and
without presidential rallies for each presidential candidate. We see that the media
markets with a rally tend to be more populated than other media markets in
battleground states. This makes sense, since candidates want their campaigns
to reach large numbers of voters. This correlation would be a problem if other
characteristics vary systematically across media markets with and without rallies.
For instance, we see that media markets with and without presidential rallies differ
on race and income.
    To see whether these correlations stem from candidates targeting more popu-
lated areas, in Table A2, we additionally control for population. The differences
  17
     Althaus, Nardulli and Shaw (2002) study the determinants of campaign visits in presidential
elections from 1972 to 2000. They find that candidates tend to visit media market areas with
more voters and electorally competitive states more than other media markets and states. See
also Stromberg (2008) who documents similar patterns for other years.


                                              13
in local characteristics disappear once we control for variation in the population.18
This suggests that presidential candidates do not systematically target media mar-
kets based on particular local characteristics, but aim to reach a larger section of
the electorate.
    To study whether the impact of presidential rallies on the voting intentions
reflects a transitory or a long-lasting impact, we also perform event studies around
presidential rallies, using the following specification:

                                         =4
                     Yijt = j + t +           Post -Rally j,t- + ijt ,                 (2)
                                        =-4


where Yijt is again the intention to turn out or to vote for a candidate for respon-
dent i living in the media market j and interviewed on the date t. In order to
reduce measurement error due to small samples, we pool the daily interviews into
three-day windows. The variable P ost-Rallyj,t- is a dummy equal to one for day
3 before ( > 0) or after ( < 0) there was a presidential rally in the media mar-
ket. The three days before the presidential rally ( = -1) is the omitted category.
For media markets with multiple rallies by a presidential candidate, we reset the
clock after each rally. In all specifications, we include individuals interviewed up
to twelve days before a presidential rally and up to twelve days after a presidential
rally.


4     Main Results

4.1      Impact of rallies on voting intention and turnout

Table 2, Panel 1, shows the impact of rallies by presidential candidates on the
intention to vote for these candidates. We focus on media markets in swing states,
where changes in voter decisions matter the most in U.S. presidential elections. In
Column 1, we analyze the effect of rallies by Trump on the intention to vote for
Trump. On average, the intention to vote for Trump increased by 4.5 percentage
points during the 10 days after a Trump rally in media markets with Trump
rallies relative to media markets in swing states without Trump rallies. This is
a substantively large effect, corresponding to an increase of 10% of a standard
deviation of the dependent variable. In Columns 2 to 6, we find that there is little
impact of rallies by other candidates on the intention to vote for those candidates.
The estimates are not statistically insignificant even at the 0.10 level.
    Table 2, Panel 2, shows the impact of rallies by presidential candidates on the
    18
     The only exception is that in 2012 Obama appears to have targeted media markets with a
higher Democratic vote share and turnout in the previous general election.



                                              14
intention to turn out to vote. In Column 1, we analyze the effect of rallies by
Trump. We find that Trump rallies resulted in a 5.1 percentage point increase in
the intention to vote. We do not find an impact of rallies by other candidates on
the intention to turn out. None of the point estimates are statistically significant
even at the .10 level, and the overall picture is that rallies by other candidates had
little or no effect on turnout.
     In addition to attracting votes, rallies may serve as a means to attract money.
In Panel 3 of Table 2, we examine individual campaign contributions (not political
action committees), using the same type of specification used in the other panels.
Thus, the estimates in Panel 3 show the impact of rallies by presidential candidates
on campaign contributions raised from individual donors around the time and place
of a rally. In Column 1, we see that Trump rallies lead to a 70.2% increase in the
individual campaign contributions in the media markets where he held a rally
relative to other swing state media markets. The estimates imply, on average,
a daily increase of $1130 in media markets where Trump held a rally. Column
4 suggests that Clinton rallies actually had a negative effect on local individual
campaign contributions. Rallies by Clinton are associated with a 16.5% decrease in
the local individual campaign contributions in the media market where she held a
rally relative to other media markets. The remaining columns indicate that rallies
by other presidential candidates do not affect individual campaign contributions,
as least locally.
     The patterns in Table 2 are robust across different samples. In Table 3, we focus
on Trump. Analogous tables for other candidates can be found in the Appendix.
     The three panels in Table 3 again correspond to the three dependent variables
under study, but now the columns refer to different subsamples rather than dif-
ferent candidates. Consider Panel 1, on the intention to vote for Trump. If we
consider all media markets where Trump held at least one rally during the 2016
campaign (Column 2), then the estimate is similar to that in Table 2 for swing
states (Column 1).19 The estimates are similar if we use the sample of media
markets where either Trump or Clinton held a campaign rally (Column 3), or all
media markets in states where Trump held at least one rally (Column 4). The
estimates are slightly smaller but still substantively meaningful if we consider the
sample of media markets in states where either Trump or Clinton held a rally in
2016 (Column 5), or simply all respondents (Column 6).
     In Panel 2 the dependent variable is the intention to turn out. Most of the
estimates are large in magnitude and statistically significant ­ those where the
subsample consists of all swing states (Column 1), all states where Trump held at
least one rally (Column 4), or states where either Clinton or Trump held a rally
  19
       For convenience, we reproduce the estimates for Trump from Table 2 in Column 1 of Table 3.


                                                15
(Column 5). The estimates in the other three columns are only about half as large
and not statistically significant, however. As we discuss below, however, when we
focus on loyal Republican voters the turnout effects are large and robust across all
subsamples.
    In Panel 3, we analyze the impact of Trump rallies on campaign donations
across the various subsamples. Here, the estimates are all economically large and
statistically significant. The estimates imply that Trump rallies lead to a 38.6%
to 70.2% increase in the individual campaign contributions in the media markets
where he held a rally.
    We present analogous tables for the other five presidential candidates in the
appendix. These tables show patterns similar to those in Table 2. Regardless of
the sample chosen, none of them appear to have attracted more support among
respondents. Nor is there consistent evidence that their rallies affected turnout or
individual campaign donations. The results for Romney, McCain, Clinton, Obama
in 2012 and Obama in 2008 are shown in Table A3, Table A4, Table A5, Table A6,
and Table A7, respectively

4.2   Dynamics of the impact on voting intention and turnout

We now explore how the effect of rallies dissipates over time, via a series of event
study analyses. This allows us to assess whether the effects estimated above are
short-lived or represent a durable change in voters' preferences and intentions to
vote. We focus our analysis on the rallies by Trump in the main text. In the
Appendix, we also report the event study results for other candidates. To reduce
noise, we aggregate the daily interviews to three-day periods.
    Figure 1 shows the estimates of Equation 2 for rallies by Trump on the intention
to vote for Trump. We present results using only the sample of media markets
in swing states (Panel (a)), media markets with a rally by Trump (Panel (b)),
media markets with a rally by Trump or Clinton (Panel (c)), states with a rally by
Trump (Panel (d)), states with a rally by Trump or Clinton (Panel (e)), and all
respondents (Panel (f)). We see that the estimates are virtually unchanged across
different samples. There is a spike of about 5 percentage points in the intention
to vote for Trump in the first three days after the rally (Panel (a)). The effect is
short-lived, fading away after three days ­ the point estimates are less than one
percentage point for days 3-5 and 6-8. These results show that Trump rallies had
a short-lived effect on the intention to vote for Trump that dies out at most three
days after the rally.
    In our empirical strategy for estimating the impact of rallies by Trump, we
compare changes in the voting intention for Trump in treated relative to control


                                        16
media markets. Our empirical strategy implicitly assumes that, in the absence of
a Trump rally in the media market, there would have been no difference in the
voting intention in the treated and control media markets. In the figure, we also
see the change in voting intention for Trump in the days leading up to the rally.
If our empirical strategy is sound, we should see no difference in voting intention
for Trump in days before the rallies. It is reassuring that there was no significant
difference in the average intention to vote for Trump in the media markets where
Trump ultimately held a rally relative to other areas. The estimates for pre-rally
periods are all statistically insignificant and substantively small.
    Figure 2 shows the estimates of Equation 2 for rallies by Trump on the intention
to vote for each of the samples. We see an increase in the intention to vote in the
first three days after the Trump rally. There is a 3.2 percentage point increase in
the intention to vote in the first three days after the Trump rally in the sample of
swing states (Panel (a)). We see that the estimates vary slightly across different
samples. The effect dies out quickly in the estimations in Panels b, c, and f. We
see that the estimated impact of the increase in voter intention lasts for up to
eight days after the rally, dying out thereafter. The estimates for days 9 to 11 are
1.5 percentage point (less than half the estimates in days 0 to 8) and statistically
insignificant at even 10% significance level. These results show that Trump rallies
had a brief effect on the intention to vote that dies out at most a week after the
rally. In the Appendix, Section A1.2, we discuss results for other candidates. We
do not find evidence that rallies by other candidates systematically affected voting
intention or turnout.
    Figure 3 shows the effect of rallies on individual campaign contributions to
Trump. There is a 41% increase in contributions to Trump in the first three days
after Trump rallies in the sample of swing states (Panel (a)). We see that the
dynamics of the effect are similar across different samples. The estimates are even
larger in two of the large samples (Panels (d) and (f)). We see that the estimated
impact of the increase in campaign contributions lasts for up to two days after
the rally. These results show that Trump rallies had a transient effect on the
individual campaign contributions.
    For the other five presidential candidates, the dynamics of the intention to vote
for the candidate are shown in Figures A2 to A6, the dynamics of the intention
to turn out to vote are shown in Figures A7 to A11, and the dynamics of the
individual campaign contribution to the candidate are shown in Figures A12 to
A16. We discuss these results in Appendix Section A1.2.




                                         17
4.3    Robustness

In this section, we demonstrate that the main results are robust to different ways
of carrying out the main analysis. Our main results do not change if we include
individual controls in our estimation (Results are shown in Table A8). Similarly,
our results are unchanged if we drop observations in which there is more than one
rally in the media market within ten days (see Table A9). Further, we also obtain
qualitatively similar results if we carry out the analysis at county, commuting zone
or state level (see Appendix Section A1.3).

4.3.1 Evidence to Support the Empirical Strategy Our empirical strat-
egy relies on the quasi-random feature of the timing of the CCES interviews. That
is, for the identification, we rely on the fact that a subset of individuals was sur-
veyed at different points before and after the rally. The identification assumption
needed for  parameters to reflect a causal impact of endorsements is that there
was no strategic implementation of the CCES interviews in different areas over dif-
ferent days. This seems highly unlikely because the questionnaire and the rolling
of interviews were decided together by a team of thirty-six research institutes
around the U.S. well before its implementation. The survey was carried out by a
widely-respected global market research company, YouGov.com. While it is highly
unlikely that the survey design itself would have systematically selected different
types of respondents before and after presidential rallies, there is some scope for
self-selection. In particular, some individuals who were invited to participate in
the survey may not participate on the day they were asked but only later ­ usually
by a few days, but in some cases longer ­ and sometimes only after some prodding
by YouGov. It is possible that some of these individuals might have been inspired
to participate in the survey as a result of a presidential rally.20
     To check for this type of selection, we conduct a battery of regression analyses
to test whether the individuals interviewed after the rallies by presidential can-
didates differ systematically from individuals interviewed before the rallies on a
wide set of observables. Specifically, for each variable, we estimate the following
equation:
                           Xijt = 0 + 1 Post -Rally jt + ijt ,                    (3)

where Xijt is a socio-economic and demographic characteristic of individual i liv-
ing in the media market j and interviewed on the date t. Again, the variable
Post -Rally jt is a dummy variable equal to one for all respondents in the media
market j on all dates on or after a rally by a presidential candidate and zero
   20
      The principal investigator of the CCES, Steve Ansolabehere, told us that individuals with
less interest in politics tended to respond later than those with more interest.


                                              18
otherwise. We restrict our attention to respondents from battleground states.
    Table 4 shows the estimates and standard errors of 1 from a regression of each
characteristic on a constant and the Post-Rally dummy for rallies by Trump. We
see that respondents interviewed after a Trump rally are similar to respondents
interviewed before a Trump rally in terms of political orientation and political
participation. In addition, the respondents who were interviewed after a rally by
Trump are comparable to those interviewed before the rally on characteristics such
as gender, race, age, education, employment, income, the importance of religion,
and home-ownership. The only variable that is statistically significant is marital
status. Respondents interviewed after a Trump rally are 3.3 p.p. more likely to be
married relative to respondents interviewed before the rally. Given that we test
for 17 variables, it is not unexpected to find that one of them is significant at the
10% level.
    These results show that the respondents interviewed around the days of Trump
rallies did not differ systematically along any important dimensions that we can
measure. Table A10 shows the estimation of Equation 3 for rallies by other Re-
publican presidential candidates, and Table A11 shows the estimation of Equation
3 for rallies by Democratic presidential candidates. For the non-political variables,
there is no systematic pattern of differences among individuals interviewed before
and after rallies. However, individuals that self-identify as Democrats are less
likely to be surveyed after rallies by McCain, Clinton, and Obama, while individ-
uals that identify as Republicans are more likely to be surveyed after rallies by
Romney, McCain, Clinton, and Obama. To help alleviate concerns about possible
differences between respondents before and after rallies by other presidential can-
didates, we report the heterogeneous impact of presidential rallies by the political
orientation of voters in Section 5.


5     Potential Mechanisms

In this section, we explore potential mechanisms that may explain the findings.
We first start by analyzing which voters are swayed by Trump rallies. We then
analyze the impact of rallies on the media coverage of the candidate's rallies. We
analyze how the TV and news coverage of candidate's rallies changes around the
rally. We also examine whether candidates use advertisements as complements or
substitutes to the on-ground campaigning.

5.1    Heterogeneous Effects Depending on Respondent Partisanship

In this section, we analyze the impact of rallies by presidential candidates on
respondents with different partisan attachments. Analyzing the heterogeneous ef-

                                         19
fect of rallies by political affiliation helps us understand which group of voters
are influenced by rallies. We expect the impact of rallies by Republican (Demo-
cratic) presidential candidates to have the largest effect among leaning Republican
(Democratic) and independent voters. In terms of turnout, presidential candidates
surely hope that their rallies mobilize co-partisans. They might also hope that their
rallies might suppress turnout among voters who identify with the opposition.
    We estimate Equation 1 separately for voters with different political identifi-
cation. We use the 7-point self-reported political identification to construct five
categories: Strong Democrats, Weak Democrats, Independents, Weak Republi-
cans, and Strong Republicans.21 We focus on the sample of battleground states.
    Table 5 shows the estimated impact of rallies by Trump on voters with different
political identification. In Panel 1, we analyze the effect of rallies by Trump on
the intention to vote for Trump. We see that there was no significant impact of
rallies by Trump on Strong Democrats, Weak Democrats, or Independent voters
(Columns 1 to 3). Trump rallies had an economically sizable and statistically
significant effect on the intention to vote for Trump among the weak and strong
Republicans. The effect is significant for the weak Republicans (Column 4). The
voting intention for Trump increased by 11.2 p.p. among weak Republicans, which
corresponds to an impact equal to 12% of the mean of the voting intention for
Trump among this group. The voting intention for Trump increased by 3.3 p.p.
among strong Republicans which corresponds to an effect equal to 3% of the mean
of the voting intention for Trump among this group. In Table A24, we show that
the results are robust to different samples.
    In Panel 2, we analyze the impact of rallies by Trump on the intention to vote.
We see that there was no impact of rallies by Trump on any group of voters except
strong Republicans. The turnout increased by ten p.p. among strong Republicans
which corresponds to an effect equal to 11% of the mean of the voting intention
among this group. These results show that rallies by Trump motivated weak and
strong Republicans to vote for him, and the strong Republicans to turn out to
vote. In Table A25, we show that the results are robust to different samples.

5.2    Impact on TV coverage

We measure TV coverage of Trump and Clinton's rally in 2016 by analyzing the
TV coverage of the candidates in the local television network. As noted above, the
  21
      We combine the not strong and leaning Democrats (Republicans) and categorize them as
weak Democrats (Republicans). We do this for two main reasons. First, not strong and leaning
voters look very similar to each other in terms of their political choices. For instance, the
likelihood of voting for Trump among not strong (leaning) Democrats is 0.11 (0.05). Similarly,
the likelihood of voting for Trump among not strong (leaning) Republicans is 0.86 (0.94). Second,
we combine the two groups to increase the power to detect an effect.


                                               20
data contains complete close-captioned transcripts of non-entertainment coverage
from 103 television stations from 26 media markets. We count the number of times
the word "rally" and the candidate's name appears together in each 30-second clip
in these transcripts. We aggregate this to construct daily TV coverage of the
candidate's rallies as a percentage of the total number of clips.
    Figure 4 presents plots of the data by day. In Panel (a), we see that TV
coverage of Trump rallies increased by 0.32 p.p. and 0.22 p.p. on the day of the
rally and the next day, respectively. The mean percentage of clips on Trump's rally
is 0.10%. The effect implies that there are three times more clips on Trump's rally
on the day of the rally, and two times more clips on Trump's rally the day after
the rally. The additional media coverage is short-lived, and disappears two days
after the rally. In Panel (b), we see that TV coverage of Clinton rallies increased
by 0.23 p.p. and 0.17 p.p. on the day of the rally and the next day, respectively.
The mean percentage of clips on Clinton's rally is 0.05%. The effect implies that
there are five times more clips on Clinton's rally on the day of the rally, and three
times more clips on Clinton's rally the day after the rally. The media coverage is
again short-lived, lasting just two days.
    A candidate's rally may lead to a change in the opponent's media coverage.
Figure A19 shows the effect of a candidate's rally on the opponent's TV media
coverage. In Panel (a), we see that TV coverage of Clinton increased by 0.17 p.p.
and 0.13 p.p. on the day of the Trump's rally and the next day, respectively. In
Panel (b), we see that TV coverage of Trump did not change around Clinton's
rally. Together, these results show that TV coverage of both candidates increased
around their rallies.

5.3   Impact on newspaper coverage

We measure the newspaper coverage of candidates from the News Library website.
The website has more than 274 million newspaper articles from more than 1,000
newspapers. We merge each newspaper to the state of its headquarter's location.
For each candidate, we search the number of times each candidate's name and the
word "rally" appear in a newspaper article. We then aggregate the information at
the state level to obtain coverage of each candidate's rally in a state daily from
October 1st to the day before the election.
    Figure 5 plots the newspaper coverage of candidates' rallies around the date
of the rally. We see a consistent pattern across different panels. The newspaper
coverage of candidates increased on the day of the rally. The increased coverage
lasts for up to three days after the rally. The number of newspaper articles covering
Trump's rallies increased by 10 and 8 on the day of the rally and the following


                                         21
day, respectively (Panel (a)). These correspond to increases of 1.6 and 1.3 relative
to the average number of newspaper articles covering Trump rallies. The number
of newspaper articles on Romney's rally increased by 7, 7, and 5, on the date of
the rally, the following day, and two days after the rally, respectively (Panel (b)).
These corresponds to increases of 1.8 times the mean of the newspaper articles
covering Romney on the day of the rally and the following day, and 1.3 times the
mean two days after the rally. The number of newspaper articles on McCains's
rally increased by 6, 9, and 3, on the date of the rally, the following day, and two
days after the rally, respectively (Panel (c)). This corresponds to an increase of
0.9 times the mean of the newspaper articles covering McCain on the day of the
rally, 1.4 times the mean on the following day, and 0.5 times the mean two days
after the rally.
    The rallies by Clinton resulted in an increase of 8 and 7 newspaper articles
related to the rally on the date of the rally and the following day, respectively
(Panel (d)). This effect corresponds to an increase equivalent to 1.4 times the
mean of the newspaper articles on Clinton on the day of the rally, and 1.3 times
the mean on the day after the rally. The number of newspaper articles on rallies
by Obama in 2012 increased by 6 and 2 on the date of the rally and the following
day, respectively (Panel (e)). This corresponds to an increase of 1.9 times the
mean of the newspaper articles covering Obama on the day of the rally and 0.8
times the mean the day after the rally. The rallies by Obama in 2008 had more
long-lived newspaper coverage. The Obama rallies were covered extensively for
the up to six days after the rallies (Panel (f)). The number of newspaper articles
on rallies by Obama increased by 13 and 14 on the day of the rally and the
following day, respectively. The number of newspaper articles on rallies by Obama
slowly declined from 7 two days after the rally to 4 six days after the rally. The
immediate increase in the coverage of Obama corresponds to 1.8 times the mean
of the newspaper articles on Obama.
    These results show that the newspaper coverage of all presidential candidates
increases around their rally. The magnitude of increase in newspaper coverage is
similar across the candidates. The rise in newspaper coverage of all candidates
(except Obama in 2008) lasted for less than two days after the rally. These results
and the results on the TV media coverage of candidates together show that: (i)
both the newspaper and TV coverage of rallies increases around the rallies and
(ii) the magnitude of the rise in TV and newspaper coverage is similar across
candidates. These results suggest that the media coverage of rallies by Trump
alone can not explain why they were effective in persuading voters to vote for him.




                                         22
5.4   Impact on advertisements

Theoretically, it is not clear how the advertisement intensity by candidates should
change around their rallies. If candidates use on-the-ground campaigning as a sub-
stitute for campaigning through mass media, then advertisements might decrease
around rallies by candidates. On the other hand, if candidates complement physi-
cal campaigning with campaigning through media, then the amount of advertising
might increase around rallies by candidates. Finally, candidates might make inde-
pendent decisions about physical and media campaigning strategies, in which case
there would be no systematic change in advertisements around the rallies.
    We measure advertisements by Trump and Clinton in 2016 by analyzing the
TV coverage of the candidates in the local television network. We count the
number of times the word "I approve" and the candidate's name appears together
in every 30-second window in these close-captioned content scripts. We aggregate
this to construct daily advertisement by each candidate as a percentage of the total
clips. For 2008 and 2012, we collect the information on the political advertisement
for each political candidate from the Wesleyan Media and Wisconsin Advertising
Projects.
    Figure 6 plots the change in the advertisement by candidates in the media
market around their rallies. We see that the advertising intensity by Trump,
Romney, Clinton, and Obama in 2012 does not change systematically around their
rallies (Panels (a), (b), (d), and (e)). On the other hand, McCain and Obama in
2008 decrease their advertisement intensity in the week of their rally (Panels (c)
and (f)). In Figure A17, we analyze how the advertisement by opponents changes
around rallies by various presidential candidates. We see that the advertising
intensity by opponents does not change systematically around rallies by Trump,
Romney, Obama in 2012, and Obama in 2008 (Panels (a), (b), (e), and (f)). On
the other hand, in 2008, Obama decreased his advertisement intensity around
rallies by McCain, and Trump increased his advertisement intensity around rallies
by Clinton. These results suggest that the advertisement intensity of candidates
does not change systematically around their rallies. If anything, the advertising
intensity by candidates decreases around their rallies.

5.5   Impact on issues

One way presidential rallies might impact voters is by making specific issues more
salient among the voters. During rallies, candidates often choose to spend more
time on policy issues on which they have (or believe they have) a significant ad-
vantage over their opponent. This may raise disproportionately the salience of
particular policy issues over others.


                                        23
    In Table 6, we study how rallies by Trump and Clinton appear to influence
the types of issues that respondents perceived as most import. We choose issues
that were among the top ten voting issues in the 2016 election according to PEW
Research Center (2016). We use the sample of voters in swing states in our anal-
ysis. Panel 1 shows the estimated impact of rallies by Trump, and Panel 2 shows
the effect of rallies by Clinton. We see that there is little change in respondents'
answers about the importance of different issues around rallies by Trump and Clin-
ton. Most estimates are both statistically insignificant and economically negligible
in magnitude. For example, after a Trump rally respondents are 0.8 and 1.4 p.p.
less likely to quote national security (Column 2), and gun control (Column 4) as
one of the most important problems, respectively. There is no impact of rallies by
Trump on the immigration (Column 5) and government corruption (Column 9),
which were two key policy issues of his campaign. Rallies by Clinton also appear
to have little or no impact on the perceived importance of different issues. After
Clinton rallies, respondents are 1 and 1.6 p.p. less likely to quote social security
(Column 6) and government corruption (Column 9) as one of the most important
problems, respectively.
    Another channel through which presidential rallies may impact voters is by
changing voters' preferences on certain policies. A candidate's rallies might con-
vince some voters that the policy platform proposed by the candidate is better
than that of their opponent, which may shift voters' preferences closer to those of
the candidate.
    In Table 7, we study rallies by Trump and Clinton appear to affect respondents'
preferences over various issues, again using the sample of voters in swing states.
Panel 1 shows the estimated impact of rallies by Trump, and Panel 2 shows the
effect of rallies by Clinton. We find limited evidence of a change in the voter
preference over critical issues highlighted during the 2016 elections. Rallies by
Trump did not lead to a statistically significant change in the respondents agreeing
with granting legal status to illegal immigrants (Column 1), increasing border
patrol (Column 2), granting legal status to Dreamers (Column 3), accepting no
Syrian refugees (Column 4), and deporting illegal immigrants (Column 5). We
also see that the voters do not change the likelihood of agreeing with the Trans-
Pacific Partnership (TPP) Act (Column 6), Highway and Transportation Funding
(HTF) Act (Column 7), Iran Sanctions Act (Column 8), Medicare Accountability
and Cost Reform (MACR) Act (Column 9), and repealing Affordable Care Act
(Column 10).
    Together, these results suggest that rallies by presidential candidates have little
impact on voters' preferences over issues, and also little impact on voters' beliefs
about the relative importance of issues.

                                          24
5.6    Impact on valence

Voters often lack relevant information on the characteristics of the presidential
candidates to form a judgment about the competence of the candidates. Rallies
can highlight particular attributes of a candidate, which may provide voters with
information to form a decision about the valence of the candidates.
    Unfortunately, we do not have measures for valence of presidential candidates
in the 2012 and 2016 CCES. Thus, we study the impact of rallies by McCain and
Obama on the perception of the candidate's characteristics (Table A26 shows the
results). We find that rallies by McCain do not change voters' opinion about his
honesty and experience (Panel 1, Columns 1 and 3). The probability that voters
think McCain is knowledgeable increases by 6.6 p.p. after his rallies. Rallies by
McCain do not result in a change in the perception among the electorate about
the honesty, knowledge, and experience of Obama (Panel 1, Columns 4 to 6). Ral-
lies by Obama do not change voters' opinion about his honesty, knowledge, and
experience (Panel 2, Columns 1 to 3) or change voters' perception about the hon-
esty, and knowledge of McCain (Panel 2, Columns 4 and 5). The probability that
voters think McCain is experienced decreases by 3.1 p.p. after rallies by Obama.
These results suggest that rallies by presidential candidates may positively affect
the valence of the candidate and negatively affect the valence of the opponent.
Trump rallies were oriented to convince voters that he is the best businessman
and would be an ideal choice for the country, while his opponent is a corrupt eli-
tist politician whose family has exploited the nation. One may speculate that this
type of framing of himself and his opponent may have contributed to an increase
his valence and a decrease in valence of his opponent.


6     Effect of rallies on the elections

Do rallies have any effect on the "bottom line" ­ the voting outcomes in the general
election? We address this here, by comparing media markets in which presidential
candidates held rallies with other media markets. The results must be interpreted
cautiously, because we do not have exogenous variation in either the location or
timing of rallies. For example, it is possible that presidential candidates hold rallies
in areas where they expect to gain the most ­ e.g., areas where there are more
"undecided" voters or where the voters are responsive to their campaign messages
­ closer to the election. Nonetheless, the results are interesting, since they are
broadly consistent with the main patterns found in section 4.1.
    We estimate the following specification:

          Yi = 1 (Late Cand Rally )i + 2 (Early Cand Rally )i + Yilag + i ,         (4)

                                          25
where Yi is either the natural logarithm of votes cast for the Republican or Demo-
cratic candidate, or the natural logarithm of total votes cast in the general election.
Yilag is the lagged value of the dependent variable. We estimate the equation at
the media market level (i.e., the unit of observation, i, is the media market). We
distinguish between "late" candidate rallies held in the week before the election,
and "early" rallies held more than 7 days before election day, since the estimates
in previous sections show that rallies have only short-term effects. We restrict
attention to media markets in swing states.
    Table 8 shows the results. In Panel 1, we see that rallies by Trump in the
last seven days are associated with a 6.9% increase in the Republican votes at the
media market level (Column 1). We also see that rallies by Trump in the last seven
days are associated with a 3.6% increase in the Republican votes relative to rallies
by Trump more than seven days before the election. We do not see any impact of
the rallies by Romney, McCain, Clinton, or Obama in 2012 on total votes received
by these candidates (Columns 2-5). Rallies by Obama in 2008 in the last seven
days before the election are associated with a 8.6% increase in Democratic votes.
These results suggest that rallies by Trump led to an increase in votes for him in
the 2016 general elections.22
    In Panel 2, we analyze the effect of rallies by each candidate on total turnout.
In Column 1, we see that rallies by Trump in the last seven days before the election
are associated with a 6% increase in the turnout at the media market level. This
is 5% greater than the estimated coefficient on rallies held seven days before the
election. There is no statistically significant relationship between turnout and
rallies by Romney, McCain, Clinton, or Obama in 2012 (Columns 2-5). Rallies
by Obama in 2008 in the last seven days before the election appear to increase
turnout by 6.5%. These results suggest that rallies by Trump led to an increase
in turnout in the 2016 general elections.
    We also ran specifications in which the definition of "close to the election" was
changed from 7 days to 6, 5, 4, 3, or 2 days. Table A27 shows the results for
Trump. Overall, the choice of thresholds does does not matter much, for either
dependent variable. Using thresholds of 3, 4, 5, or 6 days yields point estimates
similar to those shown in Table 8. In all cases, the estimated effect of rallies held
close to the election is higher than for rallies held earlier.
   22
     We analyze the Republican votes instead of vote share because vote shares do not matter at
the media market level. Vote shares matter only at the state level, because of the winner-take-all
method for allocating electors used in almost all states. In unreported analysis, we find that
the impact of rallies by Trump on the Republican vote share is small and, for the most part,
statistically insignificant. This finding, combined with overall increase in turnout, suggests that
Democratic voters are not dissuaded to vote due to rallies by Trump.




                                                26
7   Conclusion

In this paper, we provide evidence that populist leaders may be particularly ef-
fective in gaining support via their campaign rallies, at least temporarily. We do
this by studying the effect of campaign rallies held by U.S. Presidential candidates
since 2008, comparing the rallies held by Trump ­ clearly the most populist presi-
dential candidate in recent history ­ with those by Hillary Clinton, Mitt Romney,
John McCain, and Barack Obama. We study the impact of rallies on a variety
of outcomes, including voters' preferences over the candidates, citizens' intentions
to turn out and vote, campaign donations by individuals, and citizens' issue po-
sitions. To better isolate the effects of the rallies from other events, we use data
from a large survey ­ the Cooperative Congressional Elections Study (CCES) ­ to
exploit both time and geography.
    We find that Trump rallies increased his support over Clinton by about 4.5
percentage points on average. The effects are short-lived, lasting about one week.
The effects are especially large for respondents who identify as "weak" Republicans
and Republican-leaning independents. We also find that Trump rallies led to an
increase in the intention to turn out among "strong" Republicans and Democrats,
but not for other respondents. Rallies by Trump also increased individual cam-
paign contributions to him, at least for a few days. By contrast, using the same
approach, we find little or no impact of the rallies held by Clinton in 2016, as
well as those held by Obama and Romney in 2012, and by Obama and McCain
in 2008. These candidates' rallies had little or no effect on the intention to vote
for the candidate, no clear positive effect on campaign donations, and no clear,
systematic, effects on turnout.
    In terms of mechanisms, we find that rallies by Trump lead to an additional
coverage of Trump on media and newspaper. However, we find increases of similar
magnitude in the coverage of almost all other presidential candidates around their
rallies as well. This suggests that either the quality of Trump's coverage was
different from that of other candidates, or that the effect of the additional coverage
on respondents was different.
    These results provide suggestive evidence that rallies are a more important tool
for more populist candidates. Populist leaders' success may depend on connecting
with voters via rallies. Since the effects seem short-lived, our findings might also
help account for the fact that many populist leaders hold them frequently and not
only during the months leading up to elections.




                                         27
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. 2013. "A Politi-
  cal Theory of Populism." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 771­805.
Albertazzi, Daniele, and Duncan McDonnell. 2007. Twenty-first Century
  Populism: The Spectre of Western European Democracy. Springer.
Algan, Yann, Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou, and Evgenia Passari.
  2017. "The European Trust Crisis and the Rise of Populism." Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 309­382.
Althaus, Scott L., Peter F. Nardulli, and Daron L. Shaw. 2002. "Candidate
  Appearances in Presidential Elections, 1972-2000." Political Communication,
  19(1): 49­72.
Ansolabehere, Stephen. 2011. "Cooperative Congressional Election Study,
  2008: Common Content [Computer Files] Release 4: July 15, 2011. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University [producer]." http: // cces. gov. harvard. edu .
Ansolabehere, Stephen. 2013. "Cooperative Congressional Election Study,
  2012: Common Content [Computer Files] Release 1: April 15, 2013. Cambridge,
  MA: Harvard University [producer]." http: // cces. gov. harvard. edu .
Ansolabehere, Stephen. 2017. "Cooperative Congressional Election Study,
  2016: Common Content [Computer Files] Release 2: August 4, 2017. Cam-
  bridge, MA: Harvard University [producer]." http: // cces. gov. harvard.
  edu .
Appleman, Eric M. 2019. "Democracy in Action." http: // www. p2016. org/ ,.
Ballotpedia. 2016. "Presidential Battleground States, 2016." https: //
  ballotpedia. org/ Presidential_ battleground_ states,_2016 .
Chiang, Chun-Fang, and Brian Knight. 2011. "Media Bias and Influence:
  Evidence from Newspaper Endorsements." The Review of Economic Studies,
  78(3): 795­820.
Cillizza,      Chris.    2012.    "The    9     Swing     States     of    2012."
  https: // www. washingtonpost. com/ blogs/ the-fix/ post/
  the-9-swing-states-of-2012/ 2012/ 04/ 16/ gIQABuXaLT_ blog. html .
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. "The Fox News Effect: Media
  Bias and Voting." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1187­1234.
Devine, Christopher J. 2018. "What if Hillary Clinton Had Gone to Wisconsin?
  Presidential Campaign Visits and Vote Choice in the 2016 Election." The Forum,
  16(2): 211­234.
Eguia, Jon X., and Francesco Giovannoni. 2019. "Tactical Extremism."
  American Political Science Review, 113(1): 282^
                                                a286.



                                       28
Federal Election Commission. 2019. "Contributions by Individuals." https:
  // www. fec. gov/ data/ browse-data/ ?tab= bulk-data .
Fowler, Erika, Michael Franz, and Travis Ridout. 2015. "Political Advertis-
  ing in 2012 [data set]. Version 1.1. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan Media Project."
  http: // cces. gov. harvard. edu ,.
Gerber, Alan S., James G. Gimpel, Donald P. Green, and Daron R.
  Shaw. 2011. "How Large and Long Lasting Are the Persuasive Effects of Tele-
  vised Campaign Ads? Results from a Randomized Field Experiment." American
  Political Science Review, 105(1): 135­150.
Goldstein, Ken, Sarah Niebler, Jacob Neiheisel, and Matthew Holleque.
  2011. "Presidential, Congressional, and Gubernatorial Advertising, 2008 [data
  set]. Initial release. Madison: University of Wisconsin Advertising Project."
  http: // cces. gov. harvard. edu .
Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, Tommaso Sonno, et al.
  2017. "Demand and Supply of Populism." Einaudi Institute for Economics and
  Finance (EIEF).
Guriev, Sergei. 2018. "Economic Drivers of Populism." AEA Papers and Pro-
  ceedings, 108: 200­203.
Hawkins, Kirk, and Levente Littvay. 2019. Contemporary US Populism in
  Comparative Perspective. Elements in American Politics, Cambridge University
  Press.
Hawkins, Kirk A., Rosario Aguilar, Bruno Castanho Silva, Erin K.
  Jenne, Bojana Kocijan, and Crist´       obal Rovira Kaltwasser. 2019. "Global
  Populism Database, v1."
Heersink, Boris, and Brenton D. Peterson. 2017. "Truman Defeats Dewey:
  The Effect of Campaign Visits on Election Outcomes." Electoral Studies, 49: 49­
  64.
Herr, J. Paul. 2002. "The Impact of Campaign Appearances in the 1996 Elec-
  tion." Journal of Politics, 64(3): 904­913.
Hungerman, Daniel, Kevin Rinz, Tim Weninger, and Chungeun Yoon.
  2018. "Political Campaigns and Church Contributions." Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization, 155: 403­426.
Jansen, Robert S. 2011. "Populist Mobilization: A New Theoretical Approach
  to Populism." Sociological Theory, 29(2): 75­96.
Jones, Jeffrey M. 1998. "Does Bringing Out the Candidate Bring Out the
  Votes?" American Politics Research, 26: 395­419.
Leip, David. 2018. "David Leip's Atlas of U.S. Elections." http: //
  uselectionatlas. org/ .



                                       29
Lichtenstein, Nelson. 2019. "Are Trade Unions and Their Members `Populist' ?"
  IdeAs. Id´ ees d'Am´eriques, , (14).
MacWilliams, Matthew C. 2016. "Who Decides When The Party Doesn't?
  Authoritarian Voters and the Rise of Donald Trump." PS: Political Science &
  Politics, 49(4): 716^a721.
Moskowitz, Daniel J. 2018. "Local News, Information, and the Nationalization
  of US Elections." Working Paper, https://bit. ly/2W15rjp.
Mudde, Cas, and Crist´       obal Rovira Kaltwasser. 2017. Populism: A Very
  Short Introduction. Oxford University Press.
National       Public     Radio. 2015. "Nativism And Economic Anx-
  iety      Fuel     Trump's        Populist   Appeal."     https: // www. npr.
  org/ sections/ itsallpolitics/ 2015/ 09/ 04/ 437443401/
  populist-movement-reflected-in-campaigns-of-sanders-and-trump .
National Public Radio. 2016. "What Does Spending Over $1,000 Per Vote In
  N.H. Get You?"
Newsweek. 2015."Donald Trump and the Long Tradition of American Populism."
  https: // www. newsweek. com/ donald-trump-populism-365052 .
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi. 2018. "Inequality Aversion, Populism,
  and the Backlash Against Globalization." National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Working Paper 24900.
PEW       Research        Center. 2016. "Top Voting Issues in 2016
  Election."                   https: // www. people-press. org/ 2016/ 07/ 07/
  4-top-voting-issues-in-2016-election/ .
Politico      Magazine. 2016. "Donald Trump,               the Perfect Pop-
  ulist."           https: // www. politico. com/ magazine/ story/ 2016/ 03/
  donald-trump-the-perfect-populist-213697 .
Post, The Washington. 2008. "Battleground Cheat Sheet." http:
  // www. washingtonpost. com/ wp-srv/ politics/ interactives/
  campaign08/ battleground_ cheat_ sheet. html .
Prat, Andrea, and David Stro       ¨mberg. 2013. "The Political Economy of Mass
  Media." Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 2: 135.
Scientific     American. 2017. "Trump's Appeal:                 What Psychol-
  ogy     Tells     Us."    https: // www. scientificamerican. com/ article/
  trump-rsquo-s-appeal-what-psychology-tells-us/ .
Shaw, Daron R., and James G. Gimpel. 2012. "What if We Randomize the
  Governor's Schedule? Evidence on Campaign Appearance Effects From a Texas
  Field Experiment." Political Communication, 29(2): 137­159.
Sood, Gaurav. 2016. "Geographic Information on Designated Media Markets."



                                      30
Spenkuch, Jo  ¨rg L, and David Toniatti. 2018. "Political Advertising and Elec-
  tion Results." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4): 1981­2036.
Stromberg, David. 2008. "How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns
  and Policy: The Probability of Being Florida." American Economic Review,
  98(3): 769­807.
The Atlantic. 2018. "The Church of Trump." https: // www. theatlantic.
  com/ ideas/ archive/ 2018/ 08/ the-church-of-trump/ 567425/ .
The Center for Responsive Politics. 2017. "2016 Presidential Race."
The      Guardian.       2018.   "The     New    Populism."    https: // www.
  theguardian. com/ world/ ng-interactive/ 2018/ nov/ 20/
  revealed-one-in-four-europeans-vote-populist .
Topic Magazine. 2019. "Trump's Big Tent Revival." https: // www. topic.
  com/ trump-s-big-tent-revival .
Wendland, Jay. 2017. Campaigns That Matter: The Importance of Campaign
  Visits in Presidential Nominating Contests. Lexington Books.




                                      31
                          Table 1: Summary statistics

  Variable                                           N          Mean           SD
  Panel A: Main Political Variables
  Voting Intention for Trump                      16,625        0.497         0.500
  Voting Intention for Romney                     17,009        0.443         0.497
  Voting Intention for McCain                     10,142        0.449         0.497
  Intention to Vote (Turn Out) 2016               16,625        0.828         0.378
  Intention to Vote (Turn Out) 2012               17,008        0.818         0.386
  Intention to Vote (Turn Out) 2008               10,141        0.898         0.303
  ln(Campaign Cont. to Trump)                      1260         3.961         3.670
  Panel B: Socio-economic Variables
  Strong Democrat                                 42,865        0.206         0.404
  Weak Democrat                                   42,865         0.200       0.400
  Independents                                    43,437        0.090         0.286
  Weak Republican                                 42,865         0.240        0.427
  Strong Republican                               42,865         0.263       0.440
  Male                                            43,776        0.483         0.500
  White                                           43,776        0.779         0.415
  Black                                           43,776        0.119         0.324
  Age                                             43,776        47.839       17.143
  Completed High School                           43,776        0.320         0.466
  College dropout                                 43,776         0.236       0.425
  Married                                         43,776         0.546       0.498
  Unemployed                                      43,776        0.072         0.258
  Income < Median                                 43,776        0.517         0.500
  Religion Important                              43,776        0.702         0.457
  Owns a home                                     43,776         0.633       0.482
 Notes: The Table shows summary statistics for the main variables used in the paper.
Columns 1 to 3 show the total number of observations, mean, and standard deviation
of the variables, respectively. Panel A consists of the main dependent variables, while
Panel B consists of other political and socio-economic variables of the respondents.
The data is constructed using 2008, 2012, and 2016 waves of CCES survey. All obser-
vations are weighted by the common content weight variable. The sample consists of
respondents in a media market interviewed 10 days around a presidential candidate
rally for media markets with a presidential rally, and all observations for media market
without a presidential rally. We further restrict attention to (i) observations where
respondent intends to vote for one of the Republican and Democratic presidential can-
didates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews; and (iii) respondents from
the battleground states. Variable Campaign Cont. to Trump is constructed using
2016 individual campaign contributions files from FEC.




                                          32
Table 2: Impact of presidential rallies on voting intention, turnout, and campaign con-
tributions

                            (1)   (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)  (6)
      Candidate           Trump Romney McCain Clinton Obama'12 Obama'08
      Variable                     Intention to Vote for Candidate

      Post-Candidate 0.045**          -0.032 -0.004 -0.013              -0.027        -0.012
                     (0.018)         (0.022) (0.023) (0.024)           (0.030)       (0.027)

      Observations         9,506      6,884      6,762     12,122       7,577         6,059
      Clusters              67         65          76        72          64            75

      Variable                            Intention to Vote (Turn Out)

      Post-Candidate 0.051*** 0.034    -0.004 -0.024                    -0.028        -0.023
                      (0.017) (0.027) (0.014) (0.040)                  (0.033)       (0.026)

      Observations         9,506      6,883      6,762     12,122       7,577         6,059
      Clusters              67         65          76        72          64            75

      Variable                     Log(Campaign Contributions to Candidate)

      Post-Candidate 0.702**          -0.723  0.242 -0.191**            -0.109        -0.558
                     (0.282)         (0.463) (0.531) (0.083)           (0.392)       (0.370)

      Observations         1,260       378        324       1,625        588           450
      Clusters              38         25         27          38         25            27
      Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 1 for presidential rallies. In Panels
     1 to 3, the dependent variables are: the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent
     intends to vote for the candidate, the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent
     intends to turn out to vote, and natural logarithm of campaign contributions received by
     the candidate, respectively. The main independent variable is the binary indicator equal
     to one for respondents interviewed after a candidate's rally. In Columns 1 to 6, candidates
     considered are: Trump, Romney, McCain, Clinton, Obama in 2012, and Obama 2008. In
     Panels 1 and 2, data is constructed using 2008, 2012, and 2016 waves of CCES survey.
     All estimates are weighted by the common content weight variable. The sample is further
     restricted to: (i) observations where respondent intends to vote for one of the Republican
     or Democratic presidential candidates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews;
     (iii) respondents interviewed 10 days around the rally for media markets with a rally. In
     Panel 3, data is constructed using 2004 to 2016 individual campaign contributions file from
     FEC. The unit of observation is day by media market. Estimations include sample 5 days
     around the rally for media markets with a rally. In Panels 1 to 3, (i) sample is restricted
     to media markets in swing states for that election year; (ii) all estimations include media
     market and date fixed effects.




                                                 33
Table 3: Impact of Trump rallies on voting intention, turnout, and campaign contributions

                        (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)   (5)                       (6)
      Sample          Swing St Cand DMA Year DMA Cand St Year St                          All
      Variable                       Voting Intention for Trump

      Post-Trump       0.045**      0.052***        0.047**      0.046**     0.037* 0.035*
                       (0.018)       (0.018)        (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.019) (0.021)

      Observations      9,506         8,769            13,817     9,643      15,410     35,522
      Clusters            67           42                45         71         85        145

      Variable                            Intention to Vote (Turn Out)

      Post-Trump 0.051***             0.026          0.022      0.051*** 0.047*** 0.023
                  (0.017)            (0.020)        (0.018)      (0.017) (0.016) (0.017)

      Observations      9,506         8,769            13,817     9,643      15,410     35,522
      Clusters            67           42                45         71         85        145

      Variable                     Log(Campaign Contributions to Trump)

      Post-Trump       0.702**       0.404*         0.386*       0.599** 0.555** 0.394**
                       (0.282)       (0.211)        (0.201)      (0.235) (0.260) (0.170)

      Observations      1,260          676              965       1,648       2,344     10,100
      Clusters            38           46                51         52          64       209
      Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 1 for Trump presidential rallies.
     In Panels 1 to 3, the dependent variables are: the binary indicator equal to one if the
     respondent intends to vote for Trump, the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent
     intends to turn out to vote, and natural logarithm of campaign contributions received by
     Trump, respectively. The main independent variable is the binary indicator equal to one
     for respondents interviewed after a rally by Trump. Columns 1 to 6 consider the following
     samples: swing states for that election; media markets where the candidate had a rally;
     media markets where the candidate or opponent had a rally; states where the candidate had
     a rally; states where the candidate or opponent had a rally; all respondents, respectively.
     In Panels 1 and 2, data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates
     are weighted by the common content weight variable. The sample is further restricted to:
     (i) observations where respondent intends to vote for one of the Republican or Democratic
     presidential candidates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews; (iii) respondents
     interviewed 10 days around the rally for media markets with a rally. In Panel 3, data is
     constructed using 2014 and 2016 individual campaign contributions files from FEC. The
     unit of observation is day by media market. Estimations include sample 5 days around the
     rally for media markets with a rally. In Panels 1 to 3, (i) sample is restricted to media
     markets in swing states for that election year; (ii) all estimations include media market and
     date fixed effects.




                                                  34
                                                         Figure 1: Impact of Trump rally on intention to vote for Trump


                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
              Intention to Vote for Trump




                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote for Trump
                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                 (a) Swing St                                                                                               (b) Cand DMA
                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
              Intention to Vote for Trump




                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote forTrump




                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                 (c) Year DMA                                                                                                (d) Cand St
                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote for Trump
              Intention to Vote forTrump




                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                  (e) Year St                                                                                                   (f) All

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for Trump rallies. In Panel (a)
the sample consists of all media markets in the swing states. In Panel (b) the sample is restricted to
media markets with a Trump rally. In Panel (c) the sample consists of all media markets with a Trump
or Clinton rally. In Panel (d) the sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump held
a rally. In Panel (e) the sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump or Clinton held
a rally. In Panel (f) the sample consists of all media markets. The figure plots the estimated coefficient
and standard error of the difference in the voting intention for Trump in media markets with a Trump
rally relative to other media markets. The data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All
estimates are weighted by the common content weight variable. The sample is further restricted to:
(i) observations where respondent intends to vote for either Trump or Clinton; (ii) media markets with
more than 50 interviews; (iii) 12 days around the rally for media markets with a rally, and all other
observations for other media markets.



                                                                                                        35
                                                       Figure 2: Impact of Trump rally on Intention to Vote (Turn Out)


                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
              Intention to Vote (Turn Out)




                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote (Turn Out)
                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                 (a) Swing St                                                                                               (b) Cand DMA
                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
              Intention to Vote (Turn Out)




                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote (Turn Out)




                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                 (c) Year DMA                                                                                                (d) Cand St
                     .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                            -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08
              Intention to Vote (Turn Out)




                                                                                                                         Intention to Vote (Turn Out)




                                             [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]                                               [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]      [-3,-1]       [0,2]     [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                                   Days since Trump Rally                                                                                     Days since Trump Rally



                                                                  (e) Year St                                                                                                   (f) All

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for Trump rallies. In Panel (a)
the sample consists of all media markets in the swing states. In Panel (b) the sample is restricted to
media markets with a Trump rally. In Panel (c) the sample consists of all media markets with a Trump
or Clinton rally. In Panel (d) the sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump held
a rally. In Panel (e) the sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump or Clinton held
a rally. In Panel (f) the sample consists of all media markets. The figure plots the estimated coefficient
and standard error of the difference in the voting intention in media markets with a Trump rally relative
to other media markets. The data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates are
weighted by the common content weight variable. The sample is further restricted to: (i) observations
where respondent intends to vote for either Trump or Clinton; (ii) media markets with more than 50
interviews; (iii) 12 days around the rally for media markets with a rally, and all other observations for
other media markets.



                                                                                                        36
                                                         Figure 3: Impact of Trump rally on campaign contributions


 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                                                          -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6
            Log ($ Contributions to Trump)




                                                                                                                     Log ($ Contributions to Trump)
                                 [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]    [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]                                   [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                              Days since Trump Rally                                                                                  Days since Trump Rally



                                                          (a) Swing St                                                                                            (b) Cand DMA
 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                                                          -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6
            Log ($ Contributions to Trump)




                                                                                                                     Log ($ Contributions to Trump)




                                 [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]    [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]                                   [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                              Days since Trump Rally                                                                                  Days since Trump Rally



                                                          (c) Year DMA                                                                                             (d) Cand St
 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                                                          -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6
            Log ($ Contributions to Trump)




                                                                                                                     Log ($ Contributions to Trump)




                                 [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]    [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]                                   [-12,-10]     [-9,-7]   [-6,-4]     [-3,-1]     [0,2]   [3,5]   [6,8]
                                                              Days since Trump Rally                                                                                  Days since Trump Rally



                                                           (e) Year St                                                                                                 (f) All

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for Trump rallies. The unit
of observation is media market-day. In Panels (a) to (f), the main dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of individual campaign contributions to Trump. In Panel (a) the sample consists of all media
markets in the swing states. In Panel (b) the sample is restricted to media markets with a Trump
rally. In Panel (c) the sample consists of all media markets with a Trump or Clinton rally. In Panel
(d) the sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump held a rally. In Panel (e) the
sample consists of all media markets in the states where Trump or Clinton held a rally. In Panel (f) the
sample consists of all media markets. The figure plots the estimated coefficient and standard error of the
difference in the natural logarithm of individual campaign contributions to Trump in the media market
with a Trump rally relative to other media markets in the swing states. The data is constructed using
individual campaign contributions files from the FEC. All estimates include media market and day fixed
effects.



                                                                                                      37
        Table 4: Comparing respondents around Trump rally

                                              (1)                   (2)
  Variable                                 Constant             Post Rally
  Strong Democrat                            0.220                 0.013
                                            (0.009)              (0.013)
  Weak Democrat                              0.193                 0.002
                                            (0.010)              (0.016)
  Independents                               0.111                -0.007
                                            (0.008)              (0.012)
  Weak Republican                            0.221                -0.014
                                            (0.009)              (0.014)
  Strong Republican                          0.253                 0.006
                                            (0.010)              (0.016)
  Voted in prev. election                    0.749                 0.023
                                            (0.014)              (0.023)
  Male                                       0.495                -0.022
                                            (0.014)              (0.019)
  White                                      0.806                -0.033
                                            (0.019)              (0.027)
  Black                                      0.114                -0.013
                                            (0.017)              (0.026)
  Age                                       50.071                 0.577
                                            (0.770)              (1.155)
  Completed High School                      0.341                -0.025
                                            (0.013)              (0.027)
  College dropout                            0.230                 0.006
                                            (0.009)              (0.013)
  Married                                    0.532                0.033*
                                            (0.010)              (0.017)
  Unemployed                                 0.060                -0.006
                                            (0.006)              (0.008)
  Income < Median                            0.563                -0.034
                                            (0.014)              (0.024)
  Religion Important                         0.651                -0.003
                                            (0.011)              (0.019)
  Owns a home                                0.683                -0.034
                                            (0.017)              (0.024)
 Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 3 for Trump rallies. Col-
umn 1 shows the coefficient (standard error in parentheses) of 0 and Column
2 shows the coefficient (standard error in parentheses) of 1 , respectively. The
data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates are weighted
by the common content weight variable. The sample consists of respondents in
a media market interviewed 10 days around a Trump rally for media markets
with a Trump rally, and all observations for media markets without a Trump
rally. We further restrict attention to (i) observations where respondent in-
tends to vote for either Trump or Clinton; (ii) media markets with more than
50 interviews; and (iii) respondents from the battleground states.



                                      38
 Table 5: Heterogeneous Impact of Trump rallies

                                       (1)      (2)
VARIABLES                          Vote-Trump Turnout

Post-Trump * Strong DEM                0.022       0.063**
                                      (0.015)      (0.028)
Post-Trump * Weak DEM                  0.003        0.030
                                      (0.017)      (0.034)
Post-Trump * Independent               0.023        0.037
                                      (0.054)      (0.046)
Post-Trump * Weak REP                0.087***       0.035
                                      (0.022)      (0.039)
Post-Trump * Strong REP              0.043***      0.061*
                                      (0.015)      (0.032)

Observations                           9,357         9,357
R-squared                              0.703         0.096
Clusters                                67            67
 Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 1 for
Trump rallies for voters with different political ideology. In
Column 1 the dependent variable is the binary indicator equal
to one if the respondent intends to vote for Trump. In Col-
umn 2, the dependent variable is the binary indicator equal
to one if the respondent intends to vote (turnout). The main
independent variables are the interactions of binary indicator
equal to one for respondents interviewed after a Trump rally
with (i) respondents who categorize themselves as Strong
Democrats, (ii) respondents who categorize themselves either
as weak or leaning Democrats, (iii) respondents who catego-
rize themselves as independents, (iv) respondents who cate-
gorize themselves either as weak or leaning Republicans, and
(v) respondents who categorize themselves as Strong Repub-
licans. All estimations include media market and date fixed
effects. All estimations include sample 10 days around the
rally for media markets with a rally. The data is constructed
using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates are weighted
by the common content weight variable. The sample is fur-
ther restricted to: (i) observations where respondent intends
to vote for one of the Republican or Democratic presidential
candidates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews;
(iii) respondents in the swing states.




                             39
                                                      Figure 4: TV coverage of candidates around rally in 2016
                  .5




                                                                                                                        .5
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                        TV Clips about "Clinton" & "Rally"
 TV Clips about "Trump" & "Rally"
                           .3




                                                                                                                                   .3
                    .2




                                                                                                                            .2
            .1




                                                                                                                    .1
     0




                                                                                                             0
                  -.1




                                                                                                     -.1
                  -.2




                                                                                                                        -.2




                                       -5   -4   -3   -2     -1      0      1       2   3   4   5                                               -5   -4   -3   -2      -1      0       1       2   3   4   5
                                                           Days since Trump Rally                                                                                   Days since Clinton Rally



                                                           (a) Trump                                                                                                (b) Clinton

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for presidential rallies. In
Panels (a) and (b), the main dependent variables are the natural logarithm of number of TV clips about
Trump's rally and Clinton's rally, respectively. The main independent variables are days since respective
candidate's rally. The figure plots the estimated coefficient and standard error of the difference in the
natural logarithm of number of TV clips about the candidate in the media market with the candidate
rally relative to other media markets. The data is constructed using close captioned TV scripts. All
estimates include media market and day fixed effects.




                                                                                                    40
                                                              Figure 5: Newspaper coverage of candidates around rally
                   20




                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                             Number of Newspaper Articles on Clinton
 Number of Newspaper Articles on Trump
                                    15




                                                                                                                                                  15
                               10




                                                                                                                                           10
                        5




                                                                                                                                     5
                 0




                                                                                                                              0
            -5




                                                                                                                        -5
 -15 -10




                                                                                                             -15 -10
                   -20




                                                                                                                                -20
                                          -6   -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1      2   3   4   5   6                                              -6   -5    -4    -3     -2    -1      0     1     2       3   4   5
                                                                 Days since Trump Rally                                                                                       Days since Clinton Rally



                                                               (a) Trump                                                                                                     (b) Clinton
                   20




                                                                                                                                20
 Number of Newspaper Articles on Romney




                                                                                                             Number of Newspaper Articles on Obama
                                    15




                                                                                                                                                15
                               10




                                                                                                                                           10
                         5




                                                                                                                                     5
                  0




                                                                                                                              0
             -5




                                                                                                                         -5
 -15 -10




                                                                                                             -15 -10
                   -20




                                                                                                                                -20




                                          -6   -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0    1     2     3   4   5   6                                              -6   -5   -4    -3    -2   -1     0   1      2        3   4   5   6
                                                                Days since Romney Rally                                                                                       Days since Obama Rally



                                                              (c) Romney                                                                                               (d) Obama (2012)
                   20




                                                                                                                                                  20
 Number of Newspaper Articles on McCain




                                                                                                             Number of Newspaper Articles on Obama
                                    15




                                                                                                                                              15
                               10




                                                                                                                                        10
                         5




                                                                                                                                  5
                  0




                                                                                                                            0
             -5




                                                                                                             -15 -10 -5
 -15 -10           -20




                                                                                                                                -20




                                          -6   -5   -4   -3    -2   -1     0    1      2    3   4   5   6                                              -6   -5   -4    -3    -2   -1     0   1      2        3   4   5   6
                                                                Days since McCain Rally                                                                                       Days since Obama Rally



                                                               (e) McCain                                                                                              (f) Obama (2008)

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for presidential rallies. In Panels
(a) to (f), the main dependent variable is the number of newspaper articles on Trump, Clinton, Romney,
Obama in 2012, McCain, and Obama in 2008, respectively. The main independent variables are days
since respective candidate's rally. The figure plots the estimated coefficient and standard error of the
difference in the number of newspaper articles on the candidate in the state with the candidate rally
relative to other states. The data is constructed using a newspaper archive website. All estimates include
state and day fixed effects.




                                                                                                            41
                                                                     Figure 6: TV Advertisement by candidates around rally

                    .3




                                                                                                                                               .3
                                                                                                                            % TV Clips on "Clinton" & "I approve"
 % TV Clips on "Trump" & "I approve"
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                               .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                                      .1
                  0




                                                                                                                                              0
         -.1




                                                                                                                                    -.1
 -.2




                                                                                                                            -.2
                    -.3




                                                                                                                                               -.3
                                              -5      -4     -3      -2     -1      0      1        2    3      4    5                                                  -5      -4     -3      -2      -1      0       1       2    3      4    5
                                                                          Days since Trump Rally                                                                                                    Days since Clinton Rally



                                                                          (a) Trump                                                                                                                 (b) Clinton
                    .5




                                                                                                                                               .5
                         .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4
  Log(Ads by Romney in the media market)




                                                                                                                              Log(Ads by Obama in the media market)
 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                            -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                               -.5




                                            [-9,-7]        [-6,-4]         [-3,-1]       [0,2]          [3,5]       [6,8]                                             [-9,-7]        [-6,-4]          [-3,-1]       [0,2]          [3,5]       [6,8]
                                                                          Days since Romney rally                                                                                                    Days since Obama rally



                                                                      (c) Romney                                                                                                            (d) Obama (2012)
                    .5




                                                                                                                                               .5
 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                    .1 .2 .3 .4
   Log(Ads by McCain in the media market)




                                                                                                                              Log(Ads by Obama in the media market)
                                                                                                                            -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0  -.5




                                            [-9,-7]        [-6,-4]         [-3,-1]       [0,2]          [3,5]       [6,8]                                             [-9,-7]        [-6,-4]          [-3,-1]       [0,2]          [3,5]       [6,8]
                                                                          Days since McCain rally                                                                                                    Days since Obama rally



                                                                          (e) McCain                                                                                                        (f) Obama (2008)

Notes: The Figure shows the result from OLS estimation of Equation 2 for presidential rallies. In
Panels (a) to (f), the main dependent variable is the natural logarithm of number of TV advertisements
by Trump, Clinton, Romney, Obama in 2012, McCain, and Obama in 2008, respectively. The main
independent variables are days since respective candidate's rally. The figure plots the estimated coefficient
and standard error of the difference in the natural logarithm of number of TV advertisement by the
candidate in the media market with the candidate rally relative to other media markets in the swing
states. The data in Panel (a) and (b) is constructed using scrapped data of TV clips from three major
television networks. The data in Panels (c) and (d) is constructed using Wisconsin Advertising Project.
The data in Panels (e) and (f) is constructed using Wesleyan Media Project. All estimates include media
market and day fixed effects.




                                                                                                                         42
                                                Table 6: Impact of rallies in 2016 on the importance of issues
                           (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)         (9)      (10)
      Variable                                                             Most Important Problem:
                        Economy National Health               Gun        Immigration Social     Race    Environment Government Defense
                        and Jobs Security Care               Control       Policy    Security Relations    Policy   Corruption Spending

      Post-Trump          -0.003     -0.008** 0.001 -0.014***                -0.006         -0.006      -0.003          -0.007           -0.003         -0.002
                         (0.005)      (0.003) (0.005) (0.004)               (0.005)        (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.003)        (0.006)

      Observations        9,506        9,506      9,506       9,506          9,506          9,506       9,506           9,506            9,506          9,506
      Mean                .202          .207       .207        .164           .178           .202       .159            .142              .196           .173
      Clusters              67           67         67          67             67             67         67               67               67             67

      Variable                                                             Most Important Problem:
                        Economy National Health               Gun        Immigration Social     Race    Environment Government Defense




43
                        and Jobs Security Care               Control       Policy    Security Relations    Policy   Corruption Spending

      Post-Clinton        -0.014       -0.009     -0.009      -0.000         -0.008        -0.010*      -0.012          0.012          -0.016**         -0.005
                         (0.010)      (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.005)     (0.017)         (0.015)          (0.008)        (0.006)

      Observations       11,989       11,989      11,989     11,989          11,989        11,989       11,989         11,989           11,989         11,989
      Mean                0.195        0.200      0.202      0.156            0.172        0.196        0.154          0.138            0.190           0.167
      Clusters              70           70         70         70               70           70           70             70               70             70
      Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 1 for presidential rallies in 2016. The main dependent variable is binary indicator equal to one if
     the respondent thinks an issue is the important problem. The variable takes on value of one if the respondent lists an issue as "very high importance" or
     "somewhat high importance", and is zero otherwise. In Columns 1 to 10, the dependent variables are the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent says:
     economy and jobs; national security; health care; gun control; immigration; social security; race relations; environmental policy; government corruption; and
     defense budget are the most important problem. In Panels 1 and 2, the main independent variables are the binary indicator equal to one for respondents
     interviewed after a Trump, and Clinton rally, respectively. All estimations include media market and date fixed effects. All estimations include sample 10
     days around the rally for media markets with a rally. The data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates are weighted by the common
     content weight variable. The sample is further restricted to: (i) observations where respondent intends to vote for one of the Republican or Democratic
     presidential candidates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews; (iii) respondents in the swing states.
                                               Table 7: Impact of rallies in 2016 on the preference over policy
                          (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)                           (6)       (7)      (8)        (9)  (10)
     Variable         Grant Legal Increase Border Legal status No Syrian Deport Illegal                                Agree with:           Repeal
                        Status         Patrol     to Dreamers Refugees Immigrants                         TPP      HTFA Iran Sanctions MACRA ACA

     Post-Trump           -0.043            0.020             -0.046        -0.041          -0.016       -0.058* -0.029           0.025          -0.021 0.019
                         (0.029)           (0.032)           (0.038)       (0.101)         (0.024)       (0.031) (0.022)         (0.021)        (0.035) (0.018)

     Observations         9,506             9,506             9,506         2,286           9,506         9,506     9,506         9,506          9,506      9,506
     Mean                 0.541             0.545             0.453         0.402           0.447         0.518     0.846         0.825          0.669      0.552
     Clusters               67                67                67           67              67            67        67             67            67          67

     Variable         Grant Legal Increase Border Legal status No Syrian Deport Illegal                                Agree with:           Repeal
                        Status         Patrol     to Dreamers Refugees Immigrants                         TPP      HTFA Iran Sanctions MACRA ACA




44
     Post-Clinton         0.033             0.013             0.001         -0.082          -0.026        0.014 -0.001            0.004          0.040 -0.038
                         (0.029)           (0.020)           (0.025)       (0.180)         (0.024)       (0.025) (0.038)         (0.025)        (0.034) (0.028)

     Observations        11,989            11,989            11,989         2,819          11,989        11,989 11,989           11,989         11,989     11,989
     Mean                0.538              0.546             0.451         0.406           0.449         0.517 0.843            0.823          0.664       0.554
     Clusters              70                 70               70             70             70            70     70               70             70          70
      Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of Equation 1 for presidential rallies in 2016. The main dependent variables are binary indicators equal to one
     across different policy preferences. In Columns 1 to 5, the dependent variables are the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent is in favor of granting
     legal status to illegal immigrants, increasing ICE patrol on the border, granting legal status to dreamers, accepting no Syrian refugees, and deporting illegal
     immigrants, respectively. In Columns 6 to 10, the dependent variables are the binary indicator equal to one if the respondent is in favor of Trans-Pacific
     Partnership (TPP) Act, Highway and Transportation Funding (HTF) Act, Iran Sanctions Act, Medicare Accountability and Cost Reform (MACR) Act, and
     Repealing Affordable Care Act (ACA), respectively. In Panels 1 and 2, the main independent variables are the binary indicator equal to one for respondents
     interviewed after a Trump, and Clinton rally, respectively. All estimations include media market and date fixed effects. All estimations include sample 10 days
     around the rally for media markets with a rally. The data is constructed using 2016 wave of CCES survey. All estimates are weighted by the common content
     weight variable. The sample is further restricted to: (i) observations where respondent intends to vote for one of the Republican or Democratic presidential
     candidates; (ii) media markets with more than 50 interviews; (iii) respondents in the swing states.
                                      Table 8: Impact of presidential rallies on DMA electoral outcomes
                                                    (1)          (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)                   (6)
       Variable                                             Log(REP Votes)                                       Log(DEM Votes)
       Candidate came  7 days ago                0.069**          -0.033*          -0.037          0.037             0.012               0.086**
                                                  (0.030)         (0.019)         (0.031)         (0.042)           (0.017)              (0.035)
       Candidate came > 7 days ago                 0.033           -0.012          0.002           0.010             -0.002               0.065
                                                  (0.024)         (0.026)         (0.038)         (0.037)           (0.017)              (0.041)
       Lagged Log(REP Votes)                     0.958***        1.013***        1.006***
                                                  (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.013)
       Lagged Log(DEM Votes)                                                                     1.045***          1.018***             0.962***
                                                                                                  (0.018)           (0.008)              (0.018)
       Candidate                                  Trump          Romney          McCain           Clinton        Obama 2012           Obama 2008
       Observations                                 61              42              54               61              42                   54
       Difference                                 0.036*          -0.022          -0.039           0.027            0.014                0.021
                                                  (0.020)        (0.027)         (0.029)          (0.040)          (0.016)              (0.044)




45
       Variable                                                                           Log(Total Votes)
       Candidate came  7 days ago                0.060***          -0.010          -0.043          0.019             -0.003             0.065***
                                                  (0.019)         (0.012)         (0.029)         (0.022)           (0.012)              (0.024)
       Candidate came > 7 days ago                 0.010           -0.019          0.008           0.017             -0.020               0.023
                                                  (0.015)         (0.016)         (0.031)         (0.020)           (0.013)              (0.025)
       Lagged Log(Total Votes)                   0.992***        1.014***        1.004***        0.998***          1.013***             0.981***
                                                  (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.014)         (0.008)           (0.006)              (0.012)
       Candidate                                  Trump          Romney          McCain           Clinton        Obama 2012           Obama 2008
       Observations                                 61              42              54               61               42                  54
       Difference                                0.050***         0.009           -0.051           0.002            0.017               0.042*
                                                  (0.016)        (0.017)         (0.030)          (0.021)          (0.015)              (0.025)
      Notes: The Table shows OLS estimation of effect of presidential rallies on general election outcomes. The unit of observation is media market.
     In Panel 1 (Columns 1 to 3) the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of votes for Republican presidential candidate. In Panel 1 (Columns
     4 to 6) the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of votes for Democratic presidential candidate. In Panel 2 the dependent variable is the
     natural logarithm of total votes in the presidential elections. The variable Candidate came > 7 days ago is equal to one if the candidate had a
     presidential rally in the media area more than 7 days before the general elections, and is zero otherwise. The variable Candidate came  7 days
     ago is equal to one if the candidate had a presidential rally in the media area at most 7 days before the general elections, and is zero otherwise.
     The sample is restricted to media markets within swing states.
