                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                 PROMOTING PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT IN SCHOOLS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM TWO RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENTS

                                       Felipe Barrera-Osorio
                                            Paul Gertler
                                        Nozomi Nakajima
                                           Harry Patrinos

                                       Working Paper 28040
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2020


We thank seminar participants at 3ie, AEFP, APPAM, Columbia University, IZA Economics of
Education Workshop, University of Massachusetts Boston, Vanderbilt University and the World
Bank for comments and feedback on the paper. The research was supported by grants from the
Spanish Impact Evaluation Fund, the World Bank Research Committee (RF-P1123327-RESE-
BBRSB), and the Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program. We dedicate this paper to Eduardo
Rodriguez-Oreggia who worked on the original thinking about the study and passed away in
2014. We are thankful for excellent research assistance from Angelica Rivera-Olvera, Stefan
Metzger, Diego Cardozo-Medeiros and Pedro Pablo Parra-Diaz. Manuel Felix supported the
project since its inception. We are grateful to SEP for access to data. Thanks for all the support to
CONAFE staff at the time, namely: Arturo Saenz Ferral, Lucero Nava Bolanos, Jose Carlos
Rocha Silva, Alfonso Gonzalez Ramirez, Dolores Ramirez Vargas, Georgina Quintanilla
Cerda, Rafaela Merecias Sanchez, Maria Angelica Santiago Antonio and Teresa Nateras
Valdez. The authors have no financial or material interests in the results of this paper. The
registration number of the trial at the AER RCT Registry is AEARCTR-0006424. The
opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily of the institutions they
represent. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Paul Gertler, Nozomi Nakajima, and Harry Patrinos. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Promoting Parental Involvement in Schools: Evidence From Two Randomized Experiments
Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Paul Gertler, Nozomi Nakajima, and Harry Patrinos
NBER Working Paper No. 28040
October 2020
JEL No. I20,I25,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

Parental involvement programs aim to increase school-and-parent communication and support
children's overall learning environment. This paper examines the effects of low-cost, group-based
parental involvement interventions in Mexico using data from two randomized controlled trials.
The first experiment provided financial resources to parent associations. The second experiment
provided information to parents about how to support their children's learning. Overall, the
interventions induced different types of parental engagement in schools. The information
intervention changed parenting behavior at home ­ with large effects among indigenous parents
who have historically been discriminated and socially excluded ­ and improved student behavior
in school. The grants did not impact parent or student behaviors. Notably, we do not find impacts
of either intervention on educational achievement. To understand these null effects, we explore
how social ties between parents and teachers evolved over the course of the two interventions.
Parental involvement interventions led to significant changes in perceived trustworthiness
between teachers and parents. The results suggest that parental involvement interventions can
backfire if institutional rules are unclear about the expectations of parents and teachers as parents
increase their involvement in schools.

Felipe Barrera-Osorio                             Nozomi Nakajima
Department of Leadership,                         Harvard University
Policy and Organizations                          6 Appian Way
Vanderbilt University                             Cambridge, MA 02138
106 C Payne hall                                  nnakajima@g.harvard.edu
230 Appleton Place
Nashville, MA 37203                               Harry Patrinos
felipe.barrera.-.osorio@vanderbilt.edu            The World Bank
                                                  1818 H Street NW
Paul Gertler                                      MSN G8-800
Haas School of Business                           Washington DC
University of California, Berkeley                20433
Berkeley, CA 94720                                hpatrinos@worldbank.org
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction

Parents play an important role in their children's educational experiences and outcomes (Cunha,

Heckman, Lochner, & Masterov, 2006; Houtenville & Conway, 2008; Todd & Wolpin, 2007). How-

ever, parents often face challenges when supporting their children through school. For example,

parents can hold inaccurate beliefs about the returns to education (Attanasio & Kaufmann, 2014;

Jensen, 2010; Nguyen, 2008) and about their own children's academic performance and behaviors

(Banerjee, Banerji, Duflo, Glennerster, & Khemani, 2010; Dizon-Ross, 2019). These biased be-

liefs can lead to misallocation of educational investments. Parents may also have limited cognitive

bandwidth to respond to the various tasks associated with supporting their children's education

(Mani, Mullainathan, Shafir, & Zhao, 2013; Mullainathan & Shafir, 2013). Challenges may also

derive from organizational structures. Schools often assume that parents are familiar with how to

engage with teachers. This assumption can lead to systematic exclusion of low-income, culturally,

and linguistically diverse parents from advocating for their children's needs and accessing school

resources (J. S. Lee & Bowen, 2006).

    To overcome the range of challenges that parents face, parental involvement programs (also

known as family engagement programs) increase school-and-parent communication to support chil-

dren's overall learning environment. In this paper, we analyze data from two field experiments to

examine the impacts of parental involvement interventions on parent and teacher behavior, and

educational outcomes. The experiments were conducted across 430 public schools in four states in

Mexico. These states have a large indigenous population that has faced a long history of discrimina-

tion. In this setting, parental involvement programs hold particularly great promise for improving

school-and-parent communication and supporting the education of indigenous children.

    The first experiment focuses on financial grants to parent associations. Schools assigned to

the treatment condition received double the typical grant amount allocated to parent associations.

This additional grant money was modest, as it covered approximately 83% of the out-of-pocket

educational costs spent by parents in our study setting. Schools assigned to the control group

received the standard grant amount that is allocated to parent associations in Mexican public

schools.

    The second experiment focuses on information provision to parents. Parents in treatment schools


                                                 1
attended group sessions where a community facilitator informed them about ways to become in-

volved in school activities and decision-making processes, as well as where to access community

resources to support their children's learning. Parents in control schools did not receive the infor-

mation intervention.

   We also leverage the design of the two experiments to estimate a non-experimental treatment

effect of receiving the standard grant amount. Specifically, the control group from the first ex-

periment is compared to the treatment group from the second experiment. To compare schools

across experiments, we use the fact that selection into the experiments was based on the propor-

tion of indigenous students in schools. We begin by trimming our data to only include schools in

the region of common support in terms of indigenous student population. Then, we adopt a con-

ditional independence strategy and adjust the treatment and comparison groups using covariates

selected from the post-double selection (PDS) lasso estimator (Belloni, Chernozhukov, & Hansen,

2014). Recent studies have shown that machine-learning tools can be useful for principled variable

selection (Goller, Lechner, Moczall, & Wolff, 2020; B. K. Lee, Lessler, & Stuart, 2010; Urminsky,

Hansen, & Chernozhukov, 2016) and we show that our results are robust to a range of specifica-

tions, as suggested by Angrist and Frandsen (2019). We take caution in interpreting the treatment

effect of the standard grant amount, given the strong unconfoundedness assumption required for

identification. Nonetheless, this non-experimental comparison is of substantive interest because it

uncovers the effect of providing grants to parent associations at the extensive margin (i.e., no grant

versus standard grant amount), whereas the second experiment focuses on the effect of grants at the

intensive margin (i.e., standard grant amount versus double the standard grant amount). Finally,

we correct for multiple-hypothesis testing to account for the number of contrasts and outcomes that

are explored in this paper.

   We present four key results. First, the two experiments induced different types of parental

involvement in schools. Through the double grant, parent associations gained a moderate increase

in financial resources. This additional money allowed parent associations to temporarily "have a

seat at the table" with respect to school decision-making processes. In contrast, the information

intervention offered advice to parents about how to support their children through school. This

information induced parent associations to organize school activities and events, and to meet with

teachers to discuss student performance.

                                                  2
   Second, the information intervention changed parenting behavior at home. Parents in schools

that received the information intervention were significantly more likely to be aware of their chil-

dren's school assignments and to help their children with homework. Moreover, these changes in

parenting behavior were concentrated among indigenous parents. For example, 32 percent of indige-

nous parents in treatment schools helped their children with homework, whereas only 20 percent of

indigenous parents in control schools did so. The large impacts among indigenous parents suggest

the potential for improving school-to-parent communication by targeting groups that have been

historically excluded.

   Third, despite increases in parental involvement, the double grant and information provision did

not affect student test scores on the national standardized exam. For the double grant experiment,

the null results on educational outcomes are consistent with the fact that parents did not significantly

change their parenting behavior at home and teachers did not significantly shift their teaching

behavior. In contrast, the information intervention improved parental support for children's learning

at home. These changes in parenting behavior likely contributed to the marginal reduction in school

dropout and disciplinary action, but did not translate to improvements in educational achievement.

   Finally, we explore how social ties between parents and teachers evolved over the course of

the two interventions. A large body of theoretical and empirically research suggests that trust

is a core component of social capital (Coleman, 1994; Putnam, 2001) and the absence of trust

severely hampers transactions between actors (Fehr, 2009). We find that parental involvement

interventions led to significant changes in perceived trustworthiness of teachers and parents. While

the information intervention improved parents' trust towards teachers, the double grant intervention

diminished both parents' trust towards teachers and teachers' trust toward parents. The negative

effect of the double grant intervention on trust suggests that parental involvement interventions can

backfire if institutional rules are unclear about expectations as parents increase their involvement

in schools.

   This study makes a few contributions to the economic literature on parental involvement in

schools. First, the information intervention is closely related to experiments that provide parents

with information about their children's education. Studies have shown that providing parents with

information about their children's academic progress or performance can lead parents to update

their biased beliefs, reallocate resources, improve student behavior (Avvisati, Gurgand, Guyon, &

                                                   3
Maurin, 2014; Rogers & Feller, 2018), and raise academic performance (Barrera-Osorio, Gonzalez,

Lagos, & Deming, 2020; Bergman, 2016; Dizon-Ross, 2019).1 The information intervention studied

in this paper has been implemented at scale by the national government. This is an important feature

given that studies from efficacy field trials do not always yield similar results when implemented at

scale (Al-Ubaydli, List, & Suskind, 2020; Banerjee et al., 2017). The scaling up of the information

intervention was made possible by delivering information to parents through a group that exists

in all schools: parent associations. Groups have been demonstrated to be efficient platforms for

information delivery in other settings, such as women's groups in developing countries (Dìaz-Martin,

Gopalan, Guarnieri, & Jayachandran, 2020). Parent associations are also useful because they create

opportunity for social interaction among its members, resulting in positive externalities (Small

& Gose, 2020). As the information intervention in the first experiment included time for group

discussion, we view the social interaction in parent associations as an important feature of the

intervention.

    Second, the double grant experiment is closely related to a broader set of school-based man-

agement (SBM) reforms. Since the 1990s, SBM has been a popular policy strategy to improve the

quality of education in developing countries. By decentralizing decision-making authority of school

operations and management from the federal government to local stakeholders, SBM allows for

schools to directly respond to local needs and priorities. Despite the widespread adoption of SBM,

the effectiveness of these programs in raising educational outcomes have been mixed. Experiments

in India (Banerjee et al., 2010), the Gambia (Blimpo, Evans, & Lahire, 2011), and Niger (Beasley

& Huillery, 2017) show no improvement on student learning outcomes. In contrast, experimental

evidence from Indonesia (Pradhan et al., 2014) and Kenya (Duflo, Dupas, & Kremer, 2015) find

significant, positive effects on student test scores. The effective intervention in Indonesia provided

information to parents about ways to become involved in their children's school along with "link-

age" meetings between parent committees and the village council (Pradhan et al., 2014). In Kenya,

Duflo et al. (2015) providing parents with information about how to evaluate contract teachers and

involved parents in the formal review process of contract renewals for teachers.
    1
      The information intervention studied in this paper is similar to a parental outreach program in France, which
gave parents information about the functioning of schools and advice on how to support children with school work
(Avvisati et al., 2014). The French program increased parental involvement and improved student behaviors, but did
not raise student achievement.



                                                        4
    In particular, our study builds upon the numerous evaluations of Mexico's longstanding school-

based management program, which consists of a package of education reforms including infras-

tructure improvement, provision of school materials, teacher training, and school-based manage-

ment (Garcia-Moreno, Gertler, & Patrinos, 2020; Murnane, Willet, & Cardenas, 2006; Santibanez,

Abreu-Lastra, & O'Donoghue, 2014; Skoufias & Shapiro, 2006). Our study focuses specifically on the

parental involvement component (Apoyo a la Gestión Escolar). A previous study of AGE used quasi-

experimental methods to estimate the effect of the program (Gertler, Patrinos, & Rubio-Codina,

2012). This paper uses data from two randomized control trials conducted by the government of

Mexico to understand the effectiveness of different program components ­ information, grants at

the extensive margin, and grants at the intensive margin ­ in improving parental involvement in

schools.

    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present relevant background details of

the study setting and the experimental design. We describe our data sources in Section 3, introduce

our conceptual framework in Section 4, and present our empirical strategy in Section 5. In Section

6, we present results on the effect of each intervention on parental involvement in school, parenting

behavior at home, teacher behavior in school, and children's educational outcomes. In Section 7,

we explore trust between parents and teachers as a mechanism for understanding the effectiveness

of parental involvement programs. Section 8 concludes.



2       Background and Study Design

In 1996, the Government of Mexico established Apoyo a la Gestión Escolar (AGE), a parental

involvement program targeting parents of children enrolled in primary schools. The program has

two key components: (1) financial grants to parent associations and (2) information provision to

parents through parent associations. The grant is provided annually, ranging from USD 500 to 700

depending on the size of the student population. Parent associations can decide how to use these

funds for school infrastructure, supplies, and activities. These funds are not permitted to be used

towards increasing teacher or principal salaries.2

    The information component of AGE provides parents with guidance on how to become more
    2
      The grants were to be used for non-wage expenditure given that over 97 percent of school spending in Mexico
is allocated towards teacher and principal salaries (Santibanez et al., 2014)


                                                       5
involved in their children's schools and ways to support their children's education. Each school

appoints a community advisor, who is responsible for disseminating information to parents and

reporting the school's progress to the Mexican Secretariat of Public Education. The community

advisor receives training from the Mexican Secretariat of Public Education before the information

intervention and they receive an allowance of approximately USD 40 at the end of the school year.

In the vast majority of schools (98%), the school principal serves as the community advisor. Overall,

the information component of AGE is extremely low-cost with a per-student cost of approximately

U.S.D 0.98.3

    The information component consists of five sessions, each lasting approximately one hour. Each

session was facilitated by the community advisor and focused on group discussion among parents.

The first session is an introduction to AGE, highlighting the importance of parental involvement

in schools. The second session covers the role of parents in their children's education and ways in

which parents can become involved in school activities and decision-making processes. The third

session informs parents about education and health resources in their communities. The fourth

session covers the key developmental milestones of children and adolescents, and introduces age-

appropriate activities for parents to support to their children's learning. The fifth session encourages

parents to develop an action plan on how they will play a more active role in their children's schooling

and learning. Appendix A1 below provides additional details of the information intervention.4

    As the Government of Mexico gradually expanded the roll out of AGE, two randomized con-

trolled trials were conducted in four states (Chiapas, Guerrero, Puebla and Yucatan). As shown

in Figure 1, these four states are home to a large indigenous population, which have faced a long

history of discrimination in Mexico (Hall & Patrinos, 2004). The expansion of parental involve-

ment programs in these states holds great promise for improving education but also presents unique

challenges for engaging with families that have been historically marginalized.

    Given the gradual roll out of AGE, some schools in these states were already participating in

AGE while others were not. Thus, the government designed two randomized controlled trials to

tease out the effect of the financial component from the information intervention of the parental
    3
      Cost calculations are based on administrative data from CONAFE during the expansion of information inter-
ventions in 2006
    4
      To encourage the proper dissemination of funds and information to parents, the Mexican Secretariat of Public
Education conducts an audit for a random sample of schools each year.



                                                        6
involvement program. The design of the experiments are outlined in Figure 2.

    The first experiment consists of 250 public schools that were already participating in AGE.

Schools were randomly assigned to either (i) a control group that received the "standard" AGE

program, consisting of the information intervention with a USD 500-700 grant, or (ii) a treatment

group that received the same information intervention but with double (USD 1000-1400) the stan-

dard grant amount.5 The design of the first experiment allows us to estimate the average treatment

effect of doubling the grant for parent associations with the parental involvement program. Baseline

data for the first experiment were conducted in 2007, with follow-up data collection in 2008, 2009

and 2010.

    In practice, the additional grant money in treatment schools is modest. Parents in the 250

public schools in experiment 1 reported spending an average of 9 USD per year per child on school

materials, prior to the intervention. With an average of 80 students in these schools, the "double

grant" amounts to an additional 7.5 USD per year per student, which covers approximately 83% of

the out-of-pocket cost that is typically spent by parents.

    The second experiment consists of 180 public schools that had never participated in AGE. Schools

were randomly assigned to either (i) no intervention or (ii) the information intervention. The design

of the second experiment enables us to estimate the average treatment effect of the information

intervention of the parental empowerment program. The duration of the second experiment was

only one year, as baseline data were collected in 2009, with follow-up data collection in 2010.



3       Data and Descriptive Statistics

Data for this study come from three sources: the school census data (Estadistica 911), the national

standardized exam (ENLACE), and detailed self-reported surveys by students, parent, and teachers

in grades 3-5 of the schools participating in the two experiments. The school census data and

standardized exam scores were obtained through the National Council for Education Development

(CONAFE). The survey data are publicly available on the World Bank Microdata Library.6 At
    5
      The doubling of the grant was made possible through various donors including: Cinépolis, Deutsche Bank,
Fundación Lazos, Fundación Televisa, Gillette Hall, JP Morgan Foundation, Panamerican Development Foundation
and Western Union Foundation.
    6
      Mejia and Filus (2018) have used the survey data from the double grant experiment to explore which variables
predict improvement in student test scores.



                                                        7
the school-level, we merge the school census data with parent surveys, which was completed by the

head of the parent association. At the student-level, we merge the national standardized exam with

the student and teacher surveys using the unique population registry code (CURP).

   Descriptive statistics of baseline characteristics are presented in Table 1 for the double grant

experiment and Table 2 for the information experiment. Each table is organized as a balance test

of school-level variables in Panel A and a balance test of student-level variables in Panel B.

   In experiment 1, both general schools (which provide all instruction in Spanish) as well as in-

digenous schools (which provide instruction in both indigenous languages and Spanish) participated

in the study. While indigenous schools are 10.4% more likely to be found in the treatment group,

we find no systematic difference between treatment and control schools in other school- or student-

level variables. We conduct a joint F-test of the null hypothesis that there are no mean difference

between treatment and control groups across all variables in each panel. The p -values suggests that

our randomization provided balanced treatment and control groups at both the school level (our

level of randomization) and student level.

   The summary statistics in Table 1 highlight two important features of our study context. First,

parents have low levels of education. 77.6% of parent association presidents in control schools and

81.6% of parent association presidents in treatment schools reported primary (grades 1-6 in Mexico)

as their highest level of education completed. Second, teachers are substantially more educated than

parents. On average, 76.6% of teachers in control schools and 75.4% of teachers in treatment schools

completed either a teaching college degree or university degree.

   Panel B of Table 1 shows the characteristics of students participating in the double grant exper-

iment. Students in grades 3, 4 and 5 are surveyed, and nearly half of the study sample is female.

The survey includes a number of questions about household assets, which are used to construct a

wealth index using Principal Components Analysis (PCA). We further normalize the wealth index

to be mean 0 with standard deviation 1 using the control group at baseline. Language and math

test scores are from the national standardized exams (ENLACE). The test ranges from 200 to 800

points, with a national average of 500 and a standard deviation of 100. On average, students in

experiment 1 score below the national average, with mean test scores ranging from 437 to 450. In

our analyses below, we standardized the test scores in Spanish and Math for each grade to be mean

0 with standard deviation 1 using the control group scores at baseline.

                                                  8
    In the information experiment (Table 2), only general schools participated in the study. Overall,

we do not find significant differences between treatment and control schools in school-level variables.

While students in grade 4 were 1.8% more likely to be sampled in control schools than in treatment

schools, we do not find systematic difference between the two groups in other student-level variables.

The p-values from the joint F-test are 0.477 (school) and 0.329 (student), which is consistent with

successful randomization.

    Similar to schools in the double grant experiment, schools in the information experiment also

have large differences in the educational backgrounds of parent and teachers. The majority of parent

association presidents report primary school as their highest level of education, while most teachers

had completed a teaching college degree or a university degree. At the student-level, the surveys

for experiment 2 were administered to students in grades 3, 4 and 5, and nearly half of the study

sample is female. We perform the same procedure as Table 1 to construct the wealth index.



4    Conceptual Framework & Measures

Parental involvement programs (also known as family engagement programs) aim to improve school-

and-parent communication to support children's overall learning environment. These interventions

target parents and caretakers, as it is widely accepted that parents play an important role in shaping

children's educational experience and outcomes (Doepke, Sorrenti, & Zilibotti, 2019).

    Parental involvement programs recognize that parents may not be able to fully engage with

their children's education because of biased beliefs (Barrera-Osorio et al., 2020; Bergman, 2016;

Dizon-Ross, 2019; Rogers & Feller, 2018) and limited cognitive bandwidth, particularly for low-

income parents (Mani et al., 2013; Mullainathan & Shafir, 2013). Thus, the group-based information

interventions in our study are aimed at overcoming these psychological and informational barriers

that often impede school-and-parent communication.

    Parental involvement programs also acknowledge that institutional discrimination hinders school-

and-parent communication. Research suggest that schools can exclude parents whose culture or

lifestyle differs from that of the dominant culture (J. S. Lee & Bowen, 2006). The power imbalance

between schools and less advantaged parents makes it difficult for parents to take an active role

in their children's education. Thus, the double grant experiment in our study is aimed at giving


                                                  9
parents power through direct influence over resource allocation in schools.

    The theory of action underlying parental involvement programs consists of three steps. The

first step is an increase in parental involvement. We examine parental involvement in schools using

four measures: whether parent associations organized school activities and events, whether parent

associations met with teachers to discuss children's academic progress, whether parent associations

participated in school decision meetings, and the percent of parents attending parent association

meetings.

    In the next step, increase in parental involvement in schools should lead to changes in child

inputs by parent and teachers. Parents have more information about their children's behavior and

performance in school, which allows them to adjust how they support their children at home. We

measure two types of parental behavior at home: whether parents were aware of their children's

school assignments and whether parents helped with their children's homework.

    Increases in parental involvement at school also means greater oversight over teachers in how

they manage their classrooms. Teachers may be induced to exert greater effort given that parents are

regularly participating in school activities and events. We measure two types of teaching behavior:

recorded days of teacher absences in the past month and an index of student-centered instruction.

The index of student-centered instruction is the first principal components from principal component

analyses of four survey items: (i) teacher explains concepts clearly, (ii) teacher reviews homework

assignments, (iii) teacher does not ask students to copy from textbooks/blackboard without any

explanation, and (iv) teacher gives students exercises that apply concepts learned in class.              7


    The last step in the theory of action is improvements in educational outcomes. Using adminis-

trative records from the school census data, we measure school-level failure, repetition, and dropout

rates. We use the national standardized exam data for student-level test scores in Spanish and

Math. Finally, we measure disciplinary action in schools by whether a student had been suspended,

expelled, or involved in any other type of disciplinary action (i.e., referred to the principal) in the

past academic year.
   7
     To benchmark the effect size of student-centered instruction, we show the association between student-centered
instruction and the items used to construct the index at baseline in Table A6.




                                                        10
5       Empirical Strategy

Experiments. For each experiment, we estimate the effect of being assigned to treatment at each

year of data collection using the following model specification:



                                        Yj = j + Tj + Y0j + j                                              (1)

where Yj is the outcome of interest for school j , Tj is a binary variable (1 if school j was a treatment

school and 0 otherwise), and Y0j is the baseline measure of the outcome of interest.  is the intent-

to-treat effect of the intervention.

    While some of our outcome of interests are measured at the school-level (parental involvement

and school progression), others are measured at the student level (parenting behavior, teaching

behavior, student test scores, and student disciplinary action).8 For student-level outcomes, we

estimate the following model specification:


                                                   ¯0j + Xij + ij
                                   Yij = j + Tj +  Y                                                       (2)

where Yij is the outcome of interest for student i in school j , Tj is a binary variable (1 if school j
                                         ¯0j is the school-average baseline measure of the outcome
was a treatment school and 0 otherwise), Y

of interest, and Xij is a vector of child characteristics (grade, gender, household wealth).  is the

intent-to-treat effect of the intervention and we estimate robust standard errors clustered at the

school level.

    As noted in our conceptual framework, we are interested in understanding how parental in-

volvement programs affect several outcomes of interests and over several post-treatment years. We

address multiple hypothesis testing by controlling for the familywise error rate (FWER) using the

stepdown procedure proposed by Westfall, Young, and Wright (1993).

    A key threat to identification of our intent to treat estimates is differential attrition (i.e., the non-

response on outcome measures at follow-up data collection) between treatment and control schools.

We address these concerns by conducting two tests. First, we compare attrition rates between
    8
     Binary outcomes are estimated using a linear probability model for ease of interpretation of  in units of
percentage points. Results estimated using logistic regression yield the same conclusion and are available upon
request.




                                                      11
treatment and control schools and find that they are similar across groups. Second, we examine if the

mean of baseline observable characteristics differs across treatment and control groups, conditional

on response status. Overall, we do not find evidence of differential attrition rates or evidence of

selective attrition based on observables (see results for double grant experiment in Table A1 and

for information intervention in Table A2).

Observational data. In addition to the two experiments, we also have a non-experimental contrast

between the control group from experiment 1 and the treatment group from experiment 2. By

comparing these two groups, we can estimate the effect of receiving the standard grant amount

associated with the parental involvement program. In other words, this non-experimental contrast

reveals the effect of providing grants to parent associations at the extensive margin (i.e., no grant

versus single grant) whereas the double grant experiment focuses on the effect of providing grants

at the intensive margin (i.e., single grant versus double grant).

   As described in Section 2 and noted in Figure 2, schools in experiment 1 were those already

receiving the "standard" parental involvement package of grants and information, while schools in

experiment 2 were those that had not yet received the parental involvement program. Histori-

cally, the government selected schools to implement the parental involvement program based on

an increasing function of indigenous student population. This means that schools in experiment 1

historically had larger proportions of indigenous students than schools in experiment 2. While we

do not know the precise selection formula, we confirm in Figure 3a that the probability of being as-

signed to experiment 1 is strongly increasing in the proportion of indigenous students. This implies

that schools in experiment 1 and 2 have different proportions of indigenous students, and therefore,

we cannot simply compare across the two experiments.

   Given our knowledge of the selection process to experiment 1 and 2, we trim our data to exclude

indigenous schools ­ focusing only on general schools ­ when comparing across the two experiments

to estimate the effect of the single grant. As shown in Figure 3b, dropping the indigenous schools

imposes a common support restriction on the proportion of indigenous students and brings the

distribution of indigenous students in treatment schools (single grant & information from experiment

1) and comparison schools (no grants & information from experiment 2) close together. Moreover,

we drop one treatment school that has an indigenous student population above the 99th percentile of



                                                  12
that of comparison schools. Figure 3c shows the distribution of treatment and comparison schools

up to the 99th percentile cutoff (.94). This additional trimming procedure follows guidance from the

matching literature, which suggests dropping treatment group observations with propensity scores

above the 99th percentile of the propensity score in the comparison group as a way to establish

common support and improve the precision of estimators (Lechner & Strittmatter, 2017).

   For identification, we assume that the potential outcome of units in the treatment group (grant

& information) and comparison group (no grant & information) are conditionally independent of

the treatment assignment, given observed pre-treatment covariates x1 ... xp . Our main challenge

is selecting a set of appropriate covariates. On the one hand, omitting covariates that predict the

dependent variable and are correlated with treatment assignment can result in biased estimates of

the average treatment effect. On the other hand, adding too many covariates can result in over-

fitting the data. There is also concern of "researcher degrees of freedom" whereby authors may select

covariates to generate the results they seek.

   To overcome the challenge of variable selection, we follow a principled approach using the double-

lasso or post-double selection (PDS) (Belloni et al., 2014). The PDS uses lasso regression, which

is a penalized regression that improves out-of-sample prediction by shrinking estimated regression

coefficients towards zero and setting some coefficients to zero. These shrinkage properties of lasso

allow it to perform variable selection. However, lasso tends to underestimate (and therefore exclude)

small coefficients that are actually non-zero, which can result in omitted variable bias if directly

applied as a regression that estimates Yi (outcome) on Ti (treatment) and x1 ... xp (observed

covariates). Thus, the PDS approach aims to reduce omitted variable bias by following a three step

procedure:


  1. Fit lasso regression to predict the outcome Yi from observed covariates xi,1 to xi,p :



                                  Yi = 1 xi,1 + 2 xi,2 + ... + p xi,p + i                         (3)


     Covariates with non-zero coefficients from this model are A.

  2. Fit lasso regression to predict the treatment assignment Ti from observed covariates xi,1 to

     xi,p :


                                                 13
                                  Ti = 1 xi,1 + 2 xi,2 + ... + p xi,p + i                        (4)


      Covariates with non-zero coefficients from this model are B .

    3. Fit a linear regression of the outcome Yi on the treatment assignment Ti and covariates

      wi = A  B :



                                          Yi = Ti + wi  + i                                      (5)


Our coefficient of interest is , which is the effect of receiving the single grant amount on outcome

Yi , assuming that the dependence between treatment assignment and outcomes can be removed by

conditioning on observable variables.

    Following advice from Angrist and Frandsen (2019), we show that our results are robust to

different model specifications. Our main model estimates the double lasso regressions using the

`plug-in' penalty, which selects the tuning parameter of the penalty term to be just large enough to

control the noise in the data (Belloni, Chen, Chernozhukov, & Hansen, 2012). Appendix Figures A1,

A2, A3, A4 summarize our sensitivity analyses, showing that our main results remain similar across

different model specifications. Details of our approach can be found in Appendix A2.



6     Results

6.1    Implementation of interventions

Before turning to the ITT effects of the two interventions, we begin by examining the implementation

of the interventions. For the double grant, we examine how the parent associations spent the

additional funds. Figure 4 summarizes the overall spending patterns. The largest category of

spending was for learning related supplies (books, writing utensils, and writing surfaces) with 28%

of the funds allocated in the first year. This amount increased over time, with 38% of total funds

spent on learning supplies by year 3.

    Following learning supplies, the next largest category of spending was health-related supplies

(first aid kits, personal hygiene products, and cleaning supplies). The amount allocated was 18%


                                                 14
in year 1 and down to 16% by year 3. In contrast, parents chose to spend more funds towards

repairs (fixing broken equipment, furniture, and space) and upgrades (purchasing new equipment

and furniture) over time. Funding allocation for repairs increased from 17% in year 1 to 23% in

year 3, and funding for upgrades increased from 18% to 21% between years 1 and 3. Less than 10%

of funds were spent on rent and utilities, transportation, or construction.

   For the information intervention, we examine whether information was actually offered to par-

ents. Table 3 shows the results of regressing a binary outcome of whether an information session

was offered to parents (where 0 = not offered and 1 = offered) on treatment status. As expected,

none of the control schools offered these information sessions. Across the five separate information

sessions offered to parents, between 91.0% and 94.9% of treatment schools offered the information

session to parents.


6.2   Parental involvement

Next, we estimate the effect of the interventions on parental involvement in schools. Table 4 presents

these results. For the double grant experiment, we show the results separately for each follow-up

year. Overall, we do not find significant changes in parental involvement in school activities and

events (column 1), or in meetings with teachers to discuss about student performance (column 2).

The coefficients in column (1) are not statistically significant after correcting for multiple hypothesis

testing.

   However, the double grant intervention seems to have created an opportunity for parent associa-

tions to "have a seat at the table" with respect to school decision making processes. In the first year

of the double grant, we observe a 15.3 percentage point increase in parental involvement in school

decision making. This effect is quite large, as it translates to a 18.3% increase. Notably, we do

not observe these effects in subsequent years, which suggests that the double grants created tempo-

rary and not necessarily meaningful changes in parental involvement in the school decision-making

process.

   The information intervention induced parent associations to become more involved in school

activities & events by 15.0 percentage points. This is equivalent to a 16.9% increase in parental

involvement, from a baseline participation rate of 88.8%. It appears that the increase in parental

involvement was driven by greater participation among parents who were already members of par-

                                                   15
ent associations rather than new parents becoming involved with the parent association. Column

(4) indicates that there was no change in the percent of parents who are members of the parent

association.

   Finally, we observe no impact of the single grant on parental involvement in Table 4. The

null results on parental involvement in school activities and events, and meeting with teachers to

discuss student performance, are both consistent with the findings for the double grant. Given the

modest amount of financial resources that parent associations are given, it is not surprising that

the standard amount (single grant) was not sufficient to get parents involved in decision-making at

schools.


6.3   Parenting and teaching behaviors

Given that both the double grant and information interventions increased parental involvement in

schools, we now turn to estimating effects on parenting and teaching behaviors in Table 5.

   For the double grant experiment, we do not find changes in parenting behavior; either in terms

of awareness of children's school assignments (column 1) or helping children with their homework

(column 2). We also do not find impacts on teaching behaviors; either in terms of teacher absences

(column 3) or student-centered instruction (column 4).

   For the information experiment, we find significant changes in parents' behavior towards sup-

porting their children's learning. Parents are 5.7 percentage points more likely to be aware of their

children's school assignments and 8.8 percentage points more likely to help with their children's

homework. These results suggest that the information intervention not only increased parental

involvement within schools but also improved parenting behavior outside of schools to support

children's learning.

   As noted in the background section, schools in these two experiments were in states with a

large indigenous population. Given the historical marginalization of indigenous people, the parental

involvement interventions in our study offers an opportunity to improve parent and school communi-

cation, particularly for indigenous parents. We explore treatment effect heterogeneity by interacting

the ITT parameter with whether parents identified as indigenous (where 0 = not indigenous and 1

= indigenous). The interaction coefficient indicates the degree to which parental involvement effects

vary across non-indigenous and indigenous parents. In the information experiment, the improve-

                                                 16
ments in parental behavior at home are concentrated among indigenous parents (see Table A4). For

example, 20.5% of indigenous parents in control schools helped their children with homework, while

31.9% of indigenous parents in treatment schools did so. In contrast, 19.6% of non-indigenous par-

ents in control schools supported their children with homework, whereas 25.1% of non-indigenous

parents in treatment schools did so. The difference in effect sizes between indigenous and non-

indigenous parents is significant at the p < 0.10 level.

   To contextualize the null results on teaching behavior for the double grant experiment and in-

formation experiment, it is important to note that both interventions were targeted at parents. Any

changes in teaching behavior would require not only increases in parental engagement in schools but

also requires parents to have sufficient opportunity to demand teachers to improve their behaviors.

It is also worth noting the strength of teacher unions in Mexico, which ensures considerable job

security in the profession (Estrada, 2019; Santibanez, 2006). Given that the majority of teachers

in public schools are unionized, there may be little incentive for teachers to directly respond to

parental demands.


6.4   Educational outcomes

Finally, we examine whether the interventions had impacts on educational outcomes. Overall,

results presented in Table 6 show null effects of providing grants ­ at the intensive margin (double

grant) as well as at the extensive margin (single grant) ­ on school and student outcomes. These

null results on educational outcomes are consistent with our previous findings that the grants did

not induce meaningful changes in parenting and teaching behaviors.

   For the information intervention, we observe a 1.2 percentage point reduction in dropout rates

and a 6.0 percentage point decrease in disciplinary action in treatment schools. Given our previous

results on child inputs, these improvements in educational outcomes are likely to have been driven

by changes in parenting behavior at home rather than by changes in teaching behavior. Notably,

the information intervention did not have any impacts on test scores. Our findings are largely

consistent with findings from (Avvisati et al., 2014), which found that a parental outreach program

in France increased parental involvement and improved student behaviors, but did not raise student

achievement.

   Taken together, our analysis highlights three key results. First, the two experiments induced

                                                  17
different types of parental involvement in schools. Through the double grant, parent associations

gained a moderate increase in financial resources. This additional money allowed parents to tem-

porarily "have a seat at the table" with respect to school decision making processes. In contrast,

the information intervention provided parents with resources to support their children's education

from both within and outside of school. This information encouraged parents to become more in-

volved in school activities and events, and to establish regular meetings with teachers to discuss

their children's performance in schools.

    Second, the information intervention changed parenting behavior at home. Parents in schools

that received the information intervention were significantly more likely to be aware of their chil-

dren's school assignments and to help their children with homework. Moreover, these changes in

parenting behavior were concentrated among indigenous parents. For example, 32 percent of indige-

nous parents in treatment schools helped their children with homework, whereas only 20 percent of

indigenous parents in control schools did so. The large impacts among indigenous parents suggest

the potential for improving school-to-parent communication by targeting groups that have been

historically excluded.

    Third, despite increases in parental involvement, the double grant and information provision did

not affect student test scores on the national standardized exam. For the double grant experiment,

the null results on educational outcomes are consistent with the fact that parents did not significantly

change their parenting behavior at home and teachers did not significantly shift their teaching

behavior. In contrast, the information intervention improved parental support for children's learning

at home. These changes in parenting behavior likely contributed to the marginal reduction in school

dropout and disciplinary action, but did not translate to improvements in educational achievement.



7    Mechanism: Trust between parents and teachers

Our study demonstrates that group-based interventions aimed at parents can improve parental

involvement in schools and encourage parents to take a more active role in supporting their children's

learning at home. However, we show that increases in parental involvement does not necessarily

translate to improvements in educational outcomes. While there are many plausible explanations

for why we do not observe a causal link between parental involvement and educational outcomes,


                                                  18
we focus our attention in this section to the theoretically important concept of trust.

    Parental involvement programs rely on the formation of successful social ties between parents

and teachers to collectively support the needs of children. What constitutes a successful parent-

teacher relationship? A large body of theoretical and empirically research suggests that trust is a

core component of social capital (Coleman, 1994; Putnam, 2001) and the absence of trust severely

hampers transactions between actors (Fehr, 2009).

    Trust is formed between individuals through networks and institutions (Ostrom, 2000). In net-

works, the repeated nature of social interaction allows individuals to examine each others' behaviors.

If these repeated interactions send a positive (negative) signal, trust is enhanced (diminished). In

institutions, rules are established to punish or reward behaviors, and a common understanding of

these rules between individuals can foster trust. However, when rules are not clear in institutions,

a lack of common expectations can decrease trust.

    We view the information treatment as an intervention aimed to enhance network formation

as parents are expected to participate in group discussions with other parents and teachers, and

share their views and experiences. In the information sessions, parents learn about what teachers

are teaching in school and how the learning objectives align with children's development. This

means that in theory, the information sessions give parents an opportunity to receive repeated

positive signals about teachers. Thus, we hypothesize an enhancement of trust between parents and

teachers from the information intervention.

    In contrast, we view the the double grant treatment as an intervention aimed to strengthen

rules in institutions (in this case, schools) by giving parents more financial authority over school

resources. Given the flexibility in how these funds can be allocated, the double grant intervention

can create "an incomplete social contract" (Ostrom, 2000), whereby parents and teachers may not

share common expectations about how these funds should be distributed. Thus, we hypothesize

that the institutional context surrounding the double grant intervention can lead to a decline in

trust between teachers and parents.

    To test these theoretical predictions, we estimate the effect of the two experiments on trust.

Trust is widely measured by asking survey respondents whether they trust others.9 Following the
   9
     The most frequently used measure of trust is based on the American General Social Survey (GSS) and the World
Values Survey (WVS), which asks, "Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you
can't be too careful in dealing with people?" Miller and Mitamura (2003) demonstrates that this wording measures


                                                       19
survey literature on measuring trust in economics (Fehr, 2009; Glaeser, Laibson, Scheinkman, &

Soutter, 2000), we directly asked parent and teachers about their trust in each other. Specifically,

we asked parents, "do you think that most teachers can be trusted?" and asked teachers, "do you

think that most parents can be trusted?".

    In addition to directly asking teachers and parents about the trustworthiness of each other, we

also construct a measure of responsibility. At the core of parent-teacher relationships is the shared

responsibility of educating children. Thus, we hypothesize that parent and teacher trustworthiness

are likely to be closely related to how well they are perceived to be carrying out this shared re-

sponsibility of supporting children's learning. We construct a responsibility index separately for

teachers and parents using the first principal components from principal component analyses of

several survey items. For parental views of teacher responsibility, we use the following survey items:

(i) teachers are available for meetings, (ii) teachers support extra-curricular activities, (iii) teachers

handle conflict resolution between students, (iv) teachers provide additional classes for struggling

students, (v) teachers care about student achievement, and (vi) teachers provide feedback on stu-

dent assignments. For teacher views of parent responsibility, we use the following survey items: (i)

parents are available for meetings, (ii) parents help children with school work, (iii) parents make

sure that children are completing school assignments, and (iv) parents support extra-curricular ac-

tivities. For this exploratory analysis, we re-estimate equation (1) using trust and job responsibility

as the outcome of interest. The results are presented in columns (1) and (3) in Table 7.

    In the double grant experiment, parents' view of teacher trustworthiness significantly declined

by 9.6 percentage points from a high baseline level of 91.9%. This negative impact on teacher

trustworthiness persists into years 2 and 3 of the double grant intervention. We observe a similarly

sharp decrease in teachers' view of parent trustworthiness, between 8.5 and 10.0 percentage points.

These declines in trustworthiness seems to track with perceptions of responsibility, as parents are

significantly less likely to believe that teachers are carrying out their duties to support their children's

education. Moreover, the diminished trust between parents and teachers may explain why the

temporary increase in year 1 for parental involvement in school decision-making was not sustained

in subsequent years. While speculative, the double grant intervention's negative effect on trust
both beliefs about the trustworthiness of others as well as preferences towards taking social risks. We follow the
recommendation by Miller and Mitamura (2003) and remove the risk preference aspect of the question.



                                                       20
suggests that parental involvement interventions can backfire if institutional rules are unclear about

the expectations of parents and teachers as parents increase their involvement in schools.

    In the information experiment, parents' trust towards teachers significantly improved, which is

consistent with the theoretical prediction above. Parents in treatment schools are 14.8 percentage

points more likely to believe that most teachers can be trusted, from a baseline level of 81.2%.

This also tracks with the large positive effects of the intervention on parents' perception of teacher

responsibility. While we see positive shifts on the parent-side, we do not observe any significant

changes in teachers' trust or view of responsibility. These results underscore the fact that the

information intervention targeted parents, not teachers, in promoting school-to-parent communica-

tion. The results also raise a question about whether information interventions may need to more

formally integrate teachers in order to foster stronger social ties between parents and teacher to

support children's development.



8    Conclusion

In this paper, we examined the effectiveness of group-based parental involvement interventions using

two randomized controlled trials. The first experiment provided parent association in treatment

schools with a modest increase in financial resources. The second experiment provided information

to parents about how to become more involved in their children's schooling.

    We found that the two experiments induced different types of parental involvement in schools.

Through the double grant, parent associations gained a moderate increase in financial resources.

This additional money allowed parents to temporarily "have a seat at the table" with respect to

school decision making processes. In contrast, the information intervention provided parents with

resources to support their children's education from both within and outside of school. This infor-

mation encouraged parents to become more involved in school activities and events, and to establish

regular meetings with teachers to discuss their children's performance in schools.

    The information intervention was effective at changing parenting behavior at home. Parents

in schools that received the information intervention were significantly more likely to be aware of

their children's school assignments and to help their children with homework. Moreover, these

changes in parenting behavior were concentrated among indigenous parents. The result highlights


                                                 21
the enormous potential for improving school-to-parent communication by targeting groups that have

been historically excluded from parent associations and school committees.

   Yet despite increases in parental involvement, neither interventions affected educational achieve-

ment. To better understand these null effects, we explored how trust play a role in parent-teacher

relationships. We find that parental involvement interventions led to significant changes in perceived

trustworthiness between teachers and parents. The double grant intervention led to a significant

decline in relational trust between teachers and parents. Meanwhile, the information intervention

resulted in improvements in teachers' trustworthiness. While results are suggestive, we hypothesize

that relational trust is important for establishing positive parent-teacher relationship and creating

learning environments conducive to raising student performance.




                                                 22
     9   Tables & Figures




                                                                                                                   Yucatán
                                                                                                                    65.40




23
                                                                                         Puebla
                                                                                          35.28
                                                                              Guerrero
                                                                               33.92
                       Percent Indigenous Population                                                   Chiapas
                       Greater than 30%                                                                 36.15
                       20-29%
                       10-19%
                       Less than 10%


                                                           Figure 1: States of Mexico

     Note: The figure shows the percent of indigenous population in each state in Mexico. The parental involvement interventions were carried
     out in Guerrero, Puebla, Chiapas and Yucatan (labeled in white font). Data source: World Bank Open Data.
                        Timing of data             Experiment 1: Double grant             Experiment 2: Information
                          collection                           250 schools                          180 schools

                                                                     randomization


                            Year 0
                                                  Control                Treatment
                                                    Grant              Double Grant
                                                 ($500-700)            ($1000-1400)
                                                      &                      &
                                                 Information            Information
                            Year 1               125 schools             125 schools




24
                                                                                                          randomization

                            Year 2
                                                                                          Control             Treatment
                                                                                         No Grant             No Grant
                                                                                             &                    &
                                                                                       No Information        Information
                                                                                         100 schools              80 schools
                            Year 3




                                     Figure 2: Experimental design of two parental involvement interventions

     Note: The figure summarizes the experimental design of the two randomized controlled trials in this study. Baseline survey data for
     experiment 1 was collected in year 0 and baseline survey data for experiment 2 was collected in year 2.
                                   Table 1: Baseline balance of double grant experiment

                                                         Control:                 Treatment:                    Difference:
                                                       Grant & Info           Double Grant & Info
                                                      Mean    (S.D.)           Mean      (S.D.)            T-C             (S.E.)
      Panel A: School characteristics
      Type of school
         General school (1=Yes)                        0.600      (0.492)      0.496        (0.502)       -0.104    *    (0.063)
         Indigenous school (1=Yes)                     0.400      (0.492)      0.504        (0.502)       0.104     *    (0.063)
      Parent association president
         Highest edu. is primary (1=Yes)               0.776      (0.419)      0.816        (0.389)       0.040          (0.051)
         Years as president                            1.376      (1.336)      1.328        (1.148)       -0.048         (0.158)
         Indigenous (1=Yes)                            0.400      (0.492)      0.504        (0.502)       0.104     *    (0.063)
      Teachers
         Prop. with teaching college degree            0.165      (0.315)      0.210       (0.361)        0.045          (0.043)
         Prop. with university degree                  0.606      (0.446)      0.544       (0.462)        -0.063         (0.057)
      Failure rate                                     0.099      (0.066)      0.097       (0.093)        -0.003         (0.010)




25
      Repetition rate                                  0.070      (0.060)      0.068       (0.061)        -0.003         (0.008)
      Dropout rate                                     0.022      (0.039)      0.024       (0.072)         0.002         (0.007)
      Number of schools                                        125                      125
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                      0.768
      Panel B: Student characteristics
      Indigenous (1=Yes)                              0.391    (0.488)          0.426       (0.495)        0.036         (0.064)
      Female (1=Yes)                                  0.487    (0.500)          0.487       (0.500)        0.000         (0.012)
      Household wealth index (S.D.)                   0.000    (1.000)         -0.027       (1.012)       -0.027         (0.088)
      Grade 3 (1=Yes)                                 0.333    (0.471)          0.338       (0.473)        0.004         (0.008)
      Grade 4 (1=Yes)                                 0.337    (0.473)          0.341       (0.474)        0.004         (0.008)
      Grade 5 (1=Yes)                                 0.329    (0.470)          0.321       (0.467)       -0.008         (0.008)
      Language score                                 440.623 (87.430)         437.804      (89.606)       -2.819         (9.750)
      Math score                                     450.740 (97.461)         447.853     (102.326)       -2.886        (11.477)
      Number of students                                    4796                        4570
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                      0.943
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level in Panel B. Reported p-value is from a joint F-test of the null hypoth-
     esis that there are no mean differences between treatment and control across all variables in the panel. All variables measured
     in 2007. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                     Table 2: Baseline balance of information experiment

                                                           Control:                 Treatment:                      Difference
                                                      No Grant & No Info          No Grant & Info
                                                       Mean     (S.D.)            Mean     (S.D.)           T-C               (S.E.)
      Panel A: School characteristics
      Type of school
         General school (1=Yes)                        1.000        (0.000)       1.000         (0.000)     0.000             (0.000)
      Parent association president
         Highest edu. is primary (1=Yes)               0.650        (0.479)       0.662         (0.476)    0.013              (0.072)
         Years as president                            1.590        (0.830)       1.688         (0.894)     0.098             (0.129)
         Indigenous (1=Yes)                            0.200        (0.402)       0.150         (0.359)    -0.050             (0.058)
      Teachers
         Prop. with teaching college degree            0.207       (0.323)        0.246         (0.333)    0.038              (0.049)
         Prop. with university degree                  0.603       (0.424)        0.529         (0.419)    -0.073             (0.063)
      Failure rate                                     0.080       (0.060)        0.068         (0.063)    -0.013             (0.009)
      Repetition rate                                  0.055       (0.053)        0.047         (0.044)    -0.009             (0.007)




26
      Dropout rate                                     0.025       (0.042)        0.026         (0.045)     0.001             (0.007)
      Number of schools                                         100                        80
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                         0.477
      Panel B: Student characteristics
      Indigenous (1=Yes)                               0.151       (0.358)         0.115    (0.319)        -0.036           (0.047)
      Female (1=Yes)                                   0.499       (0.500)         0.492    (0.500)        -0.007           (0.011)
      Household wealth index (S.D.)                    0.000       (1.000)        -0.011    (0.916)        -0.011           (0.080)
      Grade 3 (1=Yes)                                  0.314       (0.464)         0.329    (0.470)         0.015     *     (0.008)
      Grade 4 (1=Yes)                                  0.349       (0.477)         0.332    (0.471)        -0.018     **    (0.007)
      Grade 5 (1=Yes)                                  0.336       (0.473)         0.339    (0.473)         0.003           (0.005)
      Language score                                  495.214     (107.029)      489.013 (102.780)         -6.201           (9.327)
      Math score                                      513.129     (120.626)      505.739 (116.290)         -7.390          (10.694)
      Number of students                                        4576                     3602
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                         0.284
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level in Panel B. Reported p-value is from a joint F-test of the null hypothesis
     that there are no mean differences between treatment and control across all variables in the panel. All variables measured in
     2009. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                                                                             1


                                                                                             .8


                                                                                             .6


                                                                                             .4




                                                      Prob. of selection to treatment
                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                  0        .2         .4               .6             .8          1
                                                                                                           Proportion of indigenous students

                                                   (a) Selection into treatment by proportion of indigenous students

                        8                                                                                                               15




27
                        6
                                                                                                                                        10
                        4




              Density
                                                                                                                             Density        5
                        2

                        0                                                                                                                   0
                            0    .2          .4                                         .6            .8          1                             .03   .14                           .66         .94
                                Proportion of indigenous students                                                                                           Proportion of indigenous students

                                      Density of treatment group                                                                                               Density of treatment group
                                      Density of comparison group                                                                                              Density of comparison group

              (b) Kernel density estimates of percent indigenous students                                                              (c) Histogram density of percent indigenous students

                                                   Figure 3: Common support for non-experimental contrast
     Note: These figures asses the selection process and common support for the non-experimental contrast: the treatment group is the single grant & no information
     group from experiment 1 and the comparison group is the no grant & information group from experiment 2. (a) is a binned scatter plot of the percent of schools
     assigned to treatment as a function of the proportion of indigenous students. Schools are binned into 20 equal sized group along the x-axis, and the mean of each
     group is plotted on the y-axis. (b) is a kernel density of the proportion of indigenous students after the data has been trimmed to exclude indigenous schools. (c) is
     the histogram density of the proportion of indigenous students after the data has been trimmed to exclude indigenous schools and schools outside of the 75th and
     99th percentile of indigenous student population. The 1st to 4th number in the x-axis corresponds to the 75th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles.
                                                            40



                                                            30



                                                            20



                                                            10




                            Percent of double grant spent
                                                            0
                                                                 1 year                       2 years              3 years
                                                                                      Post treatment years

                                                                                       Learning related supplies




28
                                                                                       Health related supplies
                                                                                       Repairs
                                                                                       Upgrades
                                                                                       Rent & utilities
                                                                                       Transportation
                                                                                       Construction



                                                                          Figure 4: Allocation of double grant

     Note: The figure shows the means and 95% confidence intervals of allocation of the double grant in treatment schools. "Learning related
     supplies" are spending on books, writing utensils (e.g., pencils, pens, chalk, etc.), and writing surfaces (e.g., paper, chalkboard, notebooks).
     "Health related supplies" are spending on first aid kits, basic personal hygiene products, and cleaning supplies. "Repairs" refer to funds
     spent on fixing broken equipement, furniture, and space in schools. "Upgrades" refer to funds spent on purchasing new equipment
     and furniture. "Rent & utilities" are spending related to real estate, electricity, water, etc. "Transportation" is spending related to
     transportation for teachers and students. "Construction" is spending on the infrastructure of classrooms and teacher dormitories. Data
     source: Parent association survey.
             Table 3: Delivery of information to parent association

                      (1)         (2)          (3)              (4)          (5)
                                Role of    Community          Child         Action
                Overview        parents     resources      development      plans
 Information experiment
 Treatment         0.936***    0.910***        0.936***      0.949***      0.936***
                    (0.028)     (0.033)         (0.028)       (0.025)       (0.028)
 Control mean        0.000       0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000
 Observations         174         174            174            174           174
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: parent surveys. * p<0.1, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                          29
                                        Table 4: Effect on parental involvement

                              Organized                   Met with              Involved in         Percent of parents
                          school activities          teachers to discuss           school          regularly attending
                              & events              student performance       decision making           meetings
                                 (1)                         (2)                     (3)                   (4)
      Double grant experiment
      Treatment (1 year)       0.076*                       0.034                  0.153**                 -0.726
                               (0.044)                     (0.042)                 (0.060)                (2.383)
         WY p -value                 0.160                  0.660                   0.020                  0.780
      Treatment (2 year)           0.084**                  0.003                   0.046                  0.034
                                   (0.042)                 (0.042)                 (0.062)                (1.901)
         WY p -value                 0.160                  1.000                   0.840                  1.000
      Treatment (3 year)            0.067*                  -0.021                  0.016                  -1.073
                                    (0.040)                (0.045)                 (0.064)                (1.666)
         WY p -value                 0.320                  0.900                   0.900                  0.840




30
      Control mean             0.824                        0.840                   0.584                 86.776
      Observations              244                          244                     244                   244
      Information experiment
      Treatment (1 year)     0.150***                      0.129**                  0.037                  3.300
                              (0.055)                      (0.054)                 (0.075)                (2.078)
         WY p -value                 0.020                  0.080                   0.560                  0.280
      Control mean                   0.730                  0.750                   0.550                 87.770
      Observations                    174                    174                     174                   174
      Single grant observation
      Treatment (1 year)             -0.056                 -0.084                  0.013                  -1.839
                                    (0.055)                (0.053)                 (0.085)                (2.123)
         WY p -value                 0.740                  0.340                   0.900                  0.740
      Control mean                   0.910                  0.910                   0.615                 91.231
      Observations                    151                    151                     151                   151
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Westfall and Young (WY) p-values reported. Dependent variables in
     columns (1)-(3) are binary (where 1=Yes). Dependent variable in column (4) is continuous. Data source: Parent associa-
     tion surveys. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                   Table 5: Effect on parenting and teaching behaviors

                                       Parenting                        Teaching
                            Aware of                                              Student-
                              school           Helps with      Days absent        centered
                          assignments          homework       in past month      instruction
                                (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
      Double grant experiment
      Treatment (1 year)       0.018              0.021            -0.335           0.031
                             (0.026)             (0.026)          (0.367)          (0.055)
         WY p -value              0.790           0.790            0.790            0.790
      Treatment (2 year)          0.047           0.043            0.295            0.038
                                 (0.034)         (0.033)          (0.299)          (0.059)
         WY p -value              0.550           0.560            0.590            0.590
      Treatment (3 year)          0.021           0.030            -0.172           0.017
                                 (0.033)         (0.033)          (0.433)          (0.064)




31
         WY p -value              0.930           0.780            0.950            0.950
      Control mean            0.437               0.414            1.597            0.076
      Observations            8881                8881             8881             8881
      Information experiment
      Treatment (1 year)     0.045**            0.072***           -0.087           -0.002
                             (0.021)             (0.021)          (0.466)          (0.058)
         WY p -value              0.130           0.010            0.990            0.990
      Control mean              0.245             0.203            1.534            -0.094
      Observations               7950             7950             7950              7950
      Single grant observation
      Treatment (1 year)        -0.038            -0.043           0.694            -0.039
                               (0.036)           (0.031)          (0.610)          (0.072)
         WY p -value              0.560           0.550            0.560            0.580
      Control mean                0.306           0.270            2.591            -0.013
      Observations                6288            6288             6288              6288
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Westfall and Young (WY) p-values reported.
     Dependent variables in columns (1) and (2) are binary (where 1=Yes). Dependent variable in
     columns (3) and (4) are continuous. Data source: Student surveys. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, ***
     p<0.01
                                   Table 6: Effect on educational outcomes

                                         School-level                             Student-level
                             (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
                          Failure        Dropout     Repetition      Spanish          Math        Disciplinary
                            rate           rate        rate         test (S.D.)    test (S.D.)       action
      Double grant experiment
      Treatment (1 year) 0.013             0.001         0.000         0.079          0.079          0.003
                          (0.009)         (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.075)        (0.082)        (0.024)
         WY p -value           0.220       0.960        0.990          0.490          0.490          0.900
      Treatment (2 year)       0.001       0.008         -0.001        0.063          0.005          -0.006
                              (0.008)     (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.084)        (0.087)        (0.026)
         WY p -value           0.940       0.420        0.880          0.770          0.950          0.950
      Treatment (3 year)       -0.003      0.003         -0.001        0.037          -0.002         -0.008
                              (0.008)     (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.098)        (0.103)        (0.027)
         WY p -value           1.000       0.970        1.000          0.930          1.000          0.930




32
      Control mean         0.082           0.073        0.020          0.021         -0.093          0.269
      Observations          250             250          250           8881           8881           8881
      Information experiment
      Treatment (1 year) -0.010           -0.012*        -0.006        0.078          0.023        -0.061***
                          (0.008)         (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.107)        (0.112)        (0.021)
         WY p -value           0.280       0.250        0.280          0.610          0.850          0.000
      Control mean           0.069         0.056        0.025          0.066         -0.078          0.254
      Observations            180           180          180           7981           7981           7981
      Single grant observation
      Treatment (1 year) 0.018             0.007         0.007         0.112          0.139          0.025
                            (0.011)       (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.109)        (0.118)        (0.026)
         WY p -value           0.210       0.390        0.420          0.570          0.570          0.570
      Control mean             0.056       0.041        0.019          0.109         -0.086          0.200
      Observations              151         151          151           6288           6288           6288
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. Westfall and Young (WY) p-values reported.
     Data source: Administrative data from school census (E911) and national standardized exam scores (ENLACE).*
     p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
            Table 7: Trust and responsibility between teachers and parents

                                  Parent's perspective            Teacher's perspective
                              (1)                  (2)            (3)             (4)
                             Most                                Most
                           teachers            Teacher          parents        Parent
                            can be          Responsibility      can be      Responsibility
                            trusted          Index (SD)         trusted      Index(SD)
      Double grant experiment
      Treatment (1 year) -0.096**              -0.418***       -0.110**          -0.096
                            (0.043)             (0.133)         (0.048)         (0.121)
         WY p -value             0.000            0.000          0.100           0.460
      Treatment (2 year)       -0.089***        -0.300**       -0.099**          -0.154
                                (0.034)          (0.129)        (0.040)         (0.129)
         WY p -value             0.000            0.000          0.060           0.140
      Treatment (3 year)       -0.113***         -0.217        -0.115**          -0.068
                                (0.040)         (0.142)         (0.045)         (0.135)




33
         WY p -value             0.020            0.080          0.000           0.460
      Control mean           0.920                0.000          0.803           -0.000
      Observations            244                  244            732             732
      Information experiment
      Treatment (1 year) 0.149***               0.309**          0.027          0.294*
                           (0.046)              (0.152)         (0.055)         (0.164)
         WY p -value             0.000            0.040          0.500           0.120
      Control mean            0.820               0.000          0.777           -0.000
      Observations             174                 174            522             522
      Single grant observation
      Treatment (1 year)      -0.007           -0.446***         0.027           -0.192
                             (0.034)            (0.170)         (0.070)         (0.193)
         WY p -value             0.900            0.000          0.840           0.640
      Control mean               0.962            0.337          0.778           0.209
      Observations                151              151            453             453
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. Westfall and Young (WY)
     p-values reported. Data source: parent association survey and teacher survey.* p<0.1, **
     p<0.05, *** p<0.01
References
Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J. A., & Suskind, D. (2020). The science of using science: Towards an
      understanding of the threats to scalability. International Economic Review .
Angrist, J., & Frandsen, B. (2019). Machine labor (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic
      Research.
Attanasio, O. P., & Kaufmann, K. M. (2014). Education choices and returns to schooling: Moth-
      ers' and youths' subjective expectations and their role by gender. Journal of Development
      Economics , 109 , 203­216.
Avvisati, F., Gurgand, M., Guyon, N., & Maurin, E. (2014). Getting parents involved: A field
      experiment in deprived schools. Review of Economic Studies , 81 (1), 57­83.
Banerjee, A., Banerji, R., Berry, J., Duflo, E., Kannan, H., Mukerji, S., . . . Walton, M. (2017).
      From proof of concept to scalable policies: Challenges and solutions, with an application.
      Journal of Economic Perspectives , 31 (4), 73­102.
Banerjee, A., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Khemani, S. (2010). Pitfalls of participatory
      programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in education in India. American Economic
      Journal. Economic Policy , 2 (1), 1.
Barrera-Osorio, F., Gonzalez, K., Lagos, F., & Deming, D. J. (2020). Providing performance infor-
      mation in education: An experimental evaluation in Colombia. Journal of Public Economics ,
      186 , 104185.
Beasley, E., & Huillery, E. (2017). Willing but unable? short-term experimental evidence on parent
      empowerment and school quality. The World Bank Economic Review , 31 (2), 531­552.
Belloni, A., Chen, D., Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2012). Sparse models and methods for
      optimal instruments with an application to eminent domain. Econometrica , 80 (6), 2369­2429.
Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., & Hansen, C. (2014). Inference on treatment effects after selection
      among high-dimensional controls. The Review of Economic Studies , 81 (2), 608­650.
Bergman, P. (2016). Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evidence
      from a field experiment investment. Journal of Political Economy .
Blimpo, M. P., Evans, D. K., & Lahire, N. (2011). School-based management and educational
      outcomes: Lessons from a randomized field experiment. Unpublished manuscript .
Coleman, J. S. (1994). Foundations of social theory. Harvard university press.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L., & Masterov, D. V. (2006). Interpreting the evidence on
      life cycle skill formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education , 1 , 697­812.
Dìaz-Martin, L., Gopalan, A., Guarnieri, E., & Jayachandran, S. (2020). Greater than the sum of
      the parts? evidence on mechanisms operating in women?s groups.
Dizon-Ross, R. (2019). Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability: Implications for
      educational investments. American Economic Review , 109 (8), 2728­65.
Doepke, M., Sorrenti, G., & Zilibotti, F. (2019). The economics of parenting. Annual Review of
      Economics , 11 , 55­84.
Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2015). School governance, teacher incentives, and pupil-teacher
      ratios: Experimental evidence from Kenyan primary schools. Journal of Public Economics ,
      123 , 92­110.
Estrada, R. (2019). Rules versus discretion in public service: Teacher hiring in Mexico. Journal of
      Labor Economics , 37 (2), 545­579.
Fehr, E. (2009). On the economics and biology of trust. Journal of the European Economic
      Association , 7 (2-3), 235­266.
Garcia-Moreno, V. A., Gertler, P., & Patrinos, H. A. (2020). School-based management and
      learning outcomes : Experimental evidence from Colima, Mexico. Community Participation


                                                 34
      with Schools in Developing Countries: Towards Equitable and Inclusive Basic Education for
      All .
Gertler, P., Patrinos, H. A., & Rubio-Codina, M. (2012). Empowering parents to improve education:
      Evidence from rural mexico. Journal of Development Economics , 99 (1), 68­79.
Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D. I., Scheinkman, J. A., & Soutter, C. L. (2000). Measuring trust. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics , 115 (3), 811­846.
Goller, D., Lechner, M., Moczall, A., & Wolff, J. (2020). Does the estimation of the propensity
      score by machine learning improve matching estimation? the case of Germany's programmes
      for long term unemployed. Labour Economics , 101855.
Hall, G., & Patrinos, H. A. (2004). Indigenous peoples, poverty and human development in latin
      america: 1994-2004. The World Bank.
Houtenville, A. J., & Conway, K. S. (2008). Parental effort, school resources, and student achieve-
      ment. Journal of Human resources , 43 (2), 437­453.
Jensen, R. (2010). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics , 125 (2), 515­548.
Lechner, M., & Strittmatter, A. (2017). Practical procedures to deal with common support problems
      in matching estimation. Econometric Reviews , 38 (2), 193­207.
Lee, B. K., Lessler, J., & Stuart, E. A. (2010). Improving propensity score weighting using machine
      learning. Statistics in medicine , 29 (3), 337­346.
Lee, J. S., & Bowen, N. K. (2006). Parent involvement, cultural capital, and the achievement gap
      among elementary school children. American Educational Research Journal , 43 (2), 193­218.
Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zhao, J. (2013). Poverty impedes cognitive function.
      science , 341 (6149), 976­980.
Mejia, A., & Filus, A. (2018). Exploring predictors of impact of school-based management in rural
      Mexico: Do student engagement, teacher attitudes and parent involvement predict better
      academic outcomes? International Journal of Educational Research , 88 , 95­108.
Miller, A. S., & Mitamura, T. (2003). Are surveys on trust trustworthy? Social Psychology
      Quarterly , 62­70.
Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why having too little means so much. Macmillan.
Murnane, R. J., Willet, J. B., & Cardenas, S. (2006). Did participation of schools in Programa
      Escuelas de Calidad influence student outcomes? Working Paper .
Nguyen, T. (2008). Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experimental
      evidence from Madagascar. Unpublished manuscript , 6 .
Ostrom, E. (2000). Social capital: A fad or a fundamental concept. Social capital: A multifaceted
      perspective , 172 (173), 195­98.
Pradhan, M., Suryadarma, D., Beatty, A., Wong, M., Gaduh, A., Alisjahbana, A., & Artha, R. P.
      (2014). Improving educational quality through enhancing community participation: Results
      from a randomized field experiment in Indonesia. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
      nomics , 6 (2), 105­26.
Putnam, R. (2001). Social capital: Measurement and consequences. Canadian journal of policy
      research , 2 (1), 41­51.
Rogers, T., & Feller, A. (2018). Reducing student absences at scale by targeting parents' misbeliefs.
      Nature Human Behaviour , 2 (5), 335.
Santibanez, L. (2006). Why we should care if teachers get A's: Teacher test scores and student
      achievement in Mexico. Economics of Education Review , 25 (5), 510­520.
Santibanez, L., Abreu-Lastra, R., & O'Donoghue, J. L. (2014). School based management effects:
      Resources or governance change? Evidence from Mexico. Economics of Education Review ,
      39 , 97­109.

                                                 35
Skoufias, E., & Shapiro, J. (2006). The pitfalls of evaluating a school grants program using non-
      experimental data. Policy Research Working Paper , 4036 .
Small, M. L., & Gose, L. E. (2020). How do low-income people form survival networks? routine
      organizations as brokers. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social
      Science , 689 (1), 89­109.
Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2007). The production of cognitive achievement in children: Home,
      school, and racial test score gaps. Journal of Human capital , 1 (1), 91­136.
Urminsky, O., Hansen, C., & Chernozhukov, V. (2016). Using double-lasso regression for principled
      variable selection. Working Paper .
Westfall, P. H., Young, S. S., & Wright, S. P. (1993). On adjusting p-values for multiplicity.
      Biometrics , 49 (3), 941­945.
Zou, H. (2006). The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the American Statistical
      Association , 101 (476), 1418­1429.




                                               36
A      Appendix

A1     Details of information intervention

Information was provided to parents in five sessions. Each session was facilitated by the community

advisor and focused on group discussion. Details of the sessions are described below.

Overview:

     The first session provided an overview about the importance of parental involvement in schools.

The community advisor and parents introduced themselves. This session was intended to establish

community norms, with the community advisor encouraging parents to share their perspectives and

raise questions. The logistics of future sessions were planned.

Role of parents:

     The second session focused on how parents can support their children's learning both in and

outside of school. Parents formed groups of 3-7 to discuss recent events/issues in their community

that have affected their children's education. The community advisor facilitated discussion about

how parents can work together with teachers in the school to tackle these issues.

Community resources:

     In the third session, the community advisor provided information about educational and health

resources in the community. Parents received a detailed map of where to access these resources.

Parents formed groups of 3-7 to share their views about additional resources that are needed in the

community.

Child development:

     The fourth session focused on children's development. The community advisor explained the

key learning objectives/materials covered in each grade in primary school. Parents formed groups

of 3-7 to discuss concretely what parents can do to support their children's learning at home.

Action plans:

     The last session focused on making concrete action plans for parents. The action plans focused

on ideas or initiatives that individual parents can do to support their children's education as well

as what the parent association can do to increase parental involvement in schools.




                                                 37
A2     Details of post-double selection lasso

To compare groups across experiments, we assume that the potential outcome of units in the treat-

ment group (grant & information) and comparison group (no grant & information) are conditionally

independent of the treatment assignment, given observed pre-treatment covariates x1 ... xp . We

select covariates using the double-lasso or post-double selection (PDS) (Belloni et al., 2014). The

PDS uses lasso regression, a penalized regression that minimizes:

                                         n                            p
                                     1
                                               ( yi - x  i  ) 2 +           |j |                  (A1)
                                     n
                                         i=1                         j =1

where n is the sample size, y is the outcome, x contains the p potential covariates,  is the vector

of coefficients on x , and j is the j th element of  . The first term is the least-squares fit measure

and the second term is the penalty term.  is the tuning parameter, which determines the shrinkage

of estimated coefficients.

     In our sensitivity analyses, we select the penalty level of  using four different model specifica-

tions. The first and main model uses the `plug-in' penalty, which optimizes between a value of 

large enough to control the noise in the data and small enough for shrinkage bias (Belloni et al.,

2012). The second specification uses cross-validation. We partition the data into 10 folds, treating

each fold as a validation (testing) data set while the remaining folds are used as training data. The

value of  that shows the best out-of-sample predictive performance across the folds is selected.

The third model is a variant of cross-validation and selects the largest penalty such that the mean-

squared error (MSE) is within one-standard deviation of the MSE from cross-validation. Our last

specification uses adaptive lasso, which is a two-step version of cross-validation. The first step of

adaptive lasso is cross-validation and the second step performs cross-validation among the covari-

ates selected in the first step, which tends to exclude covariates with small coefficients that should

have been omitted (Zou, 2006). While the plug-in tends to produce models with few covariates,

cross-validation tends to select many covariates (Belloni et al., 2012). Given that our identification

relies on conditional independence, using cross-validation (and variants of it) to select  allows us

to examine the sensitivity of our main results to the inclusion of additional covariates.

     The candidate covariates for each of our outcome variables is summarized below.



                                                        38
                                                                                   Number of
     Category               Outcomes                                                            Description of covariates
                                                                                   covariates
                                                                                                Head of parent association's gender, indigenous status, family's
                                                                                   121          indigenous status, education level, selection to position (election/appointed),
                            Involved in school activities & events
                                                                                   121          years in position; community advisor is principal; lagged outcome variables
                            Meeting with teachers to discuss student performance
     Parental involvement                                                                       measured prior year; educational outcomes aggregated at school level in
                            Involved in school-decision making
                                                                                   121          prior year; teachers' educational level aggregated at school level in prior year;
                            Percent of parents regularly attending meetings
                                                                                   121          average annual school expenditure in prior year; two-way interactions of
                                                                                                covariates; missing indicators of covariates.
                                                                                                Student's gender, grade level, indigenous status, physical disabilities, learning
                                                                                                disabilities, age of school entry, number of siblings, mother's education level,
                            Parenting: Aware of school assignments                 300
                                                                                                household wealth index; teacher's gender, indigenous status, holds non-
     Parenting & teaching   Parenting: Helps with homework                         300
                                                                                                teaching jobs, years of teaching experience, experience teaching same grade,
     behaviors              Teaching: Days absent in past month                    300
                                                                                                educational attainment level; lagged outcome variable aggregated at school
                            Teaching: Student-centered instruction                 300
                                                                                                level in prior year; two-way interactions of covariates; missing indicators of
                                                                                                covariates.
                                                                                                Teachers' educational attainment level; average annual school expenditure
                                                                                                in prior year; lagged outcome variable in prior year; educational outcomes
                            Failure rate                                           60
                                                                                                aggregated at school level in prior year; head of parent association's gender,
                            Dropout rate                                           60
     Educational outcomes                                                                       indigenous status, family's indigenous status, education level, selection to
                            Repetition rate                                        60
                                                                                                position (election/appointed), years in position; community advisor is




39
                                                                                                principal; two-way interactions of covariates; missing indicators of covariates.
                                                                                                Student's gender, grade level, indigenous status, physical disabilities, learning
                                                                                                disabilities, age of school entry, number of siblings, mother's education level,
                            Spanish test                                           299          household wealth index; teacher's gender, indigenous status, holds non-
                            Math test                                              299          teaching jobs, years of teaching experience, experience teaching same grade,
                            Disciplinary action                                    299          educational attainment level; lagged outcome variable aggregated at school
                                                                                                level in prior year; two-way interactions of covariates; missing indicators of
                                                                                                covariates.
                                                                                                Head of parent association's gender, indigenous status, family's
                                                                                                indigenous status, education level, selection to position (election/appointed),
                                                                                                years in position; community advisor is principal; lagged outcome variables
                            Parent's perspective: Most teachers can be trusted     119
                                                                                                measured prior year; educational outcomes aggregated at school level in
     Mechanisms             Parent's perspective: Teacher responsibility index     119
                                                                                                prior year; teachers' educational level aggregated at school level in prior year;
                                                                                                average annual school expenditure in prior year; two-way interactions of
                                                                                                covariates; missing indicators of covariates.
                                                                                                Teacher's grade, gender, indigenous status, holds non- teaching jobs, years of
                                                                                                teaching experience, experience teaching same grade, educational attainment
                            Teacher's perspective: Most parents can be trusted     58           level; lagged outcome variables measured prior year; educational outcomes
                            Teacher's perspective: Parent responsibility index     58           aggregated at school level in prior year; teachers' educational level aggregated
                                                                                                at school level in prior year; average annual school expenditure in prior year;
                                                                                                two-way interactions of covariates; missing indicators of covariates.
                  Table A1: Balance test conditional on response status for double grant experiment

                                                         Control:                 Treatment:                    Difference:
                                                       Grant & Info           Double Grant & Info
                                                      Mean    (S.D.)           Mean      (S.D.)            T-C             (S.E.)
      Attrition rate
         Attrition (1=Yes)                             0.032      (0.177)      0.016       (0.126)        -0.016         (0.019)
      Number of schools                                        125                      125
      Panel A: School characteristics
      Type of school
         General school (1 = Yes)                      0.603      (0.491)      0.496        (0.502)       -0.107    *    (0.064)
         Indigenous school (1=Yes)                     0.397      (0.491)      0.504        (0.502)       0.107     *    (0.064)
      Parent association president
         Highest edu. is primary (1=Yes)               0.777      (0.418)      0.813        (0.391)       0.036          (0.052)
         Years as president                            1.388      (1.350)      1.309        (1.146)       -0.079         (0.160)
      Teachers
         Prop. with teaching college degree            0.159      (0.310)      0.213       (0.363)        0.054          (0.043)




40
         Prop. with university degree                  0.613      (0.446)      0.544       (0.461)        -0.068         (0.058)
      Failure rate                                     0.099      (0.066)      0.091       (0.075)        -0.008         (0.009)
      Repetition rate                                  0.072      (0.060)      0.069       (0.061)        -0.003         (0.008)
      Dropout rate                                     0.021      (0.035)      0.018       (0.036)        -0.003         (0.005)
      Number of schools                                        121                      123
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                      0.738
      Panel B: Student characteristics
      Female (1=Yes)                                  0.489    (0.500)          0.488       (0.500)       -0.001         (0.012)
      Household wealth index (S.D.)                   0.000    (1.001)         -0.025       (1.015)       -0.025         (0.090)
      Grade 3 (1=Yes)                                 0.334    (0.472)          0.337       (0.473)        0.003         (0.008)
      Grade 4 (1=Yes)                                 0.336    (0.472)          0.340       (0.474)        0.004         (0.008)
      Grade 5 (1=Yes)                                 0.330    (0.470)          0.323       (0.468)       -0.007         (0.008)
      Language score                                 441.526 (87.272)         437.876      (89.871)       -3.650         (9.959)
      Math score                                     451.370 (97.565)         448.122     (102.610)       -3.248        (11.745)
      Number of students                                    4547                        4524
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                      0.978
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level in Panel B. Reported p-value is from a joint F-test of the null hypoth-
     esis that there are no mean differences between treatment and control across all variables in the panel. All variables measured
     in 2007. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                   Table A2: Balance test conditional on response status for information experiment

                                                           Control:                 Treatment:                      Difference
                                                      No Grant & No Info          No Grant & Info
                                                       Mean     (S.D.)            Mean     (S.D.)           T-C               (S.E.)
      Attrition rate
         Attrition (1=Yes)                             0.040       (0.197)        0.025         (0.157)    -0.015             (0.027)
      Number of schools                                         100                        80
      Panel A: School characteristics
      Type of school
         General school (1 = Yes)                      1.000          (0.000)     1.000         (0.000)     0.000             (0.000)
      Parent association president
         Highest edu. is primary (1=Yes)               0.646          (0.481)     0.654         (0.479)     0.008             (0.073)
         Years as president                            1.583          (0.842)     1.679         (0.904)     0.096             (0.133)
      Teachers
         Prop. with teaching college degree            0.209          (0.324)     0.252         (0.335)    0.043              (0.050)
         Prop. with university degree                  0.614          (0.421)     0.530         (0.417)    -0.084             (0.064)




41
      Failure rate                                     0.079          (0.055)     0.069         (0.063)    -0.010             (0.009)
      Repetition rate                                  0.054          (0.047)     0.048         (0.044)    -0.007             (0.007)
      Dropout rate                                     0.023          (0.031)     0.027         (0.046)     0.004             (0.006)
      Number of schools                                          96                        78
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                         0.378
      Panel B: Student characteristics
      Female (1=Yes)                                    0.498      (0.500)         0.492    (0.500)        -0.006           (0.011)
      Household wealth index (S.D.)                    -0.002      (1.002)        -0.012    (0.916)        -0.010           (0.081)
      Grade 3 (1=Yes)                                   0.314      (0.464)         0.329    (0.470)         0.015     *     (0.008)
      Grade 4 (1=Yes)                                   0.349      (0.477)         0.332    (0.471)        -0.017     **    (0.007)
      Grade 5 (1=Yes)                                   0.337      (0.473)         0.340    (0.474)         0.002           (0.005)
      Language score                                  495.201     (106.948)      489.164 (102.784)         -6.037           (9.433)
      Math score                                      512.919     (120.681)      505.635 (116.178)         -7.284          (10.844)
      Number of students                                        4544                     3595
      p-value of joint F-test                                                                                         0.298
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level in Panel B. Reported p-value is from a joint F-test of the null hypothesis
     that there are no mean differences between treatment and control across all variables in the panel. All variables measured in
     2009. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Table A3: Variation of treatment effect on parental involvement by indigenous status of head of parent
     association

                                      Organized               Met with           Involved in      Percent of parents
                                   school activities     teachers to discuss        school       regularly attending
                                      & events          student performance    decision making        meetings
                                         (1)                     (2)                  (3)                (4)
      Double grant experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             0.039                  0.103               0.067               -0.294
                                        (0.091)                (0.088)             (0.122)             (4.729)
      (2 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             -0.023                 -0.010              -0.134              1.368
                                        (0.087)                (0.087)             (0.125)             (3.921)




42
      (3 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             0.008                  -0.050             0.223*               -1.031
                                        (0.082)                (0.092)             (0.130)             (3.513)
      Information experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             0.067                  0.122               -0.035              4.491
                                        (0.113)                (0.152)             (0.204)             (5.628)
      Single grant observation
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             -0.079                 -0.072              -0.041              0.514
                                        (0.123)                (0.172)             (0.236)             (4.937)
     Notes: Robust standard errors. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Table A4: Variation of treatment effect on inputs by indigenous status of students

                                             Parenting                         Teaching
                                     Aware of                                           Student-
                                       school        Helps with      Days absent        centered
                                    assignments      homework       in past month      instruction
                                         (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)
      Double grant experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            0.013           -0.022           0.614            -0.138
                                       (0.013)         (-0.022)         (0.614)          (-0.138)
      (2 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            0.059           0.037            -0.562            0.023




43
                                       (0.059)         (0.037)          (-0.562)          (0.023)
      (3 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            0.032           0.042            0.058             0.091
                                       (0.032)         (0.042)          (0.058)           (0.091)
      Information experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            0.007           -0.042           1.564             0.137
                                       (0.054)         (0.057)          (1.345)           (0.188)
      Single grant observation
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            -0.069          -0.059           -0.535            -0.004
                                       (0.051)         (0.045)          (1.263)           (0.182)
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Table A5: Variation of treatment effect on educational outcomes
     by indigenous status of students

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)
                                       Spanish          Math         Disciplinary
                                      test (S.D.)    test (S.D.)        action
      Double grant experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            -0.022          0.127           -0.006
                                       (-0.022)        (0.127)         (-0.006)
      (2 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous           -0.245*          -0.205          -0.058
                                       (-0.245)        (-0.205)        (-0.058)




44
      (3 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            -0.061          -0.224           0.026
                                       (-0.061)        (-0.224)         (0.026)
      Information experiment
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous            -0.071          -0.194          -0.100
                                       (-0.071)        (-0.194)        (-0.100)
      Single grant observation
      (1 year)
      Treatment x Indigenous             0.045          0.046            0.047
                                        (0.197)        (0.175)          (0.071)
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the school level. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
     *** p<0.01
                                Table A6: Association of index variables with related covariates at baseline

                                                                                             Student                Teacher            Parent
                                                                                             Centered            Responsibility     Responsibility
                                                                                        Instruction (S.D.)       Index (S.D.)       Index (S.D.)
                                                                                                (1)                   (2)                (3)
      Teacher explains concepts clearly                                                      0.202***
                                                                                              (0.004)
      Teacher reviews homework assignment                                                    0.204***
                                                                                              (0.004)
      Teacher does not make students                                                         0.232***
      simply copy from textbooks/blackboard                                                   (0.005)
      Teacher gives students exercises                                                       0.190***
      that apply concepts learned in class                                                    (0.004)
      Teachers are available for meetings                                                                           0.236***
                                                                                                                     (0.023)
      Teachers support extra-curricular activities                                                                  0.292***
                                                                                                                     (0.026)




45
      Teachers handle conflict resolution between students                                                          0.233***
                                                                                                                     (0.023)
      Teachers provide additional classes for struggling students                                                   0.307***
                                                                                                                     (0.023)
      Teachers care about student achievement                                                                       0.235***
                                                                                                                     (0.020)
      Teachers provide feedback on student assignments                                                              0.287***
                                                                                                                     (0.020)
      Parents are available for meetings                                                                                                0.291***
                                                                                                                                         (0.022)
      Parents help children with school work                                                                                            0.297***
                                                                                                                                         (0.022)
      Parents make sure that children are completing school assignments                                                                 0.260***
                                                                                                                                         (0.023)
      Parents support extra-curricular activities                                                                                       0.138***
                                                                                                                                         (0.095)
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the school level. Each cell is the result of a separate regression where the outcome is the variable in
     the far left column and the predictor is the the variable in the top row. Sample pools together the control group of both experiments at baseline.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                                                                  plug-in (2)
         plug-in (2)


                                                                              cv lambda (14)
     cv lambda (11)


                                                                             1 se lambda (0)
     1 se lambda (0)


                                                                                adaptive(10)
         adaptive(9)

                                                                                                -.4   -.3        -.2        -.1   0   .1       .2       .3   .4
                       -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1   0   .1   .2   .3   .4
                                                                          (b) Met with teachers to discuss student perfor-
        (a) Organized school activities & events
                                                                          mance


         plug-in (1)                                                              plug-in (2)




46
     cv lambda (20)                                                           cv lambda (14)



     1 se lambda (0)                                                         1 se lambda (0)



        adaptive(18)                                                            adaptive(12)


                       -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1   0   .1   .2   .3   .4                        -10 -8          -6         -4    -2   0   2    4        6    8   10

          (c) Involved in school decision making                          (d) Percent of parents regularly attending meetings

           Figure A1: Robustness check for post-double selection lasso - Parental involvement outcomes
        Note: The figure shows the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval for each model specification.
        Parentheses indicates number of covariates selected by model. The models are post-double selection lasso using (i)
        the plug-in penalty, (ii) cross validation penalty, (iii) largest penalty such that the cross-validated MSE is within
        one-standard deviation of the minimum penalty, and (iv) adaptive lasso.
          plug-in (22)                                                             plug-in (24)



      cv lambda (149)                                                          cv lambda (149)



     1 se lambda (120)                                                       1 se lambda (122)



         adaptive(130)                                                           adaptive(138)


                         -.2           -.1        0       .1       .2                             -.2         -.1         0        .1        .2

      (a) Parenting: Aware of school assignments                                  (b) Parenting: Helps with homework


          plug-in (33)                                                             plug-in (24)



      cv lambda (149)                                                          cv lambda (149)




47
     1 se lambda (149)                                                       1 se lambda (124)



         adaptive(149)                                                           adaptive(132)


                         -3       -2         -1   0   1        2   3                              -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1   0   .1   .2   .3   .4

       (c) Teaching: Days absent in past month                                 (d) Teaching: Student-centered instruction

                               Figure A2: Robustness check for post-double selection lasso - Child inputs
        Note: The figure shows the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval for each model specification.
        Parentheses indicates number of covariates selected by model. The models are post-double selection lasso using (i)
        the plug-in penalty, (ii) cross validation penalty, (iii) largest penalty such that the cross-validated MSE is within
        one-standard deviation of the minimum penalty, and (iv) adaptive lasso.
         plug-in (2)                                                                  plug-in (4)                                                                   plug-in (1)



     cv lambda (16)                                                               cv lambda (23)                                                                 cv lambda (8)



     1 se lambda (0)                                                              1 se lambda (3)                                                               1 se lambda (0)



        adaptive(12)                                                                 adaptive(17)                                                                   adaptive(7)


                   -.05 -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01     0       .01 .02 .03 .04 .05                     -.03       -.02   -.01       0        .01      .02        .03                 -.03         -.02    -.01        0        .01        .02     .03

                            (a) Failure rate                                                           (b) Dropout rate                                                           (c) Repetition rate


           plug-in (32)                                                                 plug-in (34)                                                                  plug-in (27)



      cv lambda (149)                                                              cv lambda (149)                                                               cv lambda (149)




48
     1 se lambda (149)                                                            1 se lambda (149)                                                             1 se lambda (149)



         adaptive(149)                                                                adaptive(149)                                                                 adaptive(149)


                          -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1       0    .1   .2   .3   .4   .5                        -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1       0   .1   .2   .3    .4   .5                         -.2   -.15   -.1   -.05       0   .05    .1     .15   .2

                           (d) Spanish test                                                               (e) Math test                                                        (f ) Disciplinary action

                                          Figure A3: Robustness check for post-double selection lasso - Educational outcomes
                                Note: The figure shows the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval for each model specification.
                                Parentheses indicates number of covariates selected by model. The models are post-double selection lasso using (i)
                                the plug-in penalty, (ii) cross validation penalty, (iii) largest penalty such that the cross-validated MSE is within
                                one-standard deviation of the minimum penalty, and (iv) adaptive lasso.
           plug-in (1)                                                              plug-in (1)



       cv lambda (15)                                                           cv lambda (15)



       1 se lambda (0)                                                         1 se lambda (0)



          adaptive(13)                                                            adaptive(13)


                         -1        -.5     0      .5      1                                       -1   -.5     0        .5        1

     (a) Parent's perspective: Most teachers can be                         (b) Parent's perspective: Teacher responsibility in-
     trusted                                                                dex


           plug-in (5)                                                              plug-in (4)




49
       cv lambda (19)                                                           cv lambda (13)



       1 se lambda (4)                                                         1 se lambda (4)



          adaptive(17)                                                            adaptive(12)


                         -.4       -.2     0      .2      .4                                      -1   -.5     0        .5        1

     (c) Teacher's perspective: Most parents can be                         (d) Teacher's perspective: Parent responsibility in-
     trusted                                                                dex

                               Figure A4: Robustness check for post-double selection lasso - Mechanisms
          Note: The figure shows the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval for each model specification.
          Parentheses indicates number of covariates selected by model. The models are post-double selection lasso using (i)
          the plug-in penalty, (ii) cross validation penalty, (iii) largest penalty such that the cross-validated MSE is within
          one-standard deviation of the minimum penalty, and (iv) adaptive lasso.
                                    .4                                                                                                                  .4       Double grant          Information           Single grant       Double grant
                                          Double grant       Information       Single grant       Double grant



                                    .2                                                                                                                  .2




                                     0                                                                                                                  0




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                 Di erence in treatment e ect
                                    -.2                                                                                                                -.2
                                                  Double grant -     Information -      Single grant -
                                                   Information        Single grant      Double grant

                                                                                                                                                                            Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -
                                    -.4                                                                                                                -.4
                                                                                                                                                                             Information          Single grant        Double grant




                                          (a) Organized school activities & events                                                                    (b) Met with teachers to discuss student performance




50
                                    .4    Double grant       Information       Single grant       Double grant                                  10           Double grant          Information           Single grant          Double grant




                                    .2                                                                                                           5




                                     0                                                                                                           0




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                 Di erence in treatment e ect




                                    -.2                                                                                                          -5




                                                  Double grant -     Information -      Single grant -
                                    -.4
                                                   Information        Single grant      Double grant                                            -10                   Double grant -         Information -          Single grant -
                                                                                                                                                                       Information            Single grant          Double grant


                                          (c) Involved in school decision making                                                                       (d) Percent of parents regularly attending meetings

                                              Figure A5: Difference in treatment effect across interventions - Parental involvement outcomes
                                            Note: The figure shows the difference in the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval between each of
                                            the three interventions (double grant, information, single grant). Standard errors for the difference are calculated
                                            using cluster bootstrap.
                                    .2                                                                                                                      Double grant        Information         Single grant        Double grant

                                                                                                                                                      .2



                                    .1    Double grant         Information         Single grant         Double grant
                                                                                                                                                      .1




                                     0                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                      -.1




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                       Di erence in treatment e ect
                                    -.1

                                                   Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -
                                                    Information          Single grant        Double grant                                             -.2

                                    -.2                                                                                                                              Double grant -      Information -       Single grant -
                                                                                                                                                                      Information         Single grant       Double grant


                                             (a) Parents: Aware of school assignments                                                                              (b) Parents: Helps with homework




51
                                                                                                                                                            Double grant        Information         Single grant        Double grant
                                          Double grant        Information          Single grant         Double grant
                                    2                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                    0                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                      -.2




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                       Di erence in treatment e ect




                                    -2                                                                                                                -.4

                                                   Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -                                                          Double grant -      Information -       Single grant -
                                                    Information          Single grant        Double grant                                                             Information         Single grant       Double grant


                                             (c) Teachers: Days absent in past month                                                                          (d) Teachers: Student-centered instruction

                                                   Figure A6: Difference in treatment effect across interventions - Parenting and teacher behaviors
                                                  Note: The figure shows the difference in the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval between each of
                                                  the three interventions (double grant, information, single grant). Standard errors for the difference are calculated
                                                  using cluster bootstrap.
                                            Double grant       Information        Single grant       Double grant                                               Double grant          Information           Single grant          Double grant                                                    Double grant          Information           Single grant       Double grant




                                    .04
                                                                                                                                                   .02                                                                                                                                 .02

                                    .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .01

                                      0                                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.01
                                    -.02

                                                                                                                                                   -.02                                                                                                                                -.02




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                    Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Di erence in treatment e ect
                                    -.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -.03

                                    -.06
                                                                                                                                                   -.04


                                                    Double grant -     Information -       Single grant -                                                                Double grant -         Information -          Single grant -                                                                        Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -
                                                     Information        Single grant       Double grant                                                                   Information            Single grant          Double grant                                                                           Information          Single grant        Double grant



                                                       (a) Failure rate                                                                                                        (b) Dropout rate                                                                                                              (c) Repetition rate

                                            Double grant       Information        Single grant       Double grant                                                   Double grant          Information           Single grant       Double grant                                  .2           Double grant          Information           Single grant          Double grant

                                      .4                                                                                                                  .4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                      .2                                                                                                                  .2




                                       0                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                      0




52
                                      -.2                                                                                                                 -.2




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                    Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Di erence in treatment e ect




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.1



                                      -.4                                                                                                                 -.4


                                                    Double grant -      Information -      Single grant -                                                                      Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -                                          -.2                   Double grant -         Information -          Single grant -
                                                     Information         Single grant      Double grant                                                                         Information          Single grant        Double grant                                                                   Information            Single grant          Double grant



                                                      (d) Spanish test                                                                                                             (e) Math test                                                                                                       (f ) Disciplinary action

                                                                             Figure A7: Difference in treatment effect across interventions - Educational outcomes
                                                             Note: The figure shows the difference in the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval between each of
                                                             the three interventions (double grant, information, single grant). Standard errors for the difference are calculated
                                                             using cluster bootstrap.
                                    .2                                                                                                                            Double grant        Information         Single grant        Double grant

                                                                                                                                                         .2



                                    .1        Double grant        Information         Single grant         Double grant
                                                                                                                                                         .1




                                     0                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                         -.1




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                          Di erence in treatment e ect
                                    -.1

                                                       Double grant -      Information -        Single grant -
                                                        Information         Single grant        Double grant                                             -.2

                                    -.2                                                                                                                                    Double grant -      Information -       Single grant -
                                                                                                                                                                            Information         Single grant       Double grant


                                          (a) Parent's perspective: Most teachers can be trusted                                                               (b) Parent's perspective: Teacher responsibility index




53
                                                                                                                                                                  Double grant        Information         Single grant        Double grant
                                             Double grant         Information         Single grant         Double grant
                                    2                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                    0                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                         -.2




     Di erence in treatment e ect
                                                                                                                          Di erence in treatment e ect




                                    -2                                                                                                                   -.4

                                                      Double grant -       Information -        Single grant -                                                             Double grant -      Information -       Single grant -
                                                       Information          Single grant        Double grant                                                                Information         Single grant       Double grant


                                          (c) Teacher's perspective: Most parents can be trusted                                                               (d) Teacher's perspective: Parent responsibility index

                                                             Figure A8: Difference in treatment effect across interventions - Trust and Responsibility
                                                      Note: The figure shows the difference in the treatment effect estimate and 95% confidence interval between each of
                                                      the three interventions (double grant, information, single grant). Standard errors for the difference are calculated
                                                      using cluster bootstrap.
