                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     COMPREHENSIVE APPROACHES TO INCREASING STUDENT COMPLETION
           IN HIGHER EDUCATION: A SURVEY OF THE LANDSCAPE

                                     Rachel Fulcher Dawson
                                       Melissa S. Kearney
                                       James X. Sullivan

                                       Working Paper 28046
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28046


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rachel Fulcher Dawson, Melissa S. Kearney, and James X. Sullivan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comprehensive Approaches to Increasing Student Completion in Higher Education: A Survey
of the Landscape
Rachel Fulcher Dawson, Melissa S. Kearney, and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 28046
November 2020
JEL No. I23,I26,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

We describe the challenge of college non-completion in the U.S. and a variety of explanations for
the high rate of non-completion. We then provide an overview of the implementation of and
evidence from eight specific college completion interventions designed to increase college
completion rates through a comprehensive set of services. The eight interventions that we review
have all been implemented in the past decade and have been evaluated through randomized
controlled trials (RCT). After we describe the eight featured programs and the evidence on their
effectiveness, we discuss the potential to replicate these programs and deliver them at scale.
Finally, we offer some recommendations for future research, with the goal of establishing a body
of practical evidence for organizations and policymakers to learn from as they work to address
the college completion crisis.

Rachel Fulcher Dawson                                  James X. Sullivan
Wilson Sheehan Lab for Economic                        Department of Economics
Opportunities (LEO)                                    3108 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
3060-I Jenkins Nanovic Hall                            University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556                                   Notre Dame, IN 46556
rachel.a.fulcherdawson.1@nd.edu                        James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
 


Introduction

Millions of students who start college never finish, particularly low-income students and those
who attend two-year community colleges. More than 40 percent of first time, full-time enrolled
students in four-year institutions do not complete a bachelor' s degree within six years, and more
than two-thirds of those at community colleges do not complete an associate's degree within
three years (NCES, 2020.) This so-called "completion crisis" is costly to both students
themselves and the broader society because there are large economic and social returns to
associate and bachelor degree completion that are not being secured.

Many programs and public policies have been implemented over the years with the goal of
boosting college persistence and completion rates. The research and policy focus has typically
been on issues of academic under-preparation and tuition costs or subsidies. In recent years,
however, there has been considerable attention given to a newer approach focused on
comprehensive student services designed to help students at risk of dropping out overcome a
multi-faceted set of challenges. Such programs tend to include, to various degrees, elements of
case management, mentoring, coaching, referrals, financial assistance, and academic advising.

In this paper, we describe the challenge of college non-completion in the U.S. and a variety of
explanations for the high rate of non-completion. We then provide an overview of the
implementation of and evidence from eight specific college completion interventions. These
eight programs were selected because they meet the following set of criteria: explicitly aim to
increase college completion rates; offer a comprehensive set of services; have been implemented
in the past decade; and have been evaluated through a randomized controlled trial (RCT). Five of
the programs serve community college students exclusively; one serves students at both two- and
four-year institutions; and two of the programs were implemented at four-year universities. After
we describe the eight featured programs and the evidence on their effectiveness, we discuss the
potential to replicate these programs and deliver them at scale. Finally, we offer some
recommendations for future research on these types of programs, with the goal of establishing a
body of practical evidence for organizations and policymakers to learn from as they work to
address the college completion crisis.


The College Degree Premium
There are large earnings differences between those with and without a college degree. Full-time,
full-year workers with a bachelor's degree earn 114 percent more than workers with a high
school degree, on average; full-time, full-year workers with an associate's degree earn 25 percent
more (see Figure 1). Earnings differences also reveal that a degree confers an additional boost in
earnings beyond college attendance. Those who complete an associate's degree earn 10 percent
more than those who attend college but do not obtain a degree. Furthermore, individuals with
college degrees are much more likely to work at all and work full time than non-college educated
individuals, which amplifies wage differences.


                                                1
 
 


Research evidence shows that much of the difference in earnings between those with and without
a college degree reflects a causal effect of degree completion on earnings, not just differences in
the attributes of people who complete a degree versus people who do not. For instance, if
students who are harder-working and of higher ability are more likely to complete a degree than
those who are not, we would expect them to earn higher wages based on their own traits,
regardless of whether or not they have a degree. A number of economics studies use econometric
techniques to overcome such selection effects in order to quantify the causal return to degree
completion. The consensus view that emerges from this literature is that there are sizable
earnings premiums associated with both four-year and two-year degree completion, though the
magnitudes of the estimated effects vary considerably across studies, depending on factors such
as the demographic group studied, the time period, and the type of institution attended.1
With regard to community colleges in particular ­ which is a focus of this review article ­ many
studies find employment and earnings benefits associated with community college degree
completion (for example, Kane and Rouse, 1995; Marcotte et al., 2005; Jepsen et al., 2014;
Stevens et al., 2015). A recent estimate suggests that for the cohort of students who attended
college in the mid-2000s, an associate's degree yields a causal earnings premium of about 30
percent over a high school degree (Marcotte, 2016).
A recent analysis simulates the effects of increasing BA and AA attainment on aggregate
measures of economic security and income inequality, making use of causal estimates of degree
completion. The results of this analysis demonstrate that a sizable increase in the rates of BA and
AA degree completion would lead to meaningful reductions in the share of people living in
poverty and living near poverty (defined as having family income less than 200 percent of the
federal poverty threshold); it would also reduce rates of overall income inequality, driven mostly
by raising the lower-middle part of the earnings distribution relative to the upper-middle
(Hershbein, Kearney, and Pardue, 2020).
In addition to the well-documented economic benefits associated with increased college
attainment, there is research showing that college completion has a causal effect on other social
benefits, such as improved health and reduced mortality. Cowan and Tefft (2020) show that
access to 2-year colleges leads to improved indicators of health including reduced smoking,
increased exercise, and better self-reported health. There is also evidence that increased college
attainment among women leads to better outcomes for their children. Currie & Moretti (2003)
find that an additional year of maternal education reduces the chances of low birth weight by
approximately 10 percent and the likelihood of a premature birth by 6 percent. Buckles et al.
(2016) use the variation in college completion induced by the student deferment option during
the Vietnam draft to identify the causal effect of college attainment on mortality. They find that
the rise in college education that resulted from the deferment option lead to a substantial decline
in mortality, due primarily to declines in heart disease and cancer-related deaths.




                                                            
1
    See Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2013) for a thorough summary of this literature.

                                                               2
 
 


The US College Completion Crisis
A larger share of high school graduates than ever are enrolling in college. In 1960, 45 percent of
recent high school completers enrolled in higher education.2 By 2005, this number had reached
69 percent, and it has held steady since then (NCES, 2017; Oreopoulos, 2019). More low-
income, minority and first-generation students than ever in U.S. history are enrolling in post-
secondary schooling (Goolsbee et al. 2019). Community colleges play a particularly important
role in college going. Two-year colleges enroll almost half of all post-secondary students in the
US (US Dept of Ed, 2016). In addition, half of all bachelor's degree recipients were previously
enrolled at a community college (NSC, 2017).
However, the rise in degree completion has not kept pace with rising enrollment. The percentage
of 23-year-olds with some college increased 31 percent between 1971-1999, but degree
completion only increased by 4 percent from 23 to 24 percent (Turner, 2004). Almost one-fifth
of students who start a 4-year program in the US leave within a year (Consortium for Student
Retention Data Exchange, 2004), and many more never complete a degree. Data from the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) show that fewer than 60 percent of first-time,
full-time, degree-seeking enrollees at 4-year post-secondary institutions complete a degree
within 6 years, and this rate has seen little improvement over time (see Figure 2a).
Completion rates are lowest among students who attend non-selective two-year institutions.3A
full two-thirds of first-time, full-time, degree-seeking students enrolled in community college do
not obtain a degree within 3 years (Figure 2a). Black community college students have especially
low rates of completion. NCES data on the 2012 entering cohort reveal that 25 percent of black
students at two-year institutions earn an associate's degree within three years, as compared to 32
and 33 percent of white and Hispanic students, respectively (Figure 2b). The gap is even larger at
four-year institutions, where 38 percent of black students graduate within 6 years, compared to
52 percent of Hispanic students, 63 percent of white students, and 73 percent of Asian students
(Figure 2c).
Barriers to Student Completion
There are a variety of factors that contribute to the high rate of college non-completion among
students who enroll in college. Adopting the framework of Evans et al. (forthcoming), we group
explanatory factors into four categories: academic under-preparation, high college tuition costs,
institutional obstacles, and personal non-academic obstacles. Studies suggest that many students,
particularly those from low-income families or who are first generation college enrollees, face a
combination of these obstacles (Scrivener and Coghlan, 2011; Bertrand, et al, 2019).
       1. Academic under-preparation

                                                            
2
  The National Center for Education Statistics defines a recent high school completer as someone who completed
their high school (or equivalent) degree earlier in the calendar year in which they enroll, ages 16-24 (NCES, 2017).
3
  NCES's IPEDS data are collected at the institution level, not at the student level. IPEDS graduation rates are
reflective of full-time, first-time, degree-/certificate seeking students who started and finished at the same institution.
Students included in graduation rates do not represent all of the students at an institution. For example, these
graduation rates exclude part-time and transfer students.

                                                               3
 
 


A lack of academic preparation is often a key barrier to college completion (Adelman and
Gonzalez, 2006). Students often do not select or are not guided to take courses in high school
that are typically pre-requisites for many college courses and majors. This creates a significant
barrier to completion, as students must take remedial or development coursework just to be
eligible and prepared to enroll in classes that actually count towards a degree (Scott-Clayton,
2011). Almost one-third of U.S. college students take remedial courses in reading, writing or
math (NCES, 2003; Angrist, et al 2009). The rate is particularly high at community colleges
where about 60 percent of entering students are referred to at least one remedial education class
(Bailey, 2009; Attewell et al., 2006). Academic under-preparation may be exacerbated by a lack
of necessary study skills to tackle the challenging coursework needed to complete degrees on
time (Angrist, et al, 2009).

Community colleges devote upwards of $2 billion annually towards developmental education
programs designed to address academic under-preparation (Strong American Schools, 2008).
The data on the success of these programs is discouraging. Students who enroll in remedial
courses are 38 percent less likely to complete their degree than other students (Attewell et al.,
2006). This lower graduation rate, however, may reflect that the type of student enrolled in
remedial courses is different from other students. There have been numerous initiatives aimed at
addressing academic under-preparation. As others have concluded from reviewing that evidence,
the results from this line of intervention are generally disappointing (Long, 2014; Martorell and
McFarlin, 2011).


       2. College Tuition Costs


The high cost of higher education is often considered a significant barrier to college enrollment
and persistence. However, it is less clear that college tuition costs are a driving factor of
community college non-completion. The average yearly tuition of an in-district 2-year college in
2017 was $3,600, and books and supplies at a public 2-year college cost, on average, $1,447
(Ginder, Kelly-Reid & Mann, 2018b). Room and board at public 2-year institutions can range, on
average, from $6,700 for students living on campus to $8,409 for students living off campus (not
with family) (Ginder et. al., 2018b).
The availability of means-tested federal grants and loans means that many low-income students
pay little if any out-of-pocket for a college education. In 2015, the Pell Grant program provided
$30 billion in aid for low-income individuals to attend college, more than a third of whom
attended community college (Baime and Mullin, 2011). Data from the 2011-12 National
Postsecondary Student Aid Study indicates that 38 percent of community college students have
zero out of pocket expenses for tuition and fees.4
Nguyen, et al. (2019) reports on the results of 42 experimental or quasi-experimental studies
examining the effect of grant aid (needs-based, merit-based or combination of both; federal, state
                                                            
4
    https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2015/02/17/how-many-already-attend-community-college-for-free

                                                               4
 
 


and University or private grants) on student outcomes. Their review concludes that receipt of any
grant aid increases the probability of student persistence and degree completion by two to three
percentage points. The authors note that while most studies report positive point estimates, not
all do (some are null or negative). Other work, however, casts doubt on the efficacy of enhanced
financial aid in increasing rates of college completion among low-income students. For instance,
Deming (2017) finds little effect of community college tuition on associates degree completion,
though he does find evidence of induced community college enrollment. Anderson et al. (2019)
recently completed an experimental study of the Wisconsin Scholars Grant program and found
that the needs-based financial aid it provided did not significantly impact degree completion or
graduate school enrollment.

    3. Institutional barriers
Qualitative studies based on interviews with community college students suggest that many of
them struggle to successfully navigate the system in higher education institutions (Rosenbaum,
Deil-Amen, & Person, 2006; Person, Rosenbaum, & Deil-Amen, 2006). Semi-structured
interviews with 100 students from 14 two-year colleges in the Midwest reveal that many students
need help understanding course requirements and knowing if courses selected meet their
graduation needs (Person et al. 2006). Students are often side-tracked by failing to register for
the correct courses on time or by choosing a major that does not match their skill set or career
interests (Pearson et al, 2006).
A comprehensive report by a team of researchers at the Community College Research Center
(CCRC) (Bailey et al., 2005) investigates the institutional characteristics that affect the success
of community college students, particularly low-income and minority students. Their analyses
find that there are a number of identifiable community college characteristics that systematically
relate to student outcomes. On average, larger institutions have worse student outcomes. The
authors speculate that the better performance of students at smaller community colleges might be
because smaller institutions offer a more limited and focused set of programs, which might
provide students with more structure. This would be consistent with the notion that large
institutions are difficult for students to navigate. The authors also find that colleges with a larger
percentage of minority students (black, Hispanic, and Native American) and a larger share of
part-time students have lower graduation rates. In addition, a larger percentage of faculty who
are part-time also correlates with lower student graduation rates at community colleges. Across
their analyses, the authors find mixed evidence on whether expenditures on student services lead
to better student outcomes. This might suggest that spending alone won't improve services, and
therefore student outcomes, if that spending is not on well-designed or effective programs.
Holzer and Baum (2017) present an examination of college success programs along two
dimensions ­ those aimed at students and those aimed at institutions. Using a combination of
new data (from NCES and Administrative data from the state of Florida), existing studies and
policy proposals, they conclude that in order to improve completion (or degrees with market
value) for disadvantaged students, the non-selective colleges they typically attend would need to



                                                  5
 
 


significantly boost student supports and services such as personalized advising and career
guidance, remediation, financial aid and additional supports such as tutoring and childcare.
       4. Personal non-academic barriers
Students face a number of challenges that have nothing to do with academic coursework, but
could derail their path to graduation. Challenges arise in the form of health issues, financial
shocks, mental health struggles, among others. An analysis of quantitative data collected by 37
colleges involved in an emergency financial assistance pilot program shows that for many
college students ­ especially non-traditional students at community colleges--personal issues,
such as issues with bills, child care, and transportation, often arise that make it difficult for them
to complete their degree (Geckeler, 2008). Feelings of separation and estrangement from the
college community can also lead students to drop out of college. The results from a randomized
controlled trial of over 1,500 students at the Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn,
New York indicate that learning communities, which encourage integration, have a positive
effect on credit accumulation and can increase graduation rates for students without remedial
English requirements (Weiss et al., 2014). Scholars have also pointed to issues of "self-efficacy".
Case studies of colleges in six states - New York, Texas, Florida, California, Washington, and
Illinois - highlight how students often lack the necessary commitment and/or planning and time
management skills necessary to set out a path to graduation and stay committed to that plan
(Bailey and Morest, 2006). Based on his examination of these case studies as well as national
data sets, Grubb (2006) reports that students who lack clear goals and a genuine understanding of
why college is important often become derailed by relatively minor challenges and setbacks.
For low-income students, a lack of financial resources or buffers could exacerbate the
consequences of any set-back. It is widely recognized in other contexts that vulnerability is an
important dimension of poverty and many low-income families live perpetually on the brink of
crisis and deep hardship (Barr and Blank 2009; Shipler 2005). Bertrand et al. (2004) describe this
aspect of poverty in terms of some families having "narrow margins for error." These challenges
suggest that for many vulnerable college students, small negative shocks like a family
emergency, a necessary vehicle repair, or a missed rent payment can be a significant barrier to
persistence and degree completion. In an effort to address these challenges, many colleges that
serve low-income students have implemented programs that provide emergency financial
assistance. For example, see the Scholarship America's Emergency Grant Assistance program.5
A key challenge for addressing the college completion crisis is that the students needing the most
support to complete their degrees are often attending colleges with the fewest resources and
support for them. Evidence documents a causal link between institutional resources and student
outcomes. Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2010) identify how much of the decline in college
completion rates between the 1970s and 1990s is because of the changing composition of
students (as more students enrolled in college over time, they became less selected), versus the
changing composition of higher education institutions attended. Their analysis finds that the shift
toward lower-ranked, public schools along with declines in institutional resources per student are

                                                            
5
    https://scholarshipamerica.org/partners/student-supports/emergency-aid/

                                                               6
 
 


more important than shifts in student characteristics in explaining the decline in college
completion rates over time. Deming and Walters (2017) compare the impact of changes in tuition
to changes in spending (instruction and academic support are particularly responsive to budget
shocks) on enrollment and degree completion in US public postsecondary institutions between
1990 and 2013. They find that spending increases are more effective per-dollar than price cuts in
terms of increasing completion rates. These observations relate back to the discussion about
institutional barriers above.
Comprehensive Approaches to Increase College Degree Completion

In recognition of the problem of low college completion rates ­ especially among low-income
students at two-year and less selective colleges ­ there has been growing interest among
researchers, policymakers, institutions, and organizations in programs that address this crisis.6
The focus has typically been on issues of academic under-preparation and tuition costs or
subsidies. In recent years, however, there has been considerable attention given to approaches
that address the multi-faceted set of challenges that students face that put them at risk of
dropping out.

In this report we highlight eight such programs. The goal of this report is not to provide an
exhaustive meta-analysis of college success programs, but rather to highlight programs that are
comprehensive in their approach and have been rigorously evaluated. Our review focuses on
eight programs that satisfy the following criteria: a) aim to increase college completion rates, b)
offer a comprehensive set of services in the form of multi-year individualized support that is
designed to address multiple barriers to success; c) have been implemented in the past decade,
and d) have been evaluated through a randomized controlled trial (RCT).7

The key features of each of these programs and their RCT evaluations are provided in Table 1.
Below we provide a brief description of each of these interventions, synthesize the similarities
and differences across the highlighted programs, and discuss the evidence of impact on key
outcomes.

Program Descriptions

Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP)
The Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) was developed by the City University of
New York (CUNY) in 2007. This program provides comprehensive support for up to three years
for full-time, low-income students (Pell eligible or below 200% FPL) with fewer than 12 credits
earned. Students in the program receive access to an advisor with a small caseload who supports

                                                            
6
  An extensive body of research focuses on the challenge of increasing rates of college enrollment among lower
income students. This is a different issue than college non-completion. We refer interested readers to the review
piece by Page and Scott-Clayton (2016) and recent studies by Barr and Castleman (2017), Oreopoulos and Ford
(2019), Bird et al. (2019), Castleman and Page (2015), Page and Gehlbach (2017), and Carrell and Sacerdote (2017).
7
  We include in this list programs with on-going studies if some short term RCT results are available.

                                                               7
 
 


the student's academic, social and interpersonal needs, helping them: transition to college life
and culture; navigate their college campus (including talking to faculty); plan for a transfer to a
four-year institution or career path; and access additional supports if they fall off track.8 The
program offers enhanced career services, tutoring, blocked or linked courses in the first year and
a seminar in the first semester that works with students on goal setting and study skills. Students
are also provided tuition waivers if their needs-based financial aid does not cover tuition and fees
(only a small portion of students require one, given Pell coverage for tuition), a MetroCard and
free use of textbooks. ASAP originally served 1,132 students at CUNY, and has grown to
25,000 students in 2019. It is also being replicated at seven institutions across five states.
MDRC conducted an RCT evaluation of the original ASAP program at CUNY from 2010 to
2013 with a sample size of 896 (Scrivener, et al, 2015), and of the replication program in Ohio
from 2015 to 2016 with a sample size of 1,501 (Sommo et al. 2018).
Stay the Course
Stay the CourseTM (STC) is a comprehensive case management intervention aimed at helping
low-income students overcome the multiple obstacles that might derail persistence and degree
completion in community college. Stay the Course was initially designed and implemented in
2013 as a research demonstration project, implemented by Catholic Charities Fort Worth at
Tarrant County Community College in collaboration with a research team affiliated with the
Wilson Sheehan Lab for Economic Opportunities (LEO). This program serves full time (initially
enrolled in at least 9 credit hours), low-income (Pell eligible or below 200% FPL) students with
fewer than 30 credits already earned. The STC comprehensive program offers case management
services that are substantially more intensive than what a community college academic counselor
typically provides. Each student is placed with a trained social worker, called a navigator, who
provides the student with coaching, mentoring and referral services. STC navigators work with
students to help them overcome individual barriers to college completion. For example, a
navigator might help a student find affordable child care or refer the student to available social
services in the community, as well as help with institutional issues such as selecting courses that
keep the student on track for graduation or provide practical advice about how to transfer to a 4-
year institution. STC enrollees also have access to limited emergency financial assistance
through the program that can be used for non-academic expenses that could impact persistence in
college. LEO researchers conducted an RCT evaluation of the original program at Tarrant
County Community College from 2013-2016 with a sample size of 869 (Evans et al,
forthcoming).
The Stay the Course program expanded beyond the initial research demonstration project on the
Trinity River campus of Tarrant County Community College to a fully operational program
serving all five TCC campuses. In 2018, Stay the Course served 3,000 students enrolled at TCC.
Efforts are underway to replicate the program at other community colleges around the country.


                                                            
8
  Each student is assigned to an advisor with whom they must meet at least twice per month. If a student is
struggling academically, their advisor will immediately refer them to tutoring and require them to meet more
regularly with the advisor (Linderman and Kolenovic, 2009).

                                                               8
 
 


Inside Track
Inside Track is an independent non-profit provider of coaching services that combine different
methods, curricula, and technologies. The organization began providing services in 2001 and has
served over 2 million students nationwide through its coaching based programs with more than
4,000 different partner programs. This program serves students from all income levels and
depending on the site focuses on part-time, full time, athletes or other targeted groups of students
at 2 and 4 year, public or private institutions. Students tend to be non-traditional with an average
age in this study of 31 years old. Students are matched to coaches who help and support them at
the start of college and through their first year. These services are provided through remote
telephone and electronic delivery mechanisms. Coaches focus on helping students prioritize their
studies and plan for success and on identifying and overcoming barriers to college success
including issues outside of their school life. An RCT evaluation of Inside Track was conducted at
multiple (anonymous) sites from 2003-2004 and 2007-2008 with a sample size of 13,555
(Bettinger and Baker, 2014).
Opening Doors
The Opening Doors Demonstration was a multi-site study run by MDRC from 2003 to 2006 to
evaluate the impact of several different programs designed to improve student success. Our
review focuses on the Opening Doors program that provided enhanced student services and a
small stipend to students at Lorain County Community College and Owens Community College,
both in Ohio. This program serves both part-and full-time, low-income (below 250% FPL)
students with fewer than 12 credits earned at entry. Students in this program are given access to
counselors with relatively low caseloads (157:1) and are expected to meet at least twice per
semester for two semesters to check in on academic progress and address issues that could affect
success in school. Students are also eligible for a $150 stipend for each semester they work with
a counselor. The program targets low-income students either new to the college or continuing
students with fewer than 13 credits completed. Most students are in their mid-twenties, are
working and have children. MDRC's RCT study was conducted at multiple locations in Ohio
from 2003-2006 with a sample size of 2,139 (Scrivener and Weiss, 2009).
Student Achievement and Retention Project (Project STAR)
Project STAR was an RCT demonstration project implemented at a large Canadian university in
2005 with a sample size of 1,656 (Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos, 2009). All first-year students
(except those in top 25 percent of high school GPAs) were randomized into one of three
treatment groups or a control group. This program serves first time, full-time students of all
income levels. One treatment group is offered a full set of support services including mentoring
by upperclassmen and supplemental instruction. The second group receives large cash awards up
to the amount of one full year of tuition, by meeting a target GPA. The final program group is
offered a combination of services and incentives. By design, the program is meant to provide
comprehensive supports, however, the take up rates on supplemental instruction and usage rates
of coaching were extremely low (Angrist, et al, 2009). The program served 650 students across



                                                 9
 
 


the three treatment arms, with 1,006 in the control group. The program was not continued
beyond the life of the research study and does not operate today.
One Million Degrees
One Million Degrees is a non-profit organization founded in 2006 that provides comprehensive
supports to community college students in Chicago. This program serves first-time, low-income
(Pell-eligible or Chicago STAR eligible) students with at least one full year of college remaining
and a GPA over 2.0. It operates on seven campuses of the City Colleges of Chicago and at three
suburban colleges in the Chicago area. The program pairs students with a program coordinator
whom they meet with regularly (at least monthly) to address challenges and plan out a path for
success, and provides financial, academic, personal and professional support to students through
efforts such as a performance-based stipend, last-dollar scholarships, skill-building workshops
(time management, study skills, etc), advising and coaching. The Urban Labs at the University of
Chicago is conducting an RCT evaluation of One Million Degrees at 10 different sites in and
around Chicago from 2016-2017 with a sample size of 4,274 (Bertrand, Hallberg, Hofmeister,
Morgan and Shirey, 2019).
Project QUEST
Project QUEST is a non-profit organization founded in 1992 in San Antonio, Texas, which
provides comprehensive support to adults to gain post-secondary degrees and credentials and
access well-paying jobs in the local economy. This program serves individuals interested in, but
not currently attending college who are focused on careers in health care and/or an associate
degree. Services include financial assistance (for tuition, fees, books, transportation, tutoring),
remedial instruction in math and reading, counseling to address personal and academic concerns,
referrals to outside agencies for other assistance (including utility bills, childcare), weekly
meetings focused on life skills like time management and study skills, and job placement support
(resume writing, interview skills). Project QUEST has operated in San Antonio since 1992 and
has served over 7,700 people since first opening. Economic Mobility Corp's RCT evaluation of
Project QUEST from 2006 to 2008 included 410 students (Roder and Elliott, 2019). It focused
only on those students pursuing health-care sector jobs, which remains the focus of the program,
though they work with students in the tech industry as well.
Monitoring Advising Analytics to Promote Success (MAAPs)
Monitoring Advising Analytics to Promote Success (MAAPs) was launched as an RCT study in
2016 by the University Innovation Alliance (UIA) and supported by a four-year First in the
World grant from the Department of Education. MAAPs scaled a model developed and piloted
at Georgia State University to address the lack of institutional "know how" of many low-income
and first generation students in higher education. It is currently being implemented at 11
different public four-year institutions in 11 different states. This program serves Pell-eligible
and/or first-generation students enrolled in one of the partner institutions. MAAPs is based on a
model first developed and implemented at Georgia State University. It offers students the
following services: (a) intensive, proactive advising to help them navigate key academic choices
and to establish individualized academic maps; (b) early and real-time alerts prompted in part

                                                10
 
 


through a system of analytics-based tracking when they go off path; and (c) timely, targeted
advising interventions to get them back on the appropriate academic path. Ithaka S+R conducted
an RCT evaluation of the MAAPs program at 11 sites from 2016 to 2019 with a sample size of
10,946 (Alamuddin, Rossman and Kurzweil, 2018).


Summary of Similarities and Differences across Programs

All of the programs highlighted in this report take a comprehensive approach to addressing the
barriers to completion that students face, but the specific features of these programs vary
considerably. Furthermore, these programs serve different populations and are implemented in
different contexts. We list the key elements of each program in Table 1. In this subsection we
summarize the similarities and differences across a number of program dimensions.

Delivery Institutions and Setting: Five of the programs ­ ASAP, Stay the Course, Opening
Doors, Project Quest and One Million Degrees ­ work only with students at community
colleges.9 Project STAR and MAAPs only work with students at four-year public institutions.
Inside Track works with students at both two- and four-year, public and private institutions.

The programs also differed in terms of who delivered services--either non-profit entities or
employees of the colleges themselves. ASAP, Opening Doors, Project STAR and MAAPs are
delivered by the colleges themselves. Stay the Course, Inside Track, One Million Degrees, and
Project Quest are delivered by non-profit entities in partnership with the educational institutions.

Intervention duration: All of the comprehensive programs selected for this review are designed
to provide services to students for at least a year. Inside Track and Opening Doors support
students for 1 year (2 semesters). ASAP, Stay the Course, MAAPs, Project Quest and One
Million Degrees offer services for longer, but not all students use the program for the full
duration offered. In the case of One Million Degrees, for example, students who joined the
program while already in community college may leave sooner, as they transition to a four-year
college. Students participating in Project Quest receive support for an average of 22 months and
Stay the Course participants remain in the program for an average of 30 months. Information on
duration of treatment is not available for the other programs.

Eligibility:
(a) Income-based eligibility: Five of the highlighted programs target low-income students--
those with family income below 200 or 250% of the federal poverty line or those who are Pell
eligible. The other three programs--Project QUEST, Project STAR and Inside Track--do not
condition eligibility on income. However, even without an explicit income eligibility criteria in
place, Project QUEST participants, 84 percent of whom had worked in the previous year, were
observed to have an average income of around $11,700/year.
                                                            
9
 Project QUEST works with students in both community colleges and technical training institutions, but the RCT
evaluation focused only on the community college setting.

                                                               11
 
 


(b) Enrollment status: There is not uniformity across the programs in eligibility based on
enrollment status. MAAPs and Project STAR serve only first-time enrolling students. ASAP,
Stay the Course, One Million Degrees, and Opening Doors serve both new students and students
with a limited number of already earned credits (ranging from 12 to 30) into their programs.
Project QUEST recruits both currently enrolled students and students not-yet enrolled, though
the evaluation focused only on individuals who had not-yet enrolled in college. Some programs only
have minimum credit hour requirements for enrollment into the program, while others also have
credit hour requirements as a condition for continuing in the program. Among the five programs
that report only an initial minimum credit hour requirement, two (ASAP and Project Star) require
students initially to be enrolled full time to receive services, another (Stay the Course) requires at
least 9 credit hours initially, while two others (Opening Doors and Inside Track) allow either
full-time or part-time students to enroll. One Million Degrees and Project QUEST require
students to be enrolled full-time not only initially to enroll, but also as a requirement to continue
in the program.   Although the program description for MAAPs does not explicitly state a
minimum credit hour requirement, average credit hours after one year suggest most students
were enrolled fulltime. (Alamuddin, et al, 2018). Some of the programs target or exclude
students based on type of degree program being pursued. For instance, ASAP excludes health
sciences, nursing, forensic science and engineering majors, and for the study, Project Quest
focuses on students interested in health-care jobs. MAAPs does not allow students in their
program if they receive other supports via athletics or other special student groups.

Case Management:
A central component to each of these programs is the comprehensive or wrap-around supports
provided to the students by an advisor, mentor, or case manager. Though the terminology differs
across programs, the intent of the service is very similar. ASAP provides comprehensive
advising from ASAP advisors. Stay the Course navigators provide intensive case management,
coaching, mentoring, and referrals. Opening Doors counselors assist students with personal and
academic issues and refer them to other services. One Million Degrees program coordinators
provide comprehensive supports to address financial, personal, academic and professional
barriers. Project Quest career counselors provide comprehensive specialized case management.
And finally, MAAPs advisors provide wrap-around supports to navigate academic choices and
paths. Inside Track is unique in this group as it provides coaching over the phone rather than in
person, as in the other interventions, and Project STAR is unique in that it employs a peer-
mentoring approach to student support.

The student to counselor or advisor ratio across these case management interventions differs
substantially. The caseload numbers range from a low of 34 students per navigator in the Stay
the Course program, to a high of 157 students per counselor in the Opening Doors program at the
Owens campus. See Table 1 for caseloads for all programs. Note that for all these programs, the
caseloads are substantially lower than the typical advisor or counselor load at most institutions,
as noted above. This aspect of these programs is important for assessing the scalability and cost
effectiveness of these programs.


                                                 12
 
 


We have limited information on the frequency or intensity of interactions between students and
their counselors or advisors. Stay the Course navigators met with their students just over four
times a semester in person, and connected with them via email, text, or phone more than 25 times
per semester on average. MAAPS advisors had some type of meaningful contact (recommended
an academic program or a particular set of actions) with at least 80 percent of their students
during the first two years. More than 90 percent of ASAP students met with an advisor during
their first year, and during that year they met an average of 38 times, which is a much greater
frequency of in-person interactions than for the other programs. Over 75 percent of Inside Track
students had at least 5 contacts with a program coach, and 58 percent of the students assigned to
Opening Doors had at least six contacts with a program counselor.

In addition to academic services, ASAP, One Million Degrees and Project Quest also offer
formal job placement and career support. These services may include a professional coach, as in
One Million Degrees' model, who works with the student to attend professional development
events and workshops, review resumes and cover letters, and support their networking efforts
and opportunities. Project Quest provides students with career counselors who support them
from college enrollment through job placement including help registering for professional
license exams and prep materials. CUNY ASAP also employs a career and employment
specialist that ASAP students see once per semester to talk about job skills, resume writing,
applying for jobs, etc.

Financial support:
The programs offer financial supports in a variety of different forms. Five of these programs
offer non-tuition financial assistance though it varies in amount and restriction ­ ASAP students
get free use of textbooks and MetroCard, Stay the Course students get access to emergency
financial assistance for qualified expenses up to $1500 over three years, Opening Doors students
receive a $150 stipend each semester (for 2 semesters) without restrictions on use, One Million
Degrees students receive a $750-$1000 annual stipend as a performance-based grant as well as
access to $250 in enrichment grants, and Project QUEST students receive financial support for
transportation, review courses, uniforms, certificate exam fees and vaccinations.

Because most of the students served by these programs are Pell eligible, tuition assistance is less
of a dire need, but ASAP and One Million Degrees do provide tuition (net of financial aid)
waivers. Project QUEST typically covers 100 percent of tuition and fees during the first year in
the program and 50 percent of tuition and 100 percent students' fees beyond the first year. Only
Project STAR and One Million Degrees provide bonus incentives tied to student performance
and engagement in the program.

Academic support:
Most of the programs provide educational planning or advising that includes course selection
and/or academic advising. Access to and provision of tutors varies widely across programs.
Three programs offer substantial tutoring support: ASAP provides dedicated tutors, One Million
Degrees provides tutors and requires new entrants and poor performing students to use them, and

                                                13
 
 


Project Quest provides remedial instruction and allows financial assistance to pay for tutors. Stay
the Course and Opening Doors give referrals for tutors and Inside Track and MAAPs do not
provide or refer for tutors. An academic support that is unique to the ASAP program is linked or
blocked courses, which in some CUNY colleges closely resemble learning communities
providing additional cohort-based support and more cohesive learning experiences.


Evidence from RCTs on the Impact of Comprehensive Programs
Each of the programs we highlight above has been rigorously tested through a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) evaluation. These evaluations were conducted by independent evaluation
teams and the results have been published as white papers, working papers, or in peer-reviewed
journals. Table 1 lists the primary reference for each study. In this section, we summarize the
results from these studies, focusing on the impact these programs had on two key outcomes:
persistence in school and degree completion.
Impact on persistence: We report the estimated effects on persistence for seven of the programs
in Figure 3.10 The period for which effects are recorded ranges from one to three years,
depending on the study (see the notes to Figure 3). For all RCT evaluations, we report the intent-
to-treat estimate (ITT), which is the raw (or regression adjusted) difference in the mean
persistence between the treatment and control groups. We also report the estimated treatment-on-
the-treated (TOT) effect when available.11 For two of the RCTs ­ Stay the Course and One
Million Degrees ­ the take-up rate of services for those assigned to the treatment group was well
below one. In these cases, the TOT estimate will be much larger than the ITT.
There is a correspondence between the magnitude of positive effects and the intensity of services
provided. Four of the reviewed programs -- ASAP, Stay the Course, Inside Track and One
Million Degrees ­ produce statistically significant positive effects on persistence after at least
one year. One Million Degrees led to a 21 percentage point increase in persistence through one
year (TOT). The effect for Stay the Course after six semesters is similar in magnitude, although
the effect is only marginally significant. The studies of Opening Doors, MAAPs, and Project
STAR find no discernable impact on persistence.
Impact on Degree Completion (certificate and/or degree): We report the estimated effects on
degree completion in Figure 4. The studies report this outcome at three to six semesters after
enrollment. As with persistence, we report the ITT, and when available, the TOT.
ASAP, Stay the Course, and Inside Track all demonstrate positive impacts on completion. The
effect size for ASAP indicates that the intervention led to an increase in receipt of any degree by
18 percentage points, or 83 percent, and this effect is statistically significant. The effect of Stay


                                                            
10
   Project Quest is not shown because the effect of the program on persistence, relative to the control group, was not
included in the public report.
11
   TOT estimates, which are calculated as the ITT divided by the take-up rate, take into account that not all students
who are assigned to the treatment group actually receive the treatment.

                                                               14
 
 


the Course on completion is also large, but the estimate is not statistically significant. For Inside
Track the effect is smaller and marginally significant.
Impact on Earnings: A primary reason why the positive effects on degree completion are
important is that this suggests that these programs ultimately improve labor market outcomes.
Unfortunately, we don't observe such outcomes for most of these studies, although we do for
Project Quest, and several of the other programs will collect this information in the future.
Project Quest found after two years, participant wages were lower than those in the control group
(due to reduced working hours or none at all while in the program). However, after 6 and 9
years, participants had significantly higher earnings, worked more consistently and were in
higher wage careers. These findings are encouraging ­ noting that early earnings data might be
depressed as students complete the programs and get into (or back into) the workforce.
Heterogeneity: An important takeaway from these studies is that for some of these
comprehensive programs, the results differed sharply across demographic groups. The most
notable evidence of heterogeneous effects was by gender. Both Stay the Course and Project
STAR found larger effects for females than for males. In the case of Stay the Course, the effects
on persistence and degree completion for females were large and statistically significant, while
there was little evidence of an effect for males. Unlike Stay the Course and Project STAR, the
ASAP study found little difference in the effect of the program by gender. Project Quest found
that the greatest impact on earnings was for non-traditional students ages 35-64. As noted below,
in the replication study of ASAP, non-traditional students had larger effects than their peers.

Scaling and Replication

While the evidence on the impact of comprehensive interventions is promising, efforts to scale
up and replicate these smaller programs to serve much larger populations could prove to be
challenging. In their Stanford Social Innovation Review article, "Why Proven Solutions Struggle
to Scale up," Deiglmeier and Greco (2018) identify three key barriers innovators face in scaling
up: 1) inadequate funds to achieve larger growth, 2) the "fragmented nature" of social innovation
"ecosystems", and 3) talent gaps (i.e. the unique type of leaders and drivers of expansion and
vision in this space).
Social innovations often have inadequate funds because there is no clear path for funding. Some
strategies to scale up are very capital intensive, and earned revenue is not often a path for scaling
in social ventures (particularly those that serve low-income populations). Thus, innovators must
rely on external funds from grants, donors and other investors. Furthermore, social innovation
funders often reward the incubation and start-up phase, but lack clarity or focus on scale-up.
Social innovation ecosystems are fragmented by nature because they often involve multiple
sectors. In the space of comprehensive approaches to student success in higher education this is
particularly apparent, as some non-profit entities run programs within the context of complex
college systems and some college systems support students in a comprehensive way by referring
them to and assisting them with the complex networks of social services in their community.
Finally, a key factor that contributes to the talent gap in the social innovation space is the fact


                                                 15
 
 


that the skills and characteristics needed at the beginning of a new venture are often quite
different than the systems-thinking and management complexities of scaling an enterprise.
Replications typically have taken one of two different approaches.12 The "affiliation" approach is
similar to a franchise model, where the original designer establishes a network of partners and
maintains a formal relationship with each local replicator, but allows for local flexibility in
implementation. With the "branching" approach, the original program designer maintains much
more control. It operates a centrally controlled network that helps replicators launch and
maintain the program with fidelity and measure its impact, leaving little local flexibility. There
are also hybrid approaches to replication and scaling that have features of each of these
approaches.

The most promising evidence that comprehensive programs to improve college outcomes can be
scaled and replicated is that several of them have already done so. In some of these cases, there is
already RCT evidence of impact for the replication sites, but in other cases the replications are
still at too early a phase to determine whether the promising results of the initial intervention can
be replicated. Some programs have scaled up, offering a centrally controlled, consistently
defined set of services to a large number of students across multiple locations. Other programs
have expanded through replication, using the various approaches described in the paragraph
above. We summarize the replication efforts of these programs in Table 2 and describe these
instances below.

ASAP Replication: The ASAP program is being replicated now through an affiliation approach at
seven sites across five states where the sites utilize the program but adapt it locally. The ASAP
program at the three Ohio sites was based on CUNY ASAP but differed in several ways,
including the types of students served (the Ohio campus had a much larger fraction of non-
traditional students), the political and leadership structure, and the resources and services
available to students not served by ASAP (Sommo et al., 2018). Sommo, et al (2018) conclude
that the 2-year Ohio ASAP results are comparable to (or in some cases exceed) those from
CUNY ASAP, including large impacts on graduation rates. Ongoing efforts to expand evidence-
based programs like ASAP to more students include MDRC's Scaling up Community College
Efforts for Students Success (SUCCESS) program that takes components from several proven
programs and tests how to sustainably achieve improved graduation rates.13

Inside Track at Scale: Inside Track currently operates nationally via a branching approach
serving more than 4,000 programs (Inside Track, 2020). This level of scale has been achieved
over two decades and ten years after their RCT evaluation demonstrated impact of the program
on student success. Key features of Inside Track that likely contributed to the ability to scale up
and promote cost-effectiveness include the relatively low cost of personnel. The telephone and

                                                            
12
   See Dees, et al. (2004) for a description of the "affiliation", "branching", and other ways social enterprises can
scale up to have broader impact.
13
   For more information about the SUCCESS initiative see MDRC's description
https://www.mdrc.org/project/scaling-college-completion-efforts-student-success-success#overview

                                                               16
 
 


electronic delivery mechanisms of this program allow a smaller number of people to serve a
larger number of students in shorter time and at lower costs. The typical active caseload for an
Inside Track coach was between 75 and 150 students at any one time.

One Million Degrees: The One Million Degrees program is not yet being scaled with full
implementation fidelity, but aspects of the program have been embraced and adopted by some
participating community colleges. For instance, Harper College, a public college in suburban
Illinois, has introduced case management-style advising practices to advisers beyond those
employed to support OMD scholars and are considering how to reach more students with these
practices. This reflects an affiliation approach where Harper College is adapting the program to
its own local context. In addition, given OMD's results for students entering the program directly
from high school, the local K-12 district has partnered with the City Colleges of Chicago in a
human-centered design project to shadow high school seniors as they apply for college. Through
this process, they are mapping how OMD provides students with support to help ameliorate
summer melt and attrition before the first year of college and to persist in their first year in
school.

MAAPs Replication: The MAAPs program is being replicated via affiliation at 11 different
public 4-year institutions in 11 different states. At all sites, all treatment group students were
assigned to dedicated MAAPs advisors and these advisors were hired and trained by their
institutions to deliver the MAAPs advising intervention (as assisted by GA State). However,
significant local adaptation has been allowed and utilized (Alamuddin, et al, 2018). For example,
in two of the sites, MAAPs advisors serve as the students' primary advisor; at five other sites
MAAPs advisors are supplementary to primary school-provided advisors. Three institutions have
a combination of primary and supplemental models, and two have a coordinated advising system
where MAAPs advisors and department advisors worked together to support MAAPs students
(Alamuddin, et al, 2018). Long-term completion results are not yet available, but one-year results
from the evaluation of MAAPs replication indicate no significant effect on student achievement
or persistence overall. One site -- Georgia State, the lead institution for the project ­ is showing
significant impacts on credits earned and GPA in the first year. The researchers note that the
absence of early impacts of MAAPs on student outcomes is not surprising considering "a number
of sites encountered early implementation challenges" (Alamuddin, et al, 2018).

Stay the Course Replication: CCFW recently launched replications of Stay the Course via
branching at several sites across the country. They are working with local non-profit entities who
are implementing the program in partnership with local community colleges. Program services at
one of the replication sites were halted after one year due to challenges the provider faced with
program implementation. Based on the experience at this site, CCFW incorporated new training
elements to improve efficiency and better support the replication sites. In addition to the initial
in-person training, CCFW developed a new portal for service providers to access the Provider
Manual throughout the year and review updates to the program methodology. As part of the
fidelity assurance process, CCFW developed a centralized database for service providers to
capture Stay the Course program services. This allows CCFW to monitor enrollment and how

                                                17
 
 


often navigators meet with the students. CCFW also holds weekly calls and monthly
implementation meetings with the program manager of each site, as well as regular site visits.
Providers from the replication sites can participate in monthly "Community of Learning" calls to
share best practices and the challenges they have encountered. LEO is working with CCFW to
evaluate the impact of Stay the Course on completion and earnings at replication sites through an
RCT.

Project QUEST Replication: Project QUEST has been replicated via affiliation in several
locations - Project VIDA in the Rio Grande Valley, Capital IDEA in Austin, TX, Capital IDEA
in Houston, TX, Project Arriba in El Paso and SkillQUEST in Dallas. Of those, two are being
rigorously evaluated - Project VIDA by Abt Associates and Capital IDEA by Economic Mobility
Corp. Economic Mobility Corp began an RCT evaluation of Capital IDEA in 2019 and will
enroll 700 participants, with half assigned to the treatment group, over three years. Capital IDEA
is a replication of Project QUEST, but with the local adaptation to focus exclusively on students
in a nursing-RN program (Roder, 2019). Abt Associates is conducting an RCT evaluation of
Project VIDA in the Rio Grande Valley that enrolled 958 participants between 2011 and 2014.
Early results indicate that participants have a significantly higher number of credits earned, had a
higher rate of full-time enrollment in college and had higher credential completion rates
(Rolston, Copson and Gardiner, 2017).

Project STAR Replication: The original Project STAR program has not been replicated, but a
modified version of the program that offered financial incentives but not support services was
launched in 2008. This financial incentive only program, "Opportunity Knocks" (OK), aimed to
boost achievement by rewarding "above average" performance. It was piloted at a large
Canadian commuter university and targeted a population of students with low overall academic
achievement. See Angrist, Oreopoulos and Williams (2014) for more details.
A key feature of several of these replications is that they are being evaluated with an RCT.
Replication RCTs are becoming increasingly recognized as critical to successful scaling of social
programs (Deiglemeier and Greco, 2018). Replication RCTs are meant to demonstrate whether a
model program can be moved to a new context and produce the same results. A recent report
from Arnold Ventures, a philanthropy committed to the use of RCTs to improve outcomes for
social programs, notes that there has been a dearth of replication RCTs in part because the
academic community rewards "bold, new discoveries" and thus replications of existing studies
are not incentivized or performed broadly. In other disciplines, such as psychology, replication
studies have often failed to reproduce the original findings (Buck, 2019).


Sustainability

For comprehensive interventions such as those highlighted in this report to have a large and
sustained impact on college completion at a national level, there needs to be a way to fund these
programs at a large scale. Because these comprehensive programs are centered on human
interactions to support success, they are relatively expensive. An important question is therefore

                                                18
 
 


whether the improved outcomes that these programs generate are large enough to justify the
greater price tag.

As noted in Table 1, the costs to implement these programs range from $700 to $16,000 per
participant per year. It is difficult to compare or assess programs based on costs because the
interventions differ considerably in duration and impact. One way to compare the cost
effectiveness across programs is to examine how much is spent on the program for each
additional degree obtained. For example, Evans et al. (2020) estimate a cost of just over $27,000
per additional associate degree for Stay the Course, while Weiss et al. (2019) estimate a cost of
$78,000 per additional associate degree induced through the ASAP program.

A key challenge for maintaining effective programs is identifying a sustainable funding source.
Some of the comprehensive programs we highlight, such as Stay the Course and One Million
Degrees, were originally funded primarily by private philanthropy, but relying exclusively on
private resources can limit the sustainability of these programs when implemented on a national
scale. Policymakers at the federal, state, and local level are often interested in investments that
increase completion rates, so public funding is a potential option.

A policy proposal titled "A Policy Agenda to Develop Human Capital for the Modern
Economy," put forward by an Aspen Economic Strategy Group working group calls for federal
funding for "student supports at community colleges at the same per-student level as at public
four-year institutions" (Goolsbee, et al, 2019 p. 12). Their concept of student supports comes
from the programs and research we highlight in this report and would include "increasing the
availability of dedicated, nonfinancial student supports such as case management or
individualized financial counseling" (Goolsbee, et al, 2019 p. 12).

A variety of funding models have emerged to address the completion crisis. For example, thirty-
two states have implemented performance-based funding models that allocate a portion of state
funding to public 2- and 4-year colleges based on student outcomes. Dougherty, et al, (2016)
note that states often use performance funding as a policy instrument to financially incentivize
public institutions to increase completion, but they are not always supportive of the additional
resources and capacity necessary to increase completion. Several studies have examined the
effect of performance-based funding on degree completion using variation across states and time
in such policies. These studies have found little evidence that these policies lead to increased
completion of associates degrees, and mixed evidence regarding increased certificates (Hillman,
Tandberg, and Fryar, 2015; Li and Kennedy, 2018).

Another potential funding model that addresses the sustainability of comprehensive college
completion programs is pay for success financing. In this financing structure, private or public
funds are used to pay for services, but these investors are reimbursed, typically by a local




                                                 19
 
 


government, if positive outcomes and/or cost savings is achieved.14 These models break from the
federal grant model in important ways. First, they are primarily local or state initiatives whereby
the players closest to the community needs set up the PFS model. Second, they utilize private
investors who are both financially and socially motivated ­ investors are only paid if the program
performs as promised. Finally, a key difficulty in these PFS schemes is identifying an end-payer
(or payers) ­ entities that most benefit from successful completion programs which might
include the colleges themselves, local tax-collecting governments or others.
A recent feasibility study of PFS in higher education by Third Sector notes that "...there is a
clear pathway for PFS to improve student outcomes through college access and student support
services delivered prior to and/or during enrollment in higher education; however, there are
several gaps and areas of uncertainty to be addressed prior to bringing a successful PFS project
to fruition." (Silman, et al., 2017). Third Sector is now working with 4 states to pilot and test
PFS programs in higher education systems, so more information on that option as a funding
mechanism is to come.


Conclusions and Future Research

Current student supports at both two- and four-year institutions do not meet the needs of the most
vulnerable students in a way that leads to degree completion. In light of the completion crisis,
new, more comprehensive approaches have been developed to address the multi-faceted barriers
that many students face. There is a growing body of evidence that these comprehensive
approaches can significantly improve both persistence in school and degree completion. Despite
this evidence, there remains a lot we do not know. Additional research is needed to shed light on
what features of these programs are the most critical and what types of students benefit the most
from which types of programs.
Given the high cost of these programs, it will be important to target them towards the students
who are likely to benefit the most. Existing evidence for the programs highlighted in this report
indicate that there can be sharp differences in program effects across groups. For example,
evidence for both Stay the Course and Project STAR indicates significant and large impacts on
persistence and completion for female students, but not males. On the other hand, ASAP did not
find noticeable differences by gender. There is also some evidence that non-traditional students
benefit more than other students from comprehensive approaches. As these and other
comprehensive programs are replicated, it will be important to test whether there are consistent
patterns in terms of who benefits most.
Furthermore, to fully understand the long run benefit of these interventions, it will be important
to continue to track study participants as they transition into the labor market. Currently, there is
very limited evidence of the impact of these programs on employment and earnings. Recent 9-

                                                            
14
  The federal government also provides resources to pay for programs that generate positive outcomes in a pay for
success model. For example, the Social Impact Partnerships to Pay for Results Act (SIPPRA) allocated $100 million
to support such programs.

                                                               20
 
 


year findings from Project QUEST are encouraging, but there is no direct evidence of the impact
of the other programs on labor market outcomes at this point.
All of these programs, by design, are multi-faceted. This comprehensive approach allows these
programs to address the many barriers that vulnerable students often face. However, some
components of these programs may be more critical than others. To understand better the
mechanisms by which these programs improve outcomes, it will be important to test different
versions. For example, to address whether financial assistance is critical, one could test two
different versions of the program, one that provides financial assistance and one that does not.
Better information on the key mechanisms can inform program designers about how best to
refine the programs to maximize cost effectiveness.
References
Adelman, C. 2006. The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree completion from high school through college.
      US Department of Education.
Alamuddin, R., Rossman, D., and Kurzweil, M. 2018. Monitoring advising analytics to promote success
      (MAAPS): Evaluation findings from the first year of implementation.
Anderson, D. M., Broton, K. M., GoldrickRab, S., and Kelchen, R. 2019. Experimental Evidence on the
       Impacts of NeedBased Financial Aid: Longitudinal Assessment of the Wisconsin Scholars
       Grant. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.
Angrist, J., Lang, D., and Oreopoulos, P. 2009. Incentives and Services for College Achievement:
        Evidence from a Randomized Trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 1, 136-
        163.
Angrist, J., Oreopoulos, P., and Williams, T. 2014. When opportunity knocks, who answers? New
        evidence on college achievement awards. Journal of Human Resources, 49(3), 572-610.
Attewell, P., Lavin, D., Domina, T., and Levey, T. 2006. New evidence on college remediation. The
       Journal of Higher Education, 77(5), 886-924.
Bailey, T., Calcagno, J. C., Jenkins, D., Kienzl, G., Leinbach, T., and Columbia Univ., New York, NY.
        Teachers College. 2005. The Effects of Institutional Factors on the Success of Community
        College Students. Place of publication not identified: Distributed by ERIC Clearinghouse.
Bailey, T., and Morest, V.S.(Eds). 2006. Defending the Community College Equity Agenda. Johns
        Hopkins University Press.
Bailey, T. 2009. "Challenge and Opportunity: Rethinking the Role and Function of Developmental
        Education in Community College." New Directions for Community Colleges 2009 (145): 11-30.
Baime, D. S., and Mullin, C. M. 2011. Promoting educational opportunity: The Pell Grant program at
       community colleges. Washington, DC: AACC Policy Brief.
Baum, S., Ma, J., and Payea, K. 2013. Education Pays. Washington, DC: College Board.
Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. 2009. The role of simplification and
        information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment. Cambridge,
        MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barr, A., and Castleman, B. 2017. "The Bottom Line on College Counseling." Working Paper.
Barr, M., and Blank, R. 2009. Insufficient Funds: Savings, Assets, Credit, and Banking Among Low-
       Income Households. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

                                                   21
 
 


Baum, S., and Scott-Clayton, J. 2013. "Redesigning the Pell Grant Program for the Twenty-first Century."
       The Hamilton Project, Discussion Paper 2013-04.
Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S., and Shafir, E. 2004. "A Behavioral-Economics View of Poverty."
        American Economic Review 94(2): 419-423.
Bertrand, M., Hallberg, K., Hofmeister, K., Morgan, B., and Shirey, E. 2019. Increasing academic
        progress among low-income community college students: Early evidence from a randomized
        controlled trial. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Poverty Lab.
Bettinger, E. P., and Baker, R. B. 2014. The effects of student coaching: An evaluation of a randomized
        experiment in student advising. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 36(1), 3-19.
Bird, K., Castleman, B., Denning, J., Goodman, J., Lamberton, C., and Ochs Rosinger, K. 2019. Nudging
        at Scale: Experimental Evidence from FAFSA Completion Campaigns. Ed Working Paper No.
        19-117. Annenberg Institute at Brown University.
Bloom, D., and Sommo, C. 2005. Building Learning Communities Early Results from the Opening Doors
       Demonstration at Kingsborough Community College. MDRC, 65.
Bound, J., Lovenheim, M., and Turner, S. 2010. Why have college completion rates declined?: An
       analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources. Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research.
Buck, S. 2019. Replication on the Rise. Arnold Ventures.
Buckles, K., Hagemann, A., Malamud, O., Morrill, M., and Wozniak, A. 2016. The effect of college
       education on mortality. Journal of Health Economics, 50, 99-114.
Carnevale, A. P., Rose, S. J., Cheah, B. C., and Georgetown University. 2011. The college payoff:
       Education, occupations, lifetime earnings. Washington, D.C: Georgetown University, Center on
       Education and Workforce.
Carrell, S., and Sacerdote, B. 2017. "Why do college-going interventions work?" American Economic
         Journal: Applied Economics 9(3): 124-151.
Castleman, B. L., and Page, L. C. 2015. Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and peer
       mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates? Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, 115, 144-160.
Consortium for Student Retention Data Exchange. 2004. 2003-04 CSRDE Report: The Retention and
       Graduation Rates in 344 Colleges and Universities. Center for Institutional Data Exchange and
       Analysis, University of Oklahoma Outreach.
Cowan, B. W., and Tefft, N. 2020. College Access and Adult Health (No. w26685). National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Currie, J., and Moretti, E. 2003. Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission of human
         capital: Evidence from college openings. The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4), 1495-1532.
Dees, J. G., Anderson, B. B., and Wei-Skillern, J. 2004. Scaling social impact. Stanford Social Innovation
         Review, 1(4), 24-32.
Deiglmeier, K., and Greco, A. 2018. Why proven solutions struggle to scale up. Stanford Social
       Innovation Review Available at. https://ssir. org/articles/entry/why_proven_solutions_
       struggle_to_scale_up.
Deming, D., Walters, C. R., and National Bureau of Economic Research. 2017. The impact of price caps
      and spending cuts on U.S. postsecondary attainment.


                                                   22
 
 


Deming, D. 2017. Increasing College Completion with a Federal Higher Education Matching Grant.
      Policy Brief 2017-03. Hamilton Project.
De Walque, D. 2007. Does education affect smoking behaviors?: Evidence using the Vietnam draft as an
      instrument for college education. Journal of health economics, 26(5), 877-895.
Dougherty, K., Jones, S., Lahr, H., Natow, R., Pheatt, L., and Reddy, V. 2016. Performance Funding for
      Higher Education. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Evans, W. N., Kearney, M. S., Perry, B. C., and Sullivan, J. X. 2019. Increasing community college
       completion rates among low-income students: Evidence from a randomized controlled trial
       evaluation of a case management intervention. JPAM, forthcoming.
Gallagher, R. 2010. "National Survey of Counseling Center Directors 2010." The International
       Association of Counseling Services, Inc.
Galama, T. J., Lleras-Muney, A., and van Kippersluis, H. 2018. The Effect of Education on Health and
       Mortality: A Review of Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Evidence (No. w24225). National
       Bureau of Economic Research.
Geckeler, C., Beach, C., Pih, M., and Yan, L. 2008. "Helping Community College Students Cope with
       Financial Emergencies: Lessons from the Dreamkeepers and Angel Fund Emergency Financial
       Aid Programs." DMRC.
Ginder, S. A., Kelly-Reid, J. E., and Mann, F. B. 2018a. Graduation Rates for Selected Cohorts, 2009-14;
        Outcome Measures for Cohort Year 2009-10; Student Financial Aid, Academic Year 2016-17;
        and Admissions in Postsecondary Institutions, Fall 2017. First Look (Provisional Data). NCES
        2018-151. National Center for Education Statistics.
Ginder, S. A., Kelly-Reid, J. E., and Mann, F. B. 2018b. Postsecondary Institutions and Cost of
        Attendance in 2017-18; Degrees and Other Awards Conferred, 2016-17; and 12-Month
        Enrollment, 2016-17: First Look (Provisional Data). NCES 2018-060rev. National Center for
        Education Statistics.
Goldrick-Rab, S. 2010. Challenges and Opportunities for Improving Community College Student
       Success. Review of Educational Research, 80(3), 437.
Goolsbee, A., Hubbard, G., Ganz, A., Burwell, S. M., Kearney, M. S., Porat, R., and Pritzker, P. 2019. A
       Policy Agenda to Develop Human Capital for the Modern Economy. Aspen Institute Policy
       Paper. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Greenstone, M., Looney, A., Patashnik, J. and Yu, M. 2013. Thirteen facts about social mobility and the
       role of education. Washington, DC: The Hamilton Project.
Grubb, W. N. 2006. Like, what do I do now? The dilemmas of guidance counseling. In T. Bailey and V.
       S. Morest (Eds.), Defending the community college equity agenda (pp. 195-222). Baltimore, MD:
       The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Grossman, M. 2015. The relationship between health and schooling: What's new? (No. w21609).
      National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hershbein, B., Kearney, M.S., and Pardue, L.W. "College Attainment, Income Inequality, and Economic
       Security: A Simulation Exercise," AEA Papers & Proceedings May 2020, forthcoming (longer
       version: NBER Working Paper No. 26747 February 2020.)
Hillman, N. W., Tandberg, D. A., and Fryar, A. H. 2015. Evaluating the impacts of "new" performance
       funding in higher education. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 37.4: 501-519.



                                                   23
 
 


Holzer, H., and Baum, S. 2017. "Making College Work: Pathways to Success for Disadvantaged
        Students." Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Inside Higher Ed's News. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/09/28/four-
        surprising-findings-debt-and-default-among-community- college-students.
Inside Track. 2020. https://www.insidetrack.org/.
Jepsen, C., Troske, K., and Coomes, P. 2014. The labor-market returns to community college degrees,
        diplomas, and certificates. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(1), 95-121.
Johnson, J., and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 2009. With their whole lives ahead of them: Myths and
       realities about why so many students fail to finish college. New York, NY: Public Agenda.
Kane, T. J., Rouse, C. E., and Princeton University. 1995. Labor-market returns to two- and four-year
       college. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section.
Li, A. Y., and Kennedy, A. I. 2018. Performance funding policy effects on community college outcomes:
        Are short-term certificates on the rise? Community College Review 46.1 (2018): 3-39.
Linderman, D., and Kolenovic, Z. 2009. Early Outcomes Report for City University of New York
       (CUNY) Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP). Unpublished report, City University
       of New York, NY.
Long, B. T. 2014. "Addressing the Academic Barriers to Higher Education," in Policies to Address
       Poverty in America, ed. Melissa S. Kearney and Benjamin H. Harris. Brookings Institution, The
       Hamilton Project.
Lundborg, P. 2013. The health returns to schooling--what can we learn from twins? Journal of
      population economics, 26(2), 673-701.
Marcotte, D. E., Bailey, T., Borkoski, C., and Kienzl, G. S. 2005. The Returns of a Community College
       Education: Evidence from the National Education Longitudinal Survey. Educational Evaluation
       and Policy Analysis, 27, 2, 157-176.
Marcotte, D. 2016. "The Returns to Education at Community Colleges: New Evidence from the
       Education Longitudinal Survey." IZA Discussion Papers 10202, Institute for the Study of Labor
       (IZA).
Martorell, P. and McFarlin, I, Jr. 2011. Help or Hindrance? The Effects of College Remediation on
       Academic and Labor Market Outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93:2, 436-454.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2003. Remedial Education at Degree-Granting Postsecondary
       Institutions in Fall 2000. Washington DC: Department of Education.
       http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2004/2004010.pdf.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2020. https://nces.ed.gov/.
National Student Clearinghouse. 2017. www.studentclearinghouse.com.
Nguyen, T. D., Kramer, J. W., and Evans, B. J. 2019. The Effects of Grant Aid on Student Persistence
      and Degree Attainment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Causal Evidence. Review
      of Educational Research, 89(6), 831-874.
Oreopoulos, P., and Petronijevic, U. 2013. Making college worth it: A review of research on the returns
       to higher education (No. w19053). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oreopoulos, P., and Salvanes, K. G. 2011. Priceless: The nonpecuniary benefits of schooling. Journal of
       Economic perspectives, 25(1), 159-84.


                                                    24
 
 


Oreopoulos, P. 2019. What limits college success? A review and further analysis of Holzer and Baum's'
       Making College Work' (No. 150). IZA Policy Paper.
Oreopoulos, P., and Ford, R. 2019. Keeping college options open: A field experiment to help all high
       school seniors through the college application process. Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 38(2), 426-454.
Page, L. C., and Gehlbach, H. 2017. How an artificially intelligent virtual assistant helps students
        navigate the road to college. AERA Open, 3(4), 2332858417749220.
Poterba, J. M., Venti, S. F., and Wise, D. A. 2017. The Long Reach of Education: Health, Wealth, and DI
        Participation (No. w23307). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Page, L. C., and Scott-Clayton, J. 2016. Improving college access in the United States: Barriers and
        policy responses. Economics of Education Review, 51, 4-22.
Roder, A. 2019. Capital IDEA Randomized Controlled Trial. OSF. July 26. osf.io/s54q8.
Roder, A. and Elliot, M. 2019. Nine year gains: Project QUEST's continuing impact. Economic Mobility
       Corporation.
Rolston, H., Copson, E., Gardiner, K., and Constance, N. 2017. Valley Initiative for Development and
        Advancement: Implementation and Early Impact Report Pathways for Advancing Careers and
        Education (PACE).
Rosenbaum, J. E., Deil-Amen, R., and Person, A. E. 2006. After admission: From college access to
       college success. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Scott-Clayton, J., and Columbia University. 2011. The shapeless river: Does a lack of structure inhibit
        students' progress at community colleges? New York: Community College Research Center,
        Teachers College, Columbia University.
Scrivener, S., Coghlan, E., and MDRC. 2011. Opening Doors to Student Success: A Synthesis of Findings
       from an Evaluation at Six Community Colleges. Policy Brief.
Scrivener, S., and Weiss, M. J. 2009. More guidance, better results? Three-year effects of an enhanced
       student services program at two community colleges. Three-Year Effects of an Enhanced Student
       Services Program at Two Community Colleges (August 1, 2009). New York: MDRC.
Shipler, D. K. 2005. The Working Poor: Invisible in America. Vintage.
Silman, T., Shah, P. and Grossman, J. 2017. Promoting Student Success: Using Pay for Success to
        Improve Student Attainment in Higher Education. Third Sector Capitol Partners.
Sneyers, E., and De Witte, K. 2018. Interventions in higher education and their effect on student success:
       a meta-analysis. Educational Review, 70(2), 208-228.
Sommo, C., Cullinan, D., Manno, M., Blake, S., and Alonzo, E. 2018. Doubling graduation rates in a new
      state: Two-year findings from the ASAP Ohio demonstration. New York: MDRC, Policy Brief.
Stevens, A., Kurlaender, M., Grosz, M., and Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and
        Employment (CAPSEE). 2015. Career-Technical Education and Labor Market Outcomes:
        Evidence from California Community Colleges. A CAPSEE Working Paper.
Strong American Schools. (2008). Diploma to Nowhere.
The White House, Office of the Press Secretary 2015. Fact sheet ­ White House unveils America's
      college promise proposal: Tuition-free community college for responsible students [Press
      release].


                                                     25
 
 


Tinto, V. 1975. Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis of recent research. Review of
        educational research, 45(1), 89.
Turner, S. E. 2004. Going to College and Finishing College. Explaining Different Educational Outcomes.
        Chapter in College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For
        It. Hoxby, C. Ed. NBER.
U.S. Department of Education. 2016. National Center for Education Statistics, NCES-2016-112rev.
       "Postsecondary Institutions and Cost of Attendance in 2015-16; Degrees and Other Awards
       Conferred, 2014-15; and 12-Month Enrollment." https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016112rev.pdf.
Weiss, M. J., Mayer, A., Cullinan, D., Ratledge, A., Sommo, C., and Diamond, J. 2014. A Random
       Assignment Evaluation of Learning Communities Seven Years Later: Impacts on Education and
       Earnings Outcomes. MDRC.
Weiss, M.J., Ratledge, A., Sommo, C., and Gupta, H. 2019. Supporting Community College Students
       from Start to Degree Completion: Long-Term Evidence from a Randomized Trial of CUNY's
       ASAP. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 11(3): 253-297.




                                                   26
 
Figure 1

                                          Average Annual Earnings, Full-Time,
                             Full-Year Workers, Ages 18-49, by Educational Attainment, 2018

        4-year degree                                                                            $84,421


   Associate's degree                                                 $49,395


        Some college                                            $44,778


   High school grad.                                        $39,362


       < High school                                      $36,859

                        $0      $10,000 $20,000 $30,000 $40,000 $50,000 $60,000 $70,000 $80,000 $90,000 $100,000
                                                                Income

Source: 2018 American Community Survey
Figure 2a




Figure 2b




Figure 2c




Note: Data from the U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). This figures
present data items collected from Title IV institutions in the United States. Prior to cohort year 2004, the data include only Title IV primarily postsecondary institutions.
The figures shows graduation rates within 6 years at 4-year colleges and within 3 years at 2-year colleges. IPEDS data are collected at the institution level, not at the
student level. IPEDS graduation rates (GR) are reflective of full-time, first-time, degree-/certificate-seeking students who started and finished at the same institution.
Students included in graduation rates do not represent all of the students at an institution (e.g., GR excludes part-time and transfer students).
             Figure 3                                Persistence in Post Secondary Education
                                                                                                                        Effect                Control

                        Study                                                                                           Size (95% CI)         Mean




                        Alamuddin et al., 2019 (MAAPS) ITT                                                              -0.01 (-0.03, 0.01)

                        Scrivener & Weiss, 2009 (Opening Doors) ITT                                                     0.01 (-0.01, 0.03)    .93

                        Angrist et al., 2009 (Project Star) ITT                                                         0.02 (-0.12, 0.16)

                        Bettinger & Baker, 2011 (Inside Track) ITT                                                      0.03 (0.02, 0.05)     .242

                        Evans et al., 2017 (Stay the Course) ITT                                                        0.06 (-0.01, 0.12)    .44

                        Bertrand et al., 2019. (One Million Degrees) ITT                                                0.06 (0.03, 0.09)     .556

                        Scrivener et al., 2015 (ASAP) ITT                                                               0.08 (0.02, 0.13)     .173

                        Bertrand et al., 2019. (One Million Degrees) TOT                                                0.21 (0.11, 0.31)     {.596}

                        Evans et al., 2017 (Stay the Course) TOT                                                        0.25 (-0.05, 0.55)    {.238}




                                                                  -.6      -.3       0              .3             .6

Weights are evenly distributed. CI is the confidence interval.
The ITT average does not include ITT estimates from Evans et al.(2017) and Bertrand et al.(2019) because the take-up rates for these studies are well below 1.
Project Quest is not shown because the effect of the program on persistence, relative to the control group, was not included in the public report.
Persistence outcomes vary by study:
In Alamuddin et al. (2019), the outcome is continuous enrollment of pell eligible students over two years.
In Scrivener & Weiss (2009), the outcome is continuous enrollment from the first through the third semester in the program.
In Angrist et al. (2009), the outcome is good standing in the second year for SFSP students.
In Bettinger & Baker (2011), the outcomes is 24 months retention.
In Betrand et al. (2019), the outcome is enrolled through the first year.
In Evans et al. (2017) and Scrivener et al. (2015), the outcome is enrolled in college after six semesters.
{Control Complier Mean}
Figure 4                                                   Degree Completion

                                                                                                                         Effect                Control

  Study                                                                                                                  Size (95% CI)         Mean




  Scrivener & Weiss, 2009 (Opening Doors) ITT                                                                            -0.01 (-0.02, 0.00)   .025

  Evans et al., 2017 (Stay the Course) ITT                                                                               0.04 (-0.01, 0.09)    .182

  Bettinger and Baker, 2011 (Inside Track) ITT                                                                           0.04 (-0.01, 0.09)    .312

  Evans et al., 2017 (Stay the Course) TOT                                                                               0.17 (-0.07, 0.40)    {.058}

  Scrivener et al., 2015 (ASAP) ITT                                                                                      0.18 (0.10, 0.26)     .218




                                      -.4                 -.2                 0                  .2                 .4
 Weights are evenly distributed. CI is the confidence interval.
 Completion outcomes vary by study:
 In Scrivener & Weiss (2009), the outcomes is earned a degree or certificate through the third semester in the program.
 In Bettinger & Baker (2011), the outcomes is earned any degree in 24 months.
 In Evans et al. (2017) and Scrivener et al. (2015), the outcome is earned a degree from any college after six semesters.
 {Control Complier Mean}
Table 1. College Completion Interventions
                                 ASAP             Stay the         Inside Track     Opening         Project       OMD             Project          MAAPs
                                                  Course                            Doors-OH        STAR                          QUEST
    Study        Start Date      2010             2013             2003             2003            2005          2016            2006             2016
    Details      Study           2010-2013        2013-2016        2003-2004;       2003-2006       2005-2006     2016-2023       2006-2008        2016-2019
                 Duration                                          2007-2008
                 Sample Size     896              869              13,555           2,139           1,656         4,257           410              10,946

                 Location        New York,        Ft. Worth,       Multiple,        Ohio (2 site)   Canada        Chicago, IL     San Antonio,     11 locations
                                 NY               TX               anonymous                                                      TX
                 Replication     Yes (3 sites)    Yes (4 sites)    Yes              No 1            No            No              Yes (5 sites)    Yes
                                                                   (multiple)
                 Reference       Scrivener,       Evans,           Bettinger and    Scrivener and Angrist, Lang   Bertrand,       Roder and        Alamuddin,
                                 Weiss,           Kearney,         Baker, 2014      Weiss, 2009   and             Hallberg,       Elliott, 2019    Rossman and
                                 Ratledge,        Perry, and                                      Oreopoulus      Hofmeister,                      Kurzweil, 2018
                                 Rudd,            Sullivan,                                       2009.           Morgan and
                                 Sommo, and       2019                                                            Shirey, 2019.
                                 Fresques,
                                 2015
    Outcomes     Persistence     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes             No               Yes

                 Completion      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             No            Forthcoming     Yes              Planned

                 Certificate     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             No            Forthcoming     Yes              No

                 Transfer        Yes              Yes              No               Yes             No            Forthcoming     Not mentioned.   No

                 Earnings        No               No               No               No              No            Planned         Yes              No




1
    Additional Opening Doors RCTs tested other types of programs, not the same program model.
                        ASAP            Stay the       Inside Track    Opening         Project         OMD              Project             MAAPs
                                        Course                         Doors-OH        STAR                             QUEST
          Primary       ITT: 18 pp      TOT: 31.5 pp   ITT:            ITT: No         TOT:            TOT: After       ITT: At 6 and 9     ITT: Initial
          Finding:      increase in     increase in    Coached         significant     Increase in     one year,        year follow-up,     finding (only GA
          Intent to     degree          associate's    students 3-4    increase in     GPA and         overall          participants had    state campus)
          Treat (ITT)   completion,     degree         pp more         credits         credits         persistence      significantly       students
          or            ~2x             completion     likely to       earned over     earned for      (fall to         higher              accumulated 1.2
          Treatment     graduation      for females-   persist after   3-year follow   first-year      spring)          earnings,           more credits and
          on the        rate of         3X higher      18 mos, 24      up period.      female          among those      worked more         3 pp higher credit
          Treated       control         than control   mos; 4 pp                       students (but   who took up      consistently        success rate and
          (TOT)         group.          group          more likely                     not males) in   the program      and were in         0.17 point higher
                                        females.       to graduate.                    the full SFSP   was 20.7         higher wage         cumulative GPA,
                                                                                       program.        percentage       jobs.               other 10
                                                                                                       points higher,                       campuses no
                                                                                                       a 35 percent                         effect on
                                                                                                       increase over                        persistence so
                                                                                                       the control                          far.
                                                                                                       group
Program   Implementer   Community       Social         Private         Community       College         Non profit       Non profit          4 year
Details                 college         service/non    organization    college                                                              universities
                                        profit

          Education     Community       Community      Private,        Community       Public 4-year   Community        Community           Universities
          Institution   college         College        public; 2 and   college         University      college          college;
          Setting                                      4 year                                                           technical/certifi
                                                                                                                        cate programs
          Program       $16,284         $5640 for 3    $500 per        Not available   $739 for one    $2,500-          $10,501             Not available
          cost per      ($42,065 for    years          semester                        year            $3,000 per
          student       three years)                                                                   year
          Duration      Most            Up to 3       1 year (first    2 semesters     1 year          Up to 3 years    22 months avg       3 years
                        students took   years. Most   year of
                        an ASAP         students      college)
                        seminar for 3   stayed in the
                        semesters.      program for 2
                                        years.
             ASAP            Stay the          Inside Track     Opening         Project          OMD               Project            MAAPs
                             Course                             Doors-OH        STAR                               QUEST
Eligible     Pell eligible   Pell eligible     Varies by        Below 250%      No income        Pell-eligible     Individuals        Enroll in one of
population   or below        or below          site. Some       FPL, Full-      restrictions;    or eligible for   pursuing           the institutions,
for          200% FPL,       200% FPL,         school           time or part-   full time        the Chicago       training for       complete
enrollment   Restricted to   enrolled in at    focused on       time, 12 or     only;            STAR              health-care        FAFSA, be Pell-
into the     all majors      least 9 credit    full-time        fewer           entering first   scholarship;      jobs;              eligible or 1st
study        except allied   hours, 30 or      students,        accumulated     year.            full-time         individuals        gen or both, not
             Health          fewer             others           credits at                       students;         wanting to         be NCAA athlete
             Sciences,       accumulated       selected part-   baseline.                        GPA of at         enroll full-time   or part of other
             Pre-Clinical    credits.          time students.                                    least 2.0,        in associates      special student
             Nursing,                          Some schools                                      pursing first     degree             group that gets
             Forensic                          assigned new                                      college           program;           advising services
             Science, and                      entrants;                                         degree, at        individuals        not compatible
             Engineering                       others                                            least one full    interested in,     with MAAPs
             Science, Full                     assigned                                          year              but not            advising.
             time only, 12                     upperclassme                                      remaining to      currently
             or fewer                          n. One school                                     graduate (can     attending
             credits                           decided to                                        be directly       college classes
             accumulated.                      offer services                                    from HS or        (remediation
                                               to athletes.                                      already           often needed
                                                                                                 enrolled in       first).
                                                                                                 college).
Case Management
Coaching,  Comprehensi       Intensive         Coaching by      Counselor       Peer             Comprehensi       Comprehensive      Wrap-around
Mentoring, ve coaching       case              phone to help    assists with    mentoring        ve supports       specialized        supports:
Referrals  from an           management:       student          personal and    from upper-      to address        case               intensive
           ASAP              coaching,         develop time     academic        class students   financial,        management         proactive
           dedicated         mentoring         management,      issues.         in the same      personal,         including          advisement to
           advisor;          and referrals     self-advocacy    Counselor       field of         academic and      recruitment,       navigate key
           includes          for all aspects   and study        refers          study; Peer      professional      assessment,        academic choices
           enrollment        of a student's    skills.          students to     Advisors         barriers.         enrollment.        and establish
           advising,         life including                     services on     were trained                                          individual
           Career            enrollment                         and off         to identify                                           academic maps;
           information       support;                           campus.         circumstance                                          early and real
           from an           emphasis on                                        s that called                                         time alerts when
           ASAP              in-person                                          for more                                              they go off path,
           dedicated         meeting.                                           professional                                          targeted advising
           career and                                                           help and to                                           interventions to
           employment                                                           make                                                  get them back on
           services staff                                                       appropriate                                           appropriate
           member.                                                              referrals.                                            academic path.
               ASAP             Stay the         Inside Track    Opening         Project         OMD              Project           MAAPs
                                Course                           Doors-OH        STAR                             QUEST
Student:       80:1 to 60:1     34:1             75-150:1        Lorrain 81:1;   Not reported    50-65:1          Not available.    150 (or fewer) :1
Counselor                                                        Owens 157:1
Ratio
Educational    Students         Navigator        Coach works     Counselor       Peer advisors   To address       Career advising   The role of
Planning/Ad    enroll in an     helps student    with the        helps with      e-mailed        personal         and enrollment    MAAP advisors
vising- to     ASAP             identify goals   student to      work-based,     advisees at     barriers,        support.          varies by
include        seminar          and steps        develop a       learning        least           scholars are                       institution.
enrollment,    covering         necessary to     clear vision    efforts,        biweekly to     required to                        MAAPS advisors
course         topics such as   achieve those    of his/her      juggling        solicit         meet                               can serve as the
selection      goal-setting,    goals.           goals and set   school and      questions       regularly                          student's primary
OR             study skills                      up steps        work, and       about           with a                             advisor on
academic       and academic                      necessary to    career          university      Program                            campus
advising       planning.                         achieve those   aspirations.    assimilation,   Coordinator                        delivering the
                                                 goals.                          scheduling,     to discuss                         standard advising
                                                                                 studying and    their                              plus MAAPS
                                                                                 time            academic                           advising or they
                                                                                 management.     plans and                          can have a
                                                                                                 progress as                        supplemental
                                                                                                 well as                            role. At some
                                                                                                 address any                        institutions,
                                                                                                 issues that                        MAPP advisors
                                                                                                 have arisen in                     coordinate with
                                                                                                 a scholar's                        the departmental
                                                                                                 personal life.                     advisors.
Professional   Career           Informal         No              No              No              Professional     Job placement     No
support        support                                                                           support.         help
Financial
Support
Non-tuition    Students         Students with    No              Students        No              $750-$1000       Help with         No
financial      receive free     GPA of 2.0                       eligible for                    stipend          books,
assistance     use of           or higher are                    $150 stipend                    annually as      transportation,
               textbooks        eligible for                     per semester                    performance-     certification
               and              $500 EFA                         for 2                           based awards     exam fees,
               MetroCards       per semester                     semesters,                      to address       review courses,
               for use on       for a total of                   usable for                      any financial    uniforms, and
               public           $1500.                           any purpose.                    need; $250 in    vaccinations.
               transportation                                                                    enrichment
                                                                                                 grants.
            ASAP            Stay the       Inside Track   Opening        Project         OMD             Project            MAAPs
                            Course                        Doors-OH       STAR                            QUEST
Tuition     3-11 percent    No             No             No             No              Last-dollar     Yes, first three   No
Waivers     of students                                                                  scholarships    years of the
            received                                                                     to address      study QUEST
            waiver in a                                                                  gap in aid      paid 100
            given                                                                        and tuition     percent of
            semester.                                                                    (rarely used    tuition for
                                                                                         since most      participants.
                                                                                         are Pell or     After this time,
                                                                                         STAR            QUEST
                                                                                         eligible).      covered 50
                                                                                                         percent of
                                                                                                         tuition for
                                                                                                         participants.

Grade       No              No             No             No             Substantial     Stipends tied   No                 No
Bonus-                                                                   cash awards,    to
incentive                                                                up to $5,000,   performance
                                                                         for meeting a
                                                                         target GPA
Academic
Tutoring    Students        Referrals to   No             Referrals to   No              Provided        The program        No
            receive         tutoring                      tutoring                       with tutors     includes
            ASAP                                                                         and/or          remedial
            dedicated                                                                    referred to     instruction in
            tutoring                                                                     existing        math and
            services                                                                     support         reading to help
            separate from                                                                within          individuals
            the usual                                                                    college they    pass college
            college                                                                      attend;         placement
            tutoring                                                                     required to     tests. The
            services.                                                                    use a tutor     program's
                                                                                         for any class   financial
                                                                                         earning less    assistance can
                                                                                         than a C.       go towards
                                                                                                         tutoring.
             ASAP          Stay the   Inside Track   Opening    Project   OMD   Project   MAAPs
                           Course                    Doors-OH   STAR            QUEST
Learning     Students      No         No             No         No        No    No        No
Communitie   enroll in
s/Block      blocked or
classes      linked
             courses in
             their first
             year.
Table 2: Replication among evidence-based comprehensive completion programs
                     ASAP                    Stay the Course            Inside Track              Opening Doors-      Project   OMD   Project Quest          MAAPs
                                                                                                  OH                  STAR


 Replication         Y                       Y                          Y                         Y                   N         N     Y                      Y

 Number of           7                       4                          8                         6 or 2                              5                      11
 replication sites
 RCT of              Y                       Y                          Tested at scale           Y                                   Y                      Y
 Replication

 Description         ASAP was                STC was originally         Inside Track began        MDRC tested                         Project QUEST has      The
                     originally              implemented for 400        serving students in       different                           been replicated at 5   comprehensive
                     implemented for         students at one site,      2000-2001 school          completion                          other sites, Of        advising program
                     1,132 students at       TCC, to 3,500 across       year and had served       strategies at 6                     those, 2 are being     originally
                     one site, CUNY, to      5 campuses of TCC.         250,000 students (as      different                           rigorously             developed by
                     25,000 students in      In addition, it is being   of 2011). The RCT         community                           evaluated.             Georgia State
                     2019. In addition,      replicated at 4            analysis focused on 2     colleges. Only                      Abt Associates'        University on
                     it is being             institutions (by 4         years of enrollment       two of them, OH                     RCT evaluation of      their own campus.
                     replicated at 7         different nonprofits       into Inside Track for     and LA tested the                   one site, Project      MAAPs is a
                     institutions across 5   under the guidance of      13,555 students           comprehensive                       VIDA in the Rio        replication of that
                     states. Replication     CCFW) in 4 states.         randomly assigned to      student supports                    Grande Valley,         program across 11
                     results via RCT are     Replication results        the program or            program)                            early results          public
                     available for Ohio      are not yet available.     control in 8 different                                        indicate that          Universities (4-
                     sites.                                             higher education                                              participants have a    year programs) in
                                                                        institutions. Results                                         significantly higher   11 states. Local
                                                                        at scale are available.                                       number of credits      adaptation was
                                                                                                                                      earned, had a          allowed to the
                                                                                                                                      higher rate of full-   advising model.
                                                                                                                                      time enrollment in     Replication
                                                                                                                                      college and had        results are
                                                                                                                                      higher credential      available for 2
                                                                                                                                      completion rates       semesters only at
                                                                                                                                                             this time.
 Evidence/Results    Y                       N                          Y                         Y                                   Y                      Y
