                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    INTANGIBLE VALUE

                                     Andrea L. Eisfeldt
                                        Edward Kim
                                    Dimitris Papanikolaou

                                      Working Paper 28056
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28056


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Bernard Herskovic, Tyler Muir, and participants in the UCLA Finance Bag Lunch for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Edward Kim, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intangible Value
Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Edward Kim, and Dimitris Papanikolaou
NBER Working Paper No. 28056
November 2020
JEL No. E22,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

Intangible assets are absent from traditional measures of value, despite their very large (and
growing) importance in firms' capital stocks. As a result, the fundamental anchor for value that
uses book assets is mismeasured. We propose a simple improvement to the classic value factor
(HMLFF) proposed by Fama and French (1992, 1993). Our intangible value factor, HMLINT,
prices assets as well as or better than the traditional value factor but yields substantially higher
returns. This outperformance holds over the entire sample, as well as in more recent decades in
which value has underperformed. We show that this is likely due to the intangible value factor
sorting more effectively on productivity, profitability, financial soundness, and on other valuation
ratios such as price to earnings or price to sales.


Andrea L. Eisfeldt                               Dimitris Papanikolaou
UCLA Anderson School of Management               Kellogg School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza                               Northwestern University
Suite C4.10                                      2211 Campus Drive, Office 4319
Los Angeles, CA 90095                            Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                         and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu                d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Edward Kim
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
edward.kim.phd@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

Value investing requires a fundamental anchor in order to determine which stocks
are priced "expensively" vs. "cheaply" relative to their fundamental value. Using
the book value of a firm's assets as an anchor was popularized by Fama and French
(1992, 1993), and the value effect subsequently became one of the most storied and
studied anomalies in finance (see Conrad et al. (2003)). However, the value factor
has underperformed for at least a decade.1 We argue that one driver of the poor
performance of value during this period is the deteriorating quality of book assets as
a fundamental anchor due to the increasing importance of intangible assets.
    Intangible assets have become an important and fast-growing part of firms' capital
stocks. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) estimated intangibles to be about one
third of the US non-residential capital stock in 2003, while, using more recent data,
Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b), Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim (2013), Belo,
Gala, Salomao, and Vitorino (2019), and Ewens, Peters, and Wang (2019) all estimate
the contribution of intangible capital to overall corporate capital stocks to be around
one half. In addition, these same studies report much higher investment rates for
intangible assets relative to physical assets. The majority of intangible assets are
created by investment in employee, brand, and knowledge capital that is expensed.
Thus, most intangible assets do not appear on corporate balance sheets, resulting in
a growing mis-measurement of book assets.
    We propose an intangible-augmented value factor ("intangible value", HMLINT )
and construct it using a very simple modification to the standard Fama and French
value factor (HMLFF ). Our construction of HMLINT precisely follows the Fama and
French methodology.2 The only difference is that we add intangible assets to the book
equity of each firm, which is widely used as the traditional value anchor.3
    In particular, following Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b), we measure firm-level
stocks of intangible assets by applying the perpetual inventory method to flows of
Selling, General, and Administrative (SG&A) expenses, given assumptions about
   1
     See, for example, Figure 7.6 in Ang (2014). We independently document the decline in value
below.
   2
     See     https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/f-f_
factors.html.
   3
     Note that this implies an inherent assumption that all intangibles are equity backed, which is
consistent with, for example, Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) and Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim
(2013).



                                                1
depreciation and initial values. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b) builds on two
seminal contributions in measuring intangible assets. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel
(2009) uses aggregated expenditure data and the perpetual inventory method to es-
timate the value of three main categories of intangibles: computerized information,
R&D, and economic competencies.4 Lev and Radhakrishnan (2005) document that
firms with larger SG&A expenses exhibit greater Solow (1957) residuals. Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2013b) extend this work by constructing and analyzing the first
firm-level stocks of intangible assets measured as accumulated SG&A expenses. That
paper shows that firms with higher stocks of intangible assets outperform firms with
lower intangibles, and provides additional evidence supporting the use of the selling
and general administrative expense as a measure of intangible investment.5 Measures
of intangible assets using accumulated SG&A are also supported by the subsequent
findings in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014), Zhang (2014), Falato, Kadyrzhanova,
and Sim (2013), and Peters and Taylor (2017).
    Our intangible value factor HMLINT has the following features: (1) It is highly
correlated with HMLFF (81%), (2) It prices standard test assets with lower pricing
errors than HMLFF , but, most importantly, (3) It substantially and significantly out-
performs HMLFF . The average returns to a portfolio that is long HMLINT and short
HMLFF are 2.4% annually, with a standard deviation of only 5.9%. Thus, HMLINT
has an information ratio of 0.40% with respect to HMLFF (equivalently, the long-short
portfolio's Sharpe ratio is 40%). This outperformance holds over the entire sample,
and is in fact more pronounced in the post-crisis era in which the returns to tradi-
tional value have been particularly disappointing. Thus, although HMLINT is highly
correlated with the original value factor, it has enough independent variation to per-
mit substantial outperformance. The R2 in a regression of HMLINT on HMLFF is only
65%, and the alpha of intangible value in a single traditional value factor model is
3.32%.
    We examine in detail the potential drivers of the ability of intangible value to
price standard test assets as well as the traditional value factor, and its substantial
   4
    See also the precursor to that paper, Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005), for further details.
   5
    In particular, firms with more intangible assets using their measure are more productive, smaller,
have higher Tobin's Q, higher levels of executive compensation, higher managerial quality scores
according to the measure of Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), spend more on information technology
(IT), and are more likely to list "loss of key personnel" as a risk factor in their 10-K filings. See
also Lev (2000) and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013a) for further evidence supporting SG&A as
intangible investment.


                                                  2
outperformance. We show that an intangible value factor that is first sorted within
industries performs just as well against the traditional value factor, even when tra-
ditional value is sorted across all industries. This is important, since accounting
practices for allocating costs to SG&A vs. Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) vary system-
atically across industries. Despite this, we find little difference in our results when
sorting first within industry, or sorting across industries unconditionally.
    We decompose the intangible value factor into traditional value and two factors
that better isolate the effects of intangible capital. The first is an isolated intangible
value factor, HMLIME , which sorts firms based only on our measure of the book value
of intangible capital relative to the market value of equity. The second decomposition,
HMLUINT , is constructed by going long only firms that are uniquely in the long leg of
HMLINT (specifically, not in the long leg of HMLFF ), and short firms that are uniquely
in the short leg. These more isolated measures of intangible value continue to price
standard test assets better than traditional value, and the HMLIME portfolio has
positive and significant alphas in the three and five factor models plus momentum.
    We also document important differences in firm characteristics between firms in
the long (and short) legs of intangible vs. traditional value. It appears that intangible
value is long firms with better fundamentals. The long leg of intangible value contains
firms with higher productivity, higher earnings and sales to price ratios (thus better
valuation metrics by non-book measures), higher profits to assets, and lower debt to
earnings.
    The implications for our findings are: First, asset pricing researchers should con-
sider correcting book equity for intangibles, since intangible assets are a large and
growing part of the corporate capital stock and there is a small gain in model fit from
replacing the traditional value factor with the intangible-augmented factor. Second,
asset managers should consider using the intangible value factor when implementing
a value tilt in a relative value strategy. HMLINT appears to capture the value effect,
but has higher average returns, and lower volatility. Finally, an active manager can
implement a relative value strategy by going long HMLINT and short HMLFF . As
noted, this strategy has a Sharpe ratio of 0.40. Importantly, this strategy has expe-
rienced good performance even in recent years, when traditional value has severely
underperformed.
    The most closely related paper to ours is Park (forthcoming), of which we were
made aware upon circulating this paper. Because the two papers developed indepen-


                                            3
dently, the methodologies are fairly dissimilar. Park (forthcoming) connects more to
the accounting literature, whereas our work ties in more closely to the asset pricing
literature in finance. Our paper also makes substantially new contributions relative
to that study, and in general the two studies are complementary. First, we show that
the success of the intangible value factor does not depend on an unconditional sort.
Because the accounting treatment for SG&A vs. Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) varies
across industries, it is critical to verify that the asset pricing results hold using within-
industry sorts. We also investigate the differences between traditional and intangible
value in more detail, by studying portfolios sorted only on intangible assets to market
equity values, and portfolios which consist only of the firms that are uniquely in the
long or short leg of intangible value (i.e. not in the same respective leg of traditional
value). We provide robustness checks including varying the fraction of SG&A that
is considered investment in intangibles, and we show that our results are robust to
either including or dropping particular industries such as finance or high-tech.
    We examine the contribution of the long and short legs of intangible value in con-
tributing to its outperformance, and provide examples of how the intangible value
portfolio avoids "value traps" and avoids shorting low book to market firms whose
book values don't reflect their total capital stock. We also examine the firm-level char-
acteristics of the long and short legs of intangible vs. traditional value, and document,
for example, the substantial differences in productivity. This paper also documents
the difference between the intangible value factor and the organization capital factor
in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b), since the organization capital factor also uti-
lizes the accumulated stock of SG&A expenses to measure intangible (organization)
capital. The key difference is that the portfolios in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b)
are formed using sorts on book organization capital to total book assets, rather than
sorts on book to market values of equity. As a result, the intangible value portfolio
bears little relation to the organization capital portfolio.
    Our study also more formally examines the outperformance of intangible value
relative to traditional value. We construct a strategy that is long intangible value and
short traditional value and document the performance statistics for that strategy. We
show that intangible value has a statistically significant alpha of 3.32% with respect
to a single-factor traditional value model. Despite the high correlation between the
two value strategies, this is not a near-arbitrage strategy as the alpha relative to the
root mean squared pricing error is a reasonable 0.62. We also examine subsamples to


                                             4
see when the outperformance arises. In terms of average returns, the outperformance
appears to be increasing over time, and is highest in the most recent sample, post-great
financial crisis. This is consistent with the importance of intangible assets continuing
to grow. And, this subsample is of substantial interest because it is also the prolonged
period during which the performance of traditional value has been particularly poor.
    In addition to these new contributions and refinements, our study is more com-
parable to that of the classic work of Fama and French (1992, 1993) because, unlike
Park (forthcoming), we follow the Fama and French methodology for constructing
book equity, and for constructing the long and short legs of both the traditional and
intangible value portfolios. Before adding intangible capital to book equity, we con-
firm that we can very successfully replicate the Fama and French traditional value
factor from their data library. This is crucial, because it is well-known that slight
changes in methodology can lead to large differences in replication errors and a vast
literature on the value effect in finance utilizes the Fama and French series.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the data sources and con-
struction. In Section 3 we document the high correlation between the traditional value
factor and the intangible value factor, and the superior performance of the intangible
value factor in pricing standard test portfolios. We conduct several important ro-
bustness exercises, including examining intangible value portfolios within industries,
and intangible value portfolios formed only using intangible assets or only using firms
that have a different portfolio assignment than that assigned by the traditional value
factor. Then, in Section 4 we examine the outperformance of the intangible value
factor, particularly in more recent subsamples. Section 5 examines the drivers of the
differences between intangible and traditional value, and Section 6 concludes.


2        Data

We use the Center for Research Security Prices (CRSP) - Compustat dataset from
Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) to construct HMLINT . We use HMLFF as
well as other factors and test asset returns posted by Ken French.6 First, we replicate
the posted series using the procedure described in Fama and French (1992, 1993). Our
replicated series has a correlation with the original series of 97.5%. This replicated
series is the starting point for HMLINT . To construct HMLINT , we add intangible
    6
        http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.


                                             5
assets to book equity, i.e.
                                        INT
                                       Bit  = Bit + Intit ,                                      (1)

where Bit is book equity, and Intit is intangible assets.7 Intit is computed using the
perpetual inventory method as:

                               Intit = (1 -  )Intit-1 + SG&Ait                                   (2)

We initialize Intit = SG&A1 /(g +  ) using the observation for selling and general
administrative expenses when the firm first appears in Compustat. We set g = 0.1,
which is the average growth rate for SG&A in our sample, and  = 0.2 as in Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2014). Our baseline results set  = 1, and we show in the Online
Appendix that our main results are unchanged if we follow the alternative convention
of separately setting  = 0.3 for SG&A minus R&D expenditures and  = 1 for R&D
expenditures. As some of the expenditure line items are not readily reported in earlier
years, we study the sample period beginning in January 1975 and ending in December
2018. Further details on data construction can be found in Appendix A.


3       Intangible vs. Traditional Value: Pricing Errors

This section examines the ability of the traditional and intangible value factors to price
standard test portfolios. We begin by plotting the monthly returns to the intangible
value (HMLINT ) and traditional value (HMLFF ) factor portfolios in Figure 1. As can
be seen in the figure, the correlation between these two return series is high, with
a full sample correlation coefficient estimate of 81%. We show that this correlation
is high enough for intangible value to capture the "value effect", but low enough to
allow intangible value to offer superior asset pricing test results and performance.
    Table 1 presents the baseline asset pricing test results. The first two columns
present the results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993) model plus momentum using
the traditional value factor (column one) and the intangible value factor (column two).
The test assets for these models are the standard size, book-to-market and momentum
portfolios. As can be seen in the table, the intangible value factor reduces the alpha
of this model by 14%, and reduces the root mean squared error by 9%. Panels A
    7
    Note that in order to focus on internally generated intangible capital, we subtract goodwill from
the Fama and French measure of book equity. For more details, see Appendix A.



                                                 6
and B of Figure 2 plot the results of these two models and report the mean absolute
pricing errors, which HMLINT reduces by 5%. The figure shows that the intangible
value model doesn't improve the asset pricing results by pricing any one portfolio
substantially better, but instead appears to improve the pricing of most of the test
portfolios.
    The last two columns of Table 1 display the results for the Fama and French
(2015) five-factor model plus momentum model, which adds the conservative minus
aggressive (CMA) investment factor, and the robust minus weak (RMW) profitabil-
ity factor. For this model, we also include the investment (CMA) and profitability
(RMW) portfolios as additional test assets. In the five factor model with momentum,
the traditional value factor becomes insignificant, while the intangible value factor
retains significance at over the 1% level. Root mean squared errors are also smaller
using HMLINT . Panels C and D of Figure 2 display the results visually, and report
the smaller mean absolute pricing error for the intangible value model. We conclude
that the intangible value factor does a better job of pricing standard test assets when
used in both the classic three factor model, and the recent five factor model.
    Figure 1 shows that there is a lot of commonality between the traditional and
intangible value portfolios. To further draw out the unique pricing ability of intangible
value, we construct two more distinct intangible value portfolios. The first, HMLIME ,
sorts firms only based on intangible assets relative to market equity values. Table 2
presents the results for the three and five factor models plus momentum when this
portfolio is used both in addition to the traditional value factor, and on its own.
For the three factor model plus momentum, the traditional value factor becomes
insignificant when HMLIME is included. However, there is a slight reduction in root
mean squared errors achieved by including both HMLFF and HMLIME . This is not
true, however, for the five factor model plus momentum. In that model, HMLFF
both becomes insignificant when HMLIME is included, and has no effect on root mean
squared errors when both are included.
    The second decomposition we provide uses a portfolio, HMLUINT , which is long
stocks that are uniquely in the long leg of HMLINT (that is, not in the long leg of
HMLFF ), and similarly goes short stocks which are in the short leg of HMLINT but
either neutral or long in HMLFF . On average, about 22% of firms are used to construct
HMLINT , with about 60% coming from the long leg of intangible value, and 40% from
the short leg. These fractions are all quite stable over time. Table 3 presents the


                                           7
results for the three and five factor models plus momentum when this portfolio is
used both in addition to the traditional value factor, and on its own. Since this
portfolio is even less correlated with HMLFF , both factors retain their significance
when they are included together. Interestingly, the pricing errors for HMLUINT on its
own are roughly the same (slightly lower) than the model with traditional value.
    The results thus far utilize unconditional sorts, across all industries, for both tra-
ditional and intangible value, as is standard in most of the literature, and consistent
with the Fama and French data library construction. However, as noted in Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2013b), because the allocation of various costs to SG&A vs. Cost
of Goods Sold (COGS) varies across industries, it is important to study the results for
HMLINT using sorts done first within industry using the method described in Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2013b). Table 4 presents the results. The main takeaway from
this table is that despite putting HMLINT on unequal footing relative to HMLFF by
requiring the book-to-market value sorts to occur at the industry level, the models
using within industry sorted HMLINT performs just as well as the models using tra-
ditional value. In the remainder of the main text, we use unconditional sorts for our
portfolios so that traditional and intangible value are treated symmetrically, and in
line with the vast majority of prior studies of cross sectional asset pricing models.
    Our main results are produced with all industries in order to be as consistent as
possible with the test assets and factor portfolios posted on the Fama and French data
library ­ the series most widely utilized by researchers.8 In the Online Appendix, we
present our main results without financials, utilities, and industries with SIC codes
above 9000 (including the analog of Table 1). We show that intangible value also
generates lower pricing errors using the smaller number of industries.
    This section established that the intangible value factor prices standard test as-
sets in the three and five factor models, plus momentum, with lower errors than
the traditional value factor. This is true despite the fact that the book-to-market
test asset portfolios are formed using the traditional book-to-market measure. It is
true even when the intangible value factor is sorted on total book (intangible plus
recorded) to market equity first within industries prior to value weighting each leg of
   8
     Several studies of the cross section of equity returns drop financials, utilities, and industries with
SIC codes above 9000. However, when following the Fama and French methodology to replicate their
factor portfolios, the replication is substantially better when all industries are included. Thus, we
believe that the posted factors and test assets cover all industries and did not find any documentation
suggesting otherwise.



                                                    8
the HMLINT portfolio. And, when decomposing value into its traditional and intan-
gible components using either HMLIME (which sorts firms into high and low book-to-
market terciles based only on intangible assets relative to market equity values) or
HMLUINT (which only includes stocks that are uniquely in either the long or short leg
of HMLINT ), we find that these more isolated intangible value portfolios alone pro-
duce smaller pricing errors than traditional value. We conclude that intangible value
appears to capture the value effect even better than traditional value, consistent with
the idea that including intangibles improves the quality of the book value anchor.


4    Intangible vs. Traditional Value: Performance

Figure 1 shows that the traditional and intangible value factors are highly correlated,
and we also reported superior pricing errors for the model with intangible value as
well as its several variants. In this section, we show that there is enough independent
variation to allow for substantial outperformance by the intangible value factor.
    Table 5 documents the outperformance of intangible value relative to traditional
value using single factor HML models. Panel A shows the results from a model
of HMLINT regressed on the HMLFF factor. We present results for the full sample,
and for subsamples covering the pre-internet era from 1975-1994, the internet era
pre-crisis from 1995-2006, and the post-crisis era from 2007 to 2018. The alpha
of HMLINT over HMLFF is highly significant and 3.32% in the full sample. This is
sizable, given the apparent close relationship between the two factors. However, it is
also reasonable, as the /RMSE is 0.62%. Interestingly, the alpha is fairly stable over
time, and is significant in all subsamples. In the Online Appendix, we present results
for the alternative methodologies of sorting within industries, dropping financials,
utilities, and firms with SIC codes greater than 9000, as well as using the  = 0.3
convention for the fraction of SG&A that is investment in intangibles. Sorting within
industries when forming intangible value, we find that intangible value outperforms
traditional value by about the same amount in the full sample. The pattern over time
is also interesting, as the intangible value portfolio formed by sorting within industries
first has stronger outperformance in recent subsamples. Dropping industries has a
different effect. While again intangible value outperforms traditional value by about
the same amount in the full sample, the outperformance first increases in the pre-
crisis internet era, but then drops significantly in the post crisis era. While we use


                                            9
unconditional sorts to put intangible and traditional value on equal footing in our
baseline analysis, these results underscore the importance of within industry sorts
when using accounting variables such as SG&A that are treated somewhat differently
across industries. Using 30% of SG&A to form the intangible capital stock, vs. 100%
marginally reduces the outperformance in all subsamples.
    Turning to Panel B, which shows the results for the converse model in which
HMLFF is regressed on the HMLINT factor, we see that the alpha is negative, and
significant at the 5% level for the full sample. Looking at the subsamples, however, the
fourth column shows that the most significant underperformance of HMLFF relative to
HMLINT comes in the recent period, from 2007-2018. The recent underperformance is
notable because the post-crisis era has been one of the worst periods for the traditional
value strategy, and this evidence suggests that the intangible strategy did significantly
better, by 3.26%.
    Table 6 examines the outperformance of the two decompositions of intangible
value, HMLIME and HMLUINT . As expected, the two portfolios that isolate the effect
of intangibles display more independent variation to traditional value, as indicated
by the lower R2 as compared to Table 5. The full sample alphas are larger for both
the portfolio that sorts firms only based on intangible assets relative to market equity
values, and the portfolio that only includes the firms that are uniquely in either leg
of intangible value. Indeed, the alpha for HMLIME is larger in each subsample as
well, however neither portfolio has a significant alpha over traditional value in the
most recent period, post financial crisis. Instead, as for the baseline intangible value
portfolio, the outperformance appears to be strongest in the pre-crisis internet era
from 1995 to 2006.
    In prior work, Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b) showed that firms with more
organization capital to physical capital earned positive excess returns even when con-
trolling for the Fama and French three factors plus momentum. They also use accu-
mulated SG&A to measure their stock of intangible, organization capital. However,
that factor is substantially different from intangible value, which should not be sur-
prising given that the organization capital factor compares two book values, while the
intangible value factor compares book value, including intangibles, to market value.
Table 7 clearly shows that the intangible value factor is quite different from the orga-
nization capital factor, and, in addition, that traditional value is also quite unrelated
to the organization capital factor. In the full sample, the R2 in a regression of intan-


                                           10
gible value on the organization capital factor from Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b)
is 0.5%. Likewise, for traditional value, the R2 in the analogous regression is 3.5%.
We conclude that the intangible value factor is very different from the organization
capital factor both in terms of conceptual purpose and return dynamics.
    Table 8 displays performance statistics for HMLFF , HMLINT , a portfolio which is
long HMLINT and short HMLFF , and a portfolio that is long the firms that are uniquely
in the long leg of intangible value as well as firms that are uniquely in the short leg
of traditional value, and short firms that are uniquely in the short leg of intangible
value as well as firms that are uniquely in the long leg of traditional value. We show
results for average returns, volatility, confidence intervals, Sharpe ratios, information
and appraisal ratios, using intangible value for the traditional value benchmark and
vice versa. The top panel shows that the traditional long-short value factor had a
statistically significantly positive return over the full sample, but the significance is
mainly driven by the earliest subsample, the pre-internet era from 1975-1994. In no
other subsample are the returns significantly positive at more than a 10% level, and
in fact, the average returns to HMLFF are (insignificantly) negative in the most re-
cent subsample, from 2007-2018. The information and appraisal ratios with respect
to intangible value are negative, as expected, and fairly large in magnitude (-0.40
and -0.30 for the information and appraisal ratios, respectively, over the full sample).
In contrast, the average returns to intangible value are larger in magnitude and sig-
nificance over the full sample, and the positive returns remain large and significant
through 2006. In the most recent sample, average returns are only insignificantly
positive. However, HMLINT still significantly outperforms HMLFF , and as we saw in
Table 5 this outperformance actually increases in recent years. Consistent with this,
the information and appraisal ratios are large (0.40 and 0.63 respectively for the full
sample).
    The second to last panel displays portfolio performance statistics for the long
intangible value, short traditional value strategy. This strategy has a 2.4% average
return over the full sample, which is significant at the 1% level, and it has a Sharpe
(1966) ratio of 0.40. Moreover, the performance of this strategy has been improving
over time, and most of the significance actually comes from the most recent sample
when traditional value underperformed. During the 2007-2018 sample, the Sharpe
ratio of the long-short strategy is 0.70. Differences between intangible and traditional
value can arise either from the intensive margin of different weighting of firms that


                                           11
appear in the same leg of both portfolios, or from the extensive margin of inclusion
or exclusion in a particular leg. The bottom panel examines the role of the extensive
margin in driving the outperformance of intangible value by forming a portfolio that
focuses on the unique contributors to each leg of the two value factors. While the
excess return of this portfolio is just short of significance at the 5% level in the full
and most recent samples, the magnitude of the outperformance is particularly large
in the recent sample.
    Figure 3 plots the cumulative returns for several long short strategies for the full
sample and for the subsamples starting in 1995 (post internet era) and 2007 (post
Great Financial Crisis). The top panel plots the cumulative returns to investing one
dollar in either HMLFF or HMLINT , and clearly shows the superior returns to HMLINT
in the full sample, and in each more recent subsample. The middle panel plots the
cumulative returns to the portfolio that is long HMLFF , and short HMLINT . Again,
the outperformance of HMLINT is apparent. In terms of the subsamples, it appears
the post-internet era was an important driver of the outperformance, but so was the
post-crisis era, in which social media firms thrived. This is consistent with the growth
in intangible capital documented in prior studies.
    The bottom panel shows the cumulative returns to the intangible and traditional
value strategies, along with the cumulative returns to the factors from the three and
five factor models for comparison. Over the full sample, the intangible value factor's
performance is of a very similar magnitude to the best performing factor, UMD, or
momentum, and is far superior to any other factor in the Fama and French (2015)
five factor model. In the sample since 1995, the intangible value factor displays the
highest performance of any of the long-short portfolios. In the most recent sample,
post crisis, intangible value outperformed all other factors with the exception of the
profitability factor, RMW, or robust minus weak.
    Table 4 decomposes the outperformance of intangible relative to traditional value
into the contributions of the superior long leg and the superior short leg by plotting
cumulative returns to the differences in each value portfolio's long and short legs,
respectively. Two interesting findings emerge from these plots, which we present
for the full sample as well as for the post internet subsample and the post-crisis
subsample. First, we note that going long the short leg of traditional value, and short
the long leg of traditional value appears to be a fairly low volatility, positive return
strategy. Second, and consistent with this, the outperformance of intangible value in


                                           12
recent years appears to be largely driven by the difference in performance of the short
legs. This evidence supports the idea that intangible value avoids shorting firms with
book anchors that understate total book capital by excluding intangibles.
    Table 9 displays the results for the alphas of the traditional and intangible value
factors in the three and five factor models, plus momentum. We include results for
the baseline intangible value factor, and for the two factors that isolate the effect of
intangible capital. In both models, the alpha for traditional value is negative, and
insignificant. In the three factor model plus momentum, the alpha for HMLINT is
2.79%, and statistically significant at the 1% level. The alpha for HMLIME , which
is the ratio of intangible assets to market equity is 3.91%, and significant at the 1%
level. The alpha for HMLUINT , which only contains stocks unique to the HMLINT long
or short leg, is positive but insignificant. We note that the loading of HMLFF on the
market factor is negative and significant, whereas HMLINT is market-neutral.
    In the five factor model plus momentum, the HMLIME alpha is 2.58% and re-
mains significant at the 1% level. All of the other alphas are insignificant. This may
not be surprising as Fama and French (2015) note that the original value factor be-
comes redundant when the investment and profitability factors are added, although,
as shown in Table 1, this is not true for HMLINT . Indeed, although the loadings of
both traditional and intangible value on the conservative less aggressive investment
factor (CMA) are both positive, the loading for traditional value on the robust mi-
nus weak profitability factor (RMW) is negative, meaning that traditional value is
correlated with the returns to firms with relatively weaker profitability. In contrast,
the intangible value factor, and the two factors that decompose intangible value, all
load positively on the profitability factor. This is consistent with the evidence we
present below that the long leg of the intangible value factor, unlike the traditional
value factor, tends to contain more productive firms, and vice versa for the short
leg. We conclude from Table 9 that the intangible value factor has a significantly
positive alpha in the three factor model plus momentum, and that the portfolio of
intangible capital to market equity, which isolates the effect of intangible value, has
a significantly positive alpha in the five factor model plus momentum.




                                          13
5    How do Intangible and Traditional Value Differ?

Intangible value generates similar, and slightly better, pricing errors, relative to tra-
ditional value, but outperforms significantly, leading to a large Sharpe ratio for a
strategy that is long intangible value, and short traditional value. In this section,
we investigate the properties of the firms that are in the long and short legs of in-
tangible, vs. traditional, value. Table 10 presents results on firm characteristics for
firms that are in the short, neutral, or long leg of intangible value and traditional
value, respectively. Here, we report the time-series average of the median firm char-
acteristic within each bucket. Not surprisingly, the first two rows show that there
are larger differences in total book to market equity for intangible value, and larger
differences in recorded book to market equity for traditional value, across the three
possible portfolio rankings. Intangible value tends to be long slightly smaller firms,
and short slightly larger firms than tangible value. This is consistent with their load-
ings on SMB in the three and five factor models, which are positive for intangible
value and negative for traditional value. Importantly, intangible value has a positive
and significant alpha of 2.79% controlling for size as well as value and momentum, as
shown in Table 9. Row four shows that the expected pattern for intangible capital
to book assets holds for the intangible value portfolio legs. On average, firms with
higher intangible assets to recorded book assets appear in the long leg, and firms with
a lower ratio of intangible to recorded book assets appear in the short leg. This ratio
displays the opposite pattern in the traditional value portfolio; the long leg has lower
intangible to recorded book assets than the short leg. Row five shows that a similar
pattern holds for intangible capital to sales, which is intuitive since intangible capital
is measured as accumulated Selling and General Administrative expenses.
    Rows six and seven in Table 10 document that productivity is increasing in
B/MINT , and decreasing in B/MFF . Thus, HMLINT is long higher productivity firms,
and short lower productivity firms, while HMLFF is long lower productivity firms and
short higher productivity firms. This is true using either sales to recorded book assets
or Solow (1955, 1957) residuals to measure productivity. Similarly, row eight shows
that HMLINT is long firms with higher sales to stockholder's equity, and short firms
with lower sales to stockholder's equity, while HMLFF displays the opposite pattern.
    In terms of alternative valuation measures, row nine shows that intangible value is
long firms with slightly lower price to diluted earnings excluding extraordinary items,


                                           14
relative to traditional value, and row ten shows that the intangible value portfolio has
a lower average price to sales ratio in the long leg, and a much higher average price
to sales ratio in the short leg, relative to traditional value. Thus, we conclude that
including intangible capital better aligns the B/M measure of value with measures
that use P/E or Price to Sales.
    Turning to capital structure related variables, rows eleven and twelve show that,
while intangible and traditional value have fairly similar patterns of debt to book
assets across their long and short legs, traditional value tends to be long firms with
much higher debt to EBITDA, indicating that firms in the long leg of traditional
value may be less financially sound. Row thirteen shows that the dividend yield is
fairly flat across terciles of B/MINT , but is higher for firms in the long leg of traditional
value, and lower in that portfolio's short leg.
    Finally, we report statistics related to the conservative minus aggressive (CMA)
and the robust minus weak (RMW) sorts used to construct the two new factors in
the five factor model plus momentum. Row fourteen shows that both intangible and
traditional value tend to be long firms with lower investment to physical capital (capex
to PP&E), consistent with the arguments in Hou et al. (2015). Row sixteen shows
that intangible value, unlike traditional value, tends to be long firms with higher gross
profit to total assets, and short firms with lower gross profit to book assets. Instead,
traditional value tends to be short more profitable firms, and long less profitable firms
by this measure. This is consistent with the evidence in Table 9 that intangible value,
unlike traditional value, loads positively on the RMW factor.
    In summary, the analysis of firm characteristics across B/M terciles for intangible
and traditional value seems to indicate why intangible value may outperform tradi-
tional value. "Value traps" are value firms with high book to market ratios whose
market values do not recover. Since the fundamentals (measured by productivity and
alternative valuation ratios) seem better for the long leg of intangible value (and worse
for the short leg), relative to traditional value, it may be that intangible value avoids
these value traps. For instance, Finish Line was sorted uniquely in the long leg of
traditional value for 30% of the period it was traded. While the stock appeared cheap,
it suffered from lagging performance behind competitors (including online retail) and
never recovered until its acquisition in 2018. Similarly, by including investment in
intangible assets as a way of growing future market values, intangible value may out-
perform traditional value by avoiding short positions in firms whose book values do


                                             15
not accurately anchor their fundamental value. Well-known companies such as Tar-
get, Nordstrom, and Estee Lauder have consistently been sorted in the short leg of
traditional value despite showing strong fundamentals and ability to adapt to trends
in their respective sectors. In most periods, intangible value in fact goes long on these
stocks, amplifying the difference in returns between the two value factors.
    It is also interesting to examine how persistent differences in positions between
HMLINT and HMLFF are. Table 11 addresses this question by reporting the empirical
transition matrices and their respective stationary distributions, for the probability
that a firm is uniquely in a particular leg of either the intangible or traditional value
portfolio. The first matrix shows transition probabilities for firms that are uniquely
in the long leg of intangible value, that is, these firms are in the top 30% of firms
ranked by B/MINT , but in the bottom 70% of firms ranked by recorded B/M. These
unique positions are fairly persistent; with a 61% probability a firm in the long leg of
intangible value that is either neutral or short in traditional value remains uniquely
in the long leg of intangible value in the following period. An implication of this is
that the differences between HMLINT and HMLFF are driven in part by persistently
different rankings of firms. The remaining three matrices show that the probability
of remaining uniquely in the short leg of HMLINT , or uniquely in the long or short
log of HMLFF , are all over 50%. Note that the actual persistence of positions that
would be used to infer turnover costs are much higher, since Table 11 considers only
the persistence of the positions that drive the return differences between intangible
and traditional value. The implied stationary distributions show that firms spend
between 7.6% and 15% of the time in positions that differ between intangible and
traditional value.


6   Conclusion

The traditional value investing strategy, which relies on using firms' book assets as
the fundamental anchor of value, has lost its edge in recent years. This trend may
be due to the increasing importance of intangible capital, which is not incorporated
into the traditional measure of book assets. We show that a value portfolio that adds
intangible capital to book assets prior to sorting provides much stronger performance
in all periods. The intangible value factor also prices standard test assets with similar
pricing errors as the traditional value factor.


                                           16
    Our results hold when sorting firms first within industries or using alternative
parameter assumptions for constructing intangible capital. We also find that long-
short strategies that better isolate the effects of intangible capital on value continue
to price standard test assets and yield positive and significant alphas. Lastly, we
document that, on average, intangible value is long firms with better fundamentals
(productivity, earnings, sales to price, etc.) relative to traditional value.
    Taken together, our findings show that asset pricing researchers should consider
adjusting the value factor and accompanying test assets to incorporate intangible
capital. Practitioners can also use the intangible value factor to implement a prof-
itable relative value strategy, especially in recent years when traditional value has
underperformed.




                                          17
Figures




                                                        Figure 1



                    15           HMLINT
                                 HMLFF
                    10
Returns (percent)




                     5


                     0


                     -5


                    -10

                            r = 0.8094
                    -15
                          1975     1980   1985   1990    1995    2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                            Date


 Note: This figure plots the monthly returns for HMLFF and HMLINT from 1975 to 2018. The
HMLFF portfolio mimics the risk factor in returns related to book-to-market equity, and is calculated
as the difference between the returns on high-B/M portfolios and the returns on low-B/M portfolios.
HMLINT adds intangible assets to the book equity term of the book-to-market equity ratio prior
to the HML portfolio sorts. Further details on factor construction can be found in Section 2 and
Appendix A.  reports the correlation between the two returns for the full sample period.




                                                          18
                                                                                            Figure 2


                                             A. FF3 + Momentum                                                                              B. Intangible FF3 + Momentum
                                        18    MAPE (%) = 0.981
                                                                                                                                       18    MAPE (%) = 0.928
 Actual expected returns (% per year)




                                                                                                Actual expected returns (% per year)
                                        16                                                                                             16
                                                                                    S1B5                                                                                          S1B5
                                        14                                   Mom10
                                                                                S3B5S1B4                                               14                                   Mom10S1B4
                                                                                                                                                                               S3B5
                                                                                 S2B4
                                                                                   S2B5                                                                                        S2B4
                                                                                                                                                                                 S2B5
                                        12                               S3B2
                                                                          S2B2
                                                                               S2B3
                                                                              S1B2
                                                                              S3B4
                                                                                S1B3                                                   12                                    S2B3
                                                                                                                                                                           S1B2
                                                                                                                                                                        S3B2S3B4
                                                                                                                                                                         S2B2S1B3
                                                                          S4B5
                                                                           S4B4                                                                                           S4B5
                                                                                                                                                                         S4B4
                                                                            S3B3                                                                                          S3B3
                                                                           Mom9                                                                                           Mom9
                                        10                       S4B1S4B2 Mom8
                                                                        S4B3                                                           10                       S4B1 S4B2
                                                                                                                                                                        Mom8
                                                                                                                                                                        S4B3
                                                                        S5B5                                                                                           S5B5
                                                                    S5B2                                                                                           S5B2
                                                                  S3B1
                                                                Mom4  S5B3
                                                                   S2B1Mom7
                                                                     Mom6                                                                                     Mom4  S5B3
                                                                                                                                                                  S2B1
                                                                                                                                                                 S3B1 Mom7
                                                                                                                                                                    Mom6
                                        8                    Mom3
                                                               S5B1
                                                                                                                                       8                    Mom3
                                                                                                                                                              S5B1
                                                                   Mom5                                                                                          Mom5
                                                                        S5B4                                                                                          S5B4
                                        6                Mom2                                                                          6                Mom2
                                                                        S1B1                                                                                          S1B1
                                        4                                                                                              4

                                        2                                                                                              2
                                                  Mom1                                                                                           Mom1
                                        0                                                                                              0
                                              0     2    4    6    8 10 12 14 16 18                                                          0     2    4    6    8 10 12 14 16 18
                                                   Predicted expected returns (% per year)                                                        Predicted expected returns (% per year)


                                             C. FF5 + Momentum                                                                              D. Intangible FF5 + Momentum
                                        18    MAPE (%) = 0.851
                                                                                                                                       18    MAPE (%) = 0.785
 Actual expected returns (% per year)




                                                                                                Actual expected returns (% per year)




                                        16                                                                                             16
                                                                                    S1B5                                                                                              S1B5
                                        14                                         S1B4
                                                                               Mom10
                                                                                   S3B5                                                14                                      Mom10S1B4
                                                                                                                                                                                    S3B5
                                                                                   S2B4
                                                                                     S2B5                                                                                          S2B4
                                                                                                                                                                                     S2B5
                                        12                                   S1B2 S2B3
                                                                                S3B4
                                                                              S3B2
                                                                                 S1B3
                                                                               S2B2                                                    12                                   S1B2  S2B3
                                                                                                                                                                                S3B4
                                                                                                                                                                              S3B2
                                                                                                                                                                                 S1B3
                                                                                                                                                                               S2B2
                                                                         INV2S4B5
                                                                           INV1
                                                                            S4B4                                                                                       INV2
                                                                                                                                                                         INV1S4B5
                                                                                                                                                                           S4B4
                                                                               S3B3                                                                                            S3B3
                                        10                                     Mom9
                                                                            S4B2
                                                                             Mom8
                                                                             S4B3                                                      10                                  S4B2Mom9
                                                                                                                                                                            Mom8
                                                                  S4B1 ROE9
                                                                     S5B5  INV3
                                                                        ROE10
                                                                                                                                                                S4B1ROE9INV3S4B3
                                                                                                                                                                      S5B5
                                                                                                                                                                      ROE10
                                                                      INV4
                                                                     ROE8
                                                                   ROE5 INV5
                                                                       S5B2
                                                                       INV7                                                                                           INV5
                                                                                                                                                                     INV4
                                                                                                                                                                    ROE8
                                                                                                                                                                    S5B2
                                                                                                                                                                 ROE5 INV7
                                                                INV9S3B1
                                                                 Mom4   S5B3
                                                                       S2B1
                                                                        INV6
                                                                      ROE4Mom7                                                                                   INV9
                                                                                                                                                               Mom4  S5B3
                                                                                                                                                                    S2B1
                                                                                                                                                                  S3B1INV6
                                                                                                                                                                    ROE4 Mom7
                                        8                           INV8
                                                                     ROE6
                                                                        Mom6                                                           8                           INV8
                                                                                                                                                                   ROE6
                                                                                                                                                                     Mom6
                                                             Mom3ROE3
                                                               S5B1ROE7                                                                                      Mom3
                                                                                                                                                                ROE3
                                                                                                                                                               S5B1
                                                                                                                                                                  ROE7
                                                                     Mom5                                                                                          Mom5
                                                                         S5B4                                                                                           S5B4
                                        6                Mom2 ROE2
                                                              INV10                                                                    6                Mom2 ROE2
                                                                                                                                                              INV10
                                                           ROE1       S1B1                                                                                 ROE1 S1B1
                                        4                                                                                              4

                                        2                                                                                              2
                                                  Mom1                                                                                           Mom1
                                        0                                                                                              0
                                              0     2    4    6    8 10 12 14 16 18                                                          0     2    4    6    8 10 12 14 16 18
                                                   Predicted expected returns (% per year)                                                        Predicted expected returns (% per year)



 Note: This figure presents the cross-sectional asset pricing results from the Fama and French (1992,
1993, 2015) three factor and five factor models augmented by the momentum factor. The top row
plots realized mean excess returns of 25 size and book-to-market-sorted portfolios and 10 momentum
portfolios against the mean excess returns predicted by the FF3 + momentum model, where Panel
B replaces HMLFF with HMLINT . The bottom row plots realized mean excess returns of 25 size
and book-to-market-sorted portfolios, 10 momentum portfolios, 10 portfolios sorted on operating
profitability, and 10 portfolios sorted on investment, against the mean excess returns predicted by
the FF5 + momentum model. The sample is monthly from 1975 to 2018. Returns are reported in
percent per year.



                                                                                              19
                                                                                                             Figure 3


                     15                                                                  4                                                                           1.4
                                  HMLINT                                                            HMLINT                                                                        HMLINT
                                  HMLFF                                                             HMLFF                                                                         HMLFF
                     12
                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
Cumulative returns




                                                                    Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                Cumulative returns
                                                                                         3
                      9
                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                      6                                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                      3

                                                                                         1
                      0                                                                                                                                              0.6
                           1975       1985   1995     2005   2015                            1995    1999    2003   2007   2011   2015   2019                              2007        2010   2013   2016   2019
                                               Date                                                                 Date                                                                      Date

                     3.0                                                                 2.2                                                                         1.6



                     2.5                                                                 1.9
Cumulative returns




                                                                    Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                Cumulative returns
                                                                                                                                                                     1.4

                     2.0                                                                 1.6


                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                     1.5                                                                 1.3



                     1.0                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                     1.0

                           1975       1985   1995     2005   2015                              1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019                                          2007        2010   2013   2016   2019
                                               Date                                                           Date                                                                            Date

                     25           HMLINT
                                                                                         4          HMLINT                                                                        HMLINT
                                  HMLFF                                                             HMLFF                                                                         HMLFF
                                                                                                                                                                     2.0
                                    SMB                                                               SMB                                                                           SMB
                     20            UMD                                                               UMD                                                                           UMD
                                                                                         3
Cumulative returns




                                                                    Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                Cumulative returns




                                   RMW                                                               RMW                                                                           RMW
                                    CMA                                                               CMA                                                                           CMA
                     15                                                                                                                                              1.5


                                                                                         2
                     10

                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                      5
                                                                                         1

                      0                                                                                                                                              0.5

                           1975       1985   1995     2005   2015                            1995    1999    2003   2007   2011   2015   2019                              2007       2010    2013   2016   2019
                                               Date                                                                 Date                                                                      Date




     Note: The top panel in this figure plots the cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the HMLFF
    and HMLINT portfolios from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. The middle panel plots the
    cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the portfolio that is long the HMLINT portfolio and short
    the HMLFF portfolio, starting from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. The bottom panel plots
    the cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the factors from the three and five factor models plus
    momentum, along with the the HMLFF and HMLINT portfolios from the beginning of 1975, 1995,
    and 2007. HMLINT adds intangible assets to the book equity term of the book-to-market equity ratio
    prior to the HML portfolio sorts. Further details on factor construction can be found in Section 2
    and Appendix A.




                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                              Figure 4


                               100                                                                             80                                                                        40
                                            HINT - HFF                                                                   HINT - HFF                                                                   HINT - HFF
                                            LINT - LFF                                                                   LINT - LFF                                                                   LINT - LFF
Cumulative returns (percent)




                                                                                Cumulative returns (percent)




                                                                                                                                                          Cumulative returns (percent)
                                75                                                                             60                                                                        30


                                50                                                                             40                                                                        20


                                25                                                                             20                                                                        10


                                 0                                                                              0                                                                         0


                               -25                                                                             -20                                                                       -10


                               -50                                                                             -40                                                                       -20
                                     1975     1985       1995     2005   2015                                        1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019                                        2007      2010      2013   2016   2019
                                                           Date                                                                     Date                                                                           Date




        Note: This figure plots the cumulative returns of a portfolio that is long the long leg of HMLINT
       and short the long leg of HMLFF (solid blue line), as well as the returns of a portfolio that is long the
       short leg of HMLINT and short the short leg of HMLFF (dashed black line). Each panel plots percent
       returns from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. HMLINT adds intangible assets to the book
       equity term of the book-to-market equity ratio prior to the HML portfolio sorts. Further details on
       factor construction can be found in Section 2 and Appendix A.




                                                                                                                                      21
Tables

                                        Table 1

             Pricing Errors: Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015) three
factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms of test
assets, columns (1) and (2) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-market
and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (3) and (4) additionally include 10
investment and 10 profitability portfolios. Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are
reported in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January 1975 to December 2018.
All coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly percentages multiplied
by twelve).


                                (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)

                    (%)       12.97      11.19      8.73     9.85
                              (4.04)     (3.47)    (2.92)   (3.30)
                   M ktRF      -0.36     -0.23     -0.05     -0.14
                              (-1.11)   (-0.70)   (-0.17)   (-0.46)
                   SM B        0.22       0.24      0.29     0.29
                              (1.68)     (1.79)    (2.28)   (2.23)
                   HM LFF      0.30                 0.25
                              (2.33)               (1.98)
                   HM LINT                0.37               0.43
                                         (2.74)             (3.13)
                   M OM        0.54       0.55      0.53     0.54
                              (2.78)     (2.81)    (2.74)   (2.78)
                   RM W                             0.31     0.31
                                                   (2.76)   (2.81)
                   CM A                             0.16     0.11
                                                   (1.75)   (1.20)

                   Adj. R2    73.66      77.56     78.21    80.38
                   RMSE        0.43       0.39     0.34     0.33




                                           22
                                         Table 2

              Pricing Errors: Intangible Assets to Market Equity
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015) three
factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms of test
assets, columns (1) through (3) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-
market and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (4) through (6) additionally
include 10 investment and 10 profitability portfolios. HMLIME is the HML factor that
replaces book-to-market with intangibles-to-market as the sorting variable. Fama and
MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample is monthly from
January 1975 to December 2018. All coefficients are reported in percentage per year
(monthly percentages multiplied by twelve).


                       (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)

           (%)       12.97      8.71       9.66     8.73     8.32     8.87
                     (4.04)    (2.66)     (2.94)   (2.92)   (2.76)   (2.95)
          M ktRF      -0.36     -0.02     -0.10     -0.05   -0.02     -0.06
                     (-1.11)   (-0.08)   (-0.31)   (-0.17) (-0.05)   (-0.20)
          SM B        0.22      0.23       0.23     0.29     0.28     0.28
                     (1.68)    (1.75)     (1.75)   (2.28)   (2.14)   (2.18)
          HM LFF      0.30      0.23                0.25     0.23
                     (2.33)    (1.78)              (1.98)   (1.77)
          HM LIME               1.00       0.54              0.86     0.63
                               (4.41)     (3.21)            (4.30)   (3.47)
          M OM        0.54      0.47       0.53     0.53     0.48     0.51
                     (2.78)    (2.40)     (2.70)   (2.74)   (2.45)   (2.61)
          RM W                                      0.31     0.29     0.30
                                                   (2.76)   (2.66)   (2.68)
          CM A                                      0.16     0.15     0.11
                                                   (1.75)   (1.67)   (1.14)

          Adj. R2    73.66     83.11      79.76    78.21    82.65    81.87
          RMSE       0.43       0.34      0.37     0.34      0.31     0.31




                                            23
                                         Table 3

                Pricing Errors: Intangible Value with Unique Sort
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015) three
factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms of test
assets, columns (1) through (3) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-
market and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (4) through (6) additionally
include 10 investment and 10 profitability portfolios. HMLUINT is a factor that goes
long firms that are in the long leg of HMLINT but not in the long leg of HMLFF ,
and vice versa for the short leg ("unique" intangible factor). Fama and MacBeth
(1973) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January
1975 to December 2018. All coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly
percentages multiplied by twelve).


                       (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

          (%)         12.97    13.54      19.24      8.73      9.52      8.96
                      (4.04)   (4.22)     (5.17)    (2.92)    (3.17)    (2.94)
         M ktRF       -0.36     -0.38      -0.82     -0.05     -0.10     -0.05
                     (-1.11)   (-1.18)    (-2.34)   (-0.17)   (-0.32)   (-0.17)
         SM B          0.22     0.21       0.18      0.29      0.28      0.28
                      (1.68)   (1.56)     (1.36)    (2.28)    (2.19)    (2.20)
         HM LFF        0.30     0.29                 0.25      0.26
                      (2.33)   (2.27)               (1.98)    (2.07)
         HM LUINT               1.17       1.58                1.16      1.18
                               (3.84)     (4.28)              (4.27)    (4.30)
         M OM          0.54     0.53       0.48      0.53      0.52      0.50
                      (2.78)   (2.71)     (2.42)    (2.74)    (2.66)    (2.58)
         RM W                                        0.31      0.35      0.34
                                                    (2.76)    (3.03)    (3.05)
         CM A                                        0.16      0.19      0.26
                                                    (1.75)    (2.08)    (2.56)

         Adj. R2      73.66    78.27      74.10     78.21     82.84     82.24
         RMSE         0.43      0.39       0.42     0.34       0.31     0.31



                                            24
                                        Table 4

               Pricing Errors: Within Industry Sorts for HMLINT
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015) three
factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms of test
assets, columns (1) and (2) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-market
and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (3) and (4) additionally include 10
investment and 10 profitability portfolios. Book-to-market value sorts for HM LINT are
done at the industry level using 12 industry portfolio definitions from Ken French's
website. Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The
sample is monthly from January 1975 to December 2018. All coefficients are reported
in percentage per year (monthly percentages multiplied by twelve).


                                (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)

                    (%)       12.97      13.45      8.73     8.43
                              (4.04)     (4.14)    (2.92)   (2.79)
                   M ktRF      -0.36     -0.40     -0.05     -0.03
                              (-1.11)   (-1.22)   (-0.17)   (-0.09)
                   SM B        0.22       0.22      0.29     0.29
                              (1.68)     (1.65)    (2.28)   (2.28)
                   HM LFF      0.30                 0.25
                              (2.33)               (1.98)
                   HM LINT                0.27               0.21
                                         (2.55)             (2.00)
                   M OM        0.54       0.54      0.53     0.53
                              (2.78)     (2.77)    (2.74)   (2.72)
                   RM W                             0.31     0.31
                                                   (2.76)   (2.80)
                   CM A                             0.16     0.18
                                                   (1.75)   (1.96)

                   Adj. R2    73.66      72.09     78.21    77.82
                   RMSE        0.43       0.44     0.34     0.35




                                           25
                                       Table 5

           Single Factor Models for Intangible and Traditional Value
In this table, we study the relative performance between the HMLFF and HMLINT
factors. Specifically, we report alphas and betas of a regression of each return on the
other, for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble and
the Great Recession. The data are monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018.
We include t-statistics that adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors
are annualized in percent per year.


                         Full sample      1975-1994        1995-2006     2007-2018
                              (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)

         A. HMLINT
               t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                t


            (%)              3.32            3.68               3.69       2.55
                            (4.13)          (2.54)             (2.83)     (2.23)
           HM LFF            0.73           0.66                0.81       0.73
                            (23.46)        (10.66)             (19.48)    (13.46)
           Adj. R2           65.46             46.93           81.47       74.70
           RMSE              5.31               6.31           4.54        3.93
           /RMSE             0.62              0.58             0.81       0.65

         B. HMLFF                  INT
               t =  + HM LINT · HMLt   +                   t

            (%)              -1.76           0.17               -2.54      -3.26
                            (-1.93)         (0.12)             (-1.63)    (-2.42)
           HM LINT           0.89           0.72                1.01       1.02
                            (27.77)        (14.66)             (23.08)    (13.83)
           Adj. R2           65.46             46.93           81.47       74.70
           RMSE               5.86              6.61           5.08         4.64
           /RMSE             -0.30              0.03           -0.50       -0.70




                                          26
                                       Table 6

         Single Factor Models for Decompositions of Intangible Value
In this table, we report alphas and betas of a regression of HMLIME and HMLUINT
on HMLFF , for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble
and the Great Recession. HMLIME is constructed using the intangible capital-to-
market value ratio as the sorting variable. HMLUINT is a portfolio that is long firms
that are sorted in the long leg when using BINT /M but not when using B/M, and
similarly, short firms that are uniquely in the short leg of HMLINT . The data are
monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018. We include t-statistics that adjust
for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors are annualized in percent per year.


                         Full sample     1975-1994    1995-2006         2007-2018
                             (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)

        A. HMLIME
              t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                   t +                t


           (%)               4.54            4.87              4.57       2.75
                            (4.46)          (3.09)            (2.40)     (1.51)
          HM LFF            0.50             0.59              0.50       0.35
                           (12.00)          (8.62)            (7.53)     (4.79)
          Adj. R2           35.16             37.13           42.68       20.22
          RMSE              6.80               6.98           6.86        6.28
          /RMSE             0.67              0.70             0.67       0.44

        B. HMLUINT
              t    =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                   t

           (%)               3.64            3.53              7.51       3.41
                            (2.04)          (1.39)            (2.13)     (1.03)
          HM LFF             0.05           -0.04              -0.16      0.54
                            (0.72)         (-0.30)            (-1.27)    (4.37)
          Adj. R2            0.03             -0.34            2.08       15.57
          RMSE              11.60             11.25           11.33       11.38
          /RMSE             0.31              0.31             0.66        0.30




                                         27
                                       Table 7

          Single Factor Models for Intangible and Traditional Value:
                           Organization Capital
In this table, we report alphas and betas of a regression of HMLFF and HMLINT factors
on the OMK factor (Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b)), for the full sample as well
as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble and the Great Recession. The data are
monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018. We include t-statistics that adjust
for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors are annualized in percent per year.


                         Full sample     1975-1994            1995-2006   2007-2018
                             (1)              (2)                (3)         (4)

        A. HMLINT
              t   =  + OM K · OMKt +                      t


           (%)               5.68            8.10               8.29        0.60
                            (4.16)          (4.18)             (2.92)      (0.27)
          OM K               0.08           -0.22               0.35        -0.06
                            (1.29)         (-2.24)             (3.74)      (-0.51)
          Adj. R2            0.51             3.47              14.76       -0.38
          RMSE               9.02             8.51              9.74        7.83
          /RMSE              0.63             0.95               0.85       0.08

        B. HMLFF
              t =  + OM K · OMKt +                    t

           (%)               3.04            5.25               5.64        -2.63
                            (2.05)          (2.57)             (1.80)      (-0.98)
          OM K               0.21            0.02               0.41        -0.02
                            (3.07)          (0.22)             (3.94)      (-0.11)
          Adj. R2            3.48             -0.39             17.45       -0.69
          RMSE               9.79             9.09              10.72        9.26
          /RMSE              0.31             0.58               0.53       -0.28




                                         28
                                                  Table 8

              Performance Statistics: Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value
This table summarizes the risk and return associated with HMLFF and HMLINT . The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics for the test that the average return, E[R], is different
from zero. All factors are annualized in percent per year. The underlying data are monthly
and the full sample period is 1975 to 2018. HMLLS refers to the portfolio that is long
HMLINT and short HMLFF . HMLULS refers to the portfolio that is long the firms that
are uniquely in the long leg of HMLINT as well as firms that are uniquely in the short
leg of HMLFF , and short firms that are uniquely in the short leg of HMLINT as well as
firms that are uniquely in the long leg of HMLFF . The information ratio is given by
E[Rp - Rb ]/ (Rp - Rb ), where Rp is the portfolio return and Rb is the benchmark return.
The appraisal ratio is /RMSE of a regression of portfolio returns on benchmark returns.
The benchmark portfolios for HMLFF and HMLINT are HMLINT and HMLFF , respectively.


                                Full sample            1975-1994          1995-2006          2007-2018
                                     (1)                    (2)               (3)               (4)

                E[R]                 3.47                 5.34                6.44              -2.62
                                    (2.31)               (2.63)             (1.89)             (-0.98)
                                     9.97                 9.07               11.80              9.23
         FF
   HML          [0.05, 0.95]   [-48.24, 63.84]       [-44.52, 63.12]    [-56.64, 73.56]    [-45.36, 49.92]
                Sharpe               0.35                 0.59                0.55              -0.28
                Information          -0.40                -0.26              -0.48              -0.70
                Appraisal            -0.30                0.03               -0.50              -0.70

                E[R]                 5.86                 7.18                8.89               0.64
                                    (4.30)               (3.71)             (2.92)              (0.28)
                                     9.04                 8.66               10.55               7.81
         INT
   HML          [0.05, 0.95]   [-40.94, 56.53]       [-38.02, 57.00]    [-48.00, 62.80]    [-36.46, 45.52]
                Sharpe               0.65                 0.83               0.84                0.08
                Information          0.40                 0.26               0.48                0.70
                Appraisal            0.62                 0.58               0.81                0.65

                E[R]                 2.39                 1.84               2.45                3.26
                                    (2.67)               (1.17)             (1.68)              (2.44)
   HMLLS                             5.93                 7.03               5.06                4.63
                [0.05, 0.95]   [-32.49, 33.79]       [-38.12, 37.07]    [-26.56, 29.39]    [-19.32, 25.35]
                Sharpe               0.40                 0.26               0.48                0.70

                E[R]                  5.15                 2.69               5.16               9.23
                                    (1.94)                (0.71)             (0.90)             (1.95)
   HMLULS                            17.57                16.90              19.74              16.40
                [0.05, 0.95]   [-92.89, 101.92]      [-94.43, 103.75]   [-98.52, 104.72]   [-88.34, 97.95]
                Sharpe               0.29                  0.16               0.26               0.56
                                            Table 9

                       Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value: Alphas
In this table, we report portfolio alphas and betas of a regression of different variants of HML
portfolio returns on traditional factor models. Columns (1) through (4) use the Fama and
French (1992, 1993) three factor model, and columns (5) through (8) use the Fama and French
(2015) five factor model. Both specifications are augmented with the momentum factor.
Columns (1) and (5) are benchmarks that set HMLIME as the dependent variable and replace
the intangibles-adjusted HML factor in the aforementioned models. We include t-statistics
that adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January 1975
to December 2018. All coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly percentages
multiplied by twelve).


             HMLFF     HMLINT     HMLIME    HMLUINT    HMLFF      HMLINT    HMLIME    HMLUINT
               (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)

   (%)        -0.36      2.79      3.91       1.90       -0.62     1.19      2.58       0.62
             (-0.36)    (3.27)    (3.79)     (1.13)     (-0.66)   (1.44)    (2.49)     (0.37)

  M ktRF      -0.09      0.03      0.00       0.05       -0.04     0.07      0.05       0.10
             (-3.76)    (1.41)    (0.18)     (1.35)     (-1.88)   (3.69)    (2.06)     (2.47)

  SM B        -0.12      0.14      0.22      0.55        -0.14     0.21      0.25       0.58
             (-4.66)    (4.21)    (6.71)    (10.59)     (-5.23)   (8.35)    (7.75)    (11.01)

  HM LINT     0.88                                        0.73
             (24.86)                                    (16.87)

  HM LFF                 0.75       0.52      0.09                 0.62      0.35       -0.08
                        (22.91)   (12.55)    (1.87)               (17.79)   (7.97)     (-1.09)

  M OM        -0.03      -0.03     -0.02      -0.07      -0.04     -0.06     -0.04      -0.10
             (-1.44)    (-1.31)   (-0.71)    (-1.52)    (-2.11)   (-2.97)   (-1.83)    (-2.07)

  RM W                                                   -0.09     0.27      0.16       0.14
                                                        (-2.32)   (7.30)    (3.56)     (1.73)

  CM A                                                   0.39      0.22      0.34       0.35
                                                        (6.65)    (4.45)    (5.31)     (3.42)

  Adj. R2     69.58     68.59      41.98     25.97      74.05      73.34     46.24     28.02
  RMSE         5.50      5.07       6.44     9.98       5.08        4.67      6.20      9.84



                                                30
                                                             Table 10

                                          Summary Statistics of Firm Characteristics
     This table summarizes the characteristics of firms sorted into the long ("High 30") and short ("Low 30") legs of the
     HMLFF and HMLINT factors. B/M is the traditional book-to-market ratio, and BINT /M denotes the intangible-adjusted
     book-to-market ratio used to construct HMLINT . We report the time-series average of the median firm characteristic
     within each percentile bucket. The sample period is January 1975 to December 2018.


                                                                                BINT /M                      B/M
                                                                       Low 30   Mid 40    High 30   Low 30   Mid 40   High 30
                                                                         (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)

      B/M Int                                                            0.55     1.46     3.93       0.72    1.60      3.26




31
      B/M FF                                                             0.30     0.67     1.12       0.27    0.68      1.33
      Market capitalization (log, real)                                  5.29     4.79     3.25      5.00     4.67      3.48
      Intangible capital to book assets (%)                              7.62    13.55     31.47     21.88    15.61    12.42
      Intangible capital to sales (%)                                   11.21    17.08     25.89     21.27    17.68    17.73
      Productivity - sales to book assets (%)                          70.95     82.91    115.62     97.40   93.47     76.25
      Productivity - Solow residual (%)                                 -0.17    1.80      3.06      5.30     3.10     -3.76
      Sales to Stockholder's equity (%)                                156.13   172.32    248.03    203.91   187.41   174.16
      Price to Earnings (Diluted, excluding extraordinary items) (%)   13.41    12.09      7.30     13.80    11.80      8.54
      Price to sales (%)                                                 2.23    1.18      0.54     1.8367    1.08      0.68
      Debt to book assets (%)                                           12.42    11.13     16.52     12.38     8.94    13.79
      Debt to EBITDA (%)                                               66.12    150.97    165.05     52.62   134.99   219.17
      Dividend yield                                                     2.21    2.95      2.89      1.91     2.92      3.39
      Investment to physical capital (%)                                15.34    11.11      9.00     15.17    11.13     8.18
      Gross profit to total assets (%)                                  24.23    24.24     33.36     37.99    27.86     17.4
                                      Table 11

                              Persistence of Positions
This table represents transition matrices P for being sorted uniquely into a particular
leg of the HMLINT and HMLFF portfolios. For instance, the state j = HighINT refers
to a given firm being sorted in the top 30th percentile in terms of BINT /M and in the
bottom 70th percentile in terms of B/M. In this case, the alternative state can be
either i) being sorted in the top 30th percentiles of both BINT /M and B/M, or ii) being
sorted in the bottom 70th percentile of BINT /M, regardless of the B/M sort. Below
each panel, we report the stationary distribution, w = j , 1 - j ), of each Markov
Chain, where j denotes the long run proportion of time that each chain spends in
state j . All numbers are expressed in percentages.


   j       HighINT              LowINT              HighFF               LowFF
         60.72 39.28         53.35 46.65          56.61 43.39         59.84 40.16
   P
          6.95 93.05         3.84 96.16           4.22 95.78           5.69 94.31
   w    (15.03, 84.97)       (7.61, 92.39)        (8.86, 91.14)      (12.42, 87.58)




                                             32
References
Andrew Ang. Asset management: A systematic approach to factor investing. Oxford
 University Press, 2014.
Frederico Belo, Vito Gala, Juliana Salomao, and Maria Ana Vitorino. Decomposing
  firm value. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen. Measuring and explaining management prac-
  tices across firms and countries. The quarterly journal of Economics, 122(4):1351­
  1408, 2007.
Jennifer Conrad, Michael Cooper, and Gautam Kaul. Value versus glamour. The
  Journal of Finance, 58(5):1969­1995, 2003.
Carol Corrado, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. Measuring capital and technology:
  an expanded framework. In Measuring capital in the new economy, pages 11­46.
  University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Carol Corrado, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. Intangible capital and us economic
  growth. Review of income and wealth, 55(3):661­685, 2009.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Dimitris Papanikolaou. Internet appendix to organization
 capital and the cross-section of expected returns. Technical report, 2013a.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Dimitris Papanikolaou. Organization capital and the cross-
 section of expected returns. The Journal of Finance, 68(4):1365 ­ 1406, Feburary
 2013b. doi: 10.1111/jofi.12034.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Dimitris Papanikolaou. The value and ownership of intangible
 capital. American Economic Review, 104(5):189­94, May 2014. URL http://
 ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v104y2014i5p189-94.html.
Michael Ewens, Ryan H Peters, and Sean Wang. Acquisition prices and the mea-
 surement of intangible capital. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, 2019.
Antonio Falato, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, and Jae Sim. Rising intangible capital, shrink-
 ing debt capacity, and the us corporate savings glut. Technical report, FEDS
 Working Paper No. 2013-67, September 2013. URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=
 2350863.
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. The cross-section of expected stock returns.
  Journal of Finance, 1992.
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on
  stocks and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 1993.

                                        33
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of
  financial economics, 116(1):1­22, 2015.

Kewei Hou, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang. Digesting anomalies: An investment approach.
  The Review of Financial Studies, 28(3):650­705, 2015.

Baruch Lev. Intangibles: Management, measurement, and reporting. Brookings
  institution press, 2000.

Baruch Lev and Suresh Radhakrishnan. The valuation of organization capital. In
  Measuring Capital in the New Economy, NBER Chapters, pages 73­110. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.,, July 2005. URL http://ideas.repec.org/
  h/nbr/nberch/10619.html.

Hyuna Park. An intangible-adjusted book-to-market ratio still predicts stock returns.
 Critical Finance Review, forthcoming.

Ryan H Peters and Lucian A Taylor. Intangible capital and the investment-q relation.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 123(2):251­272, 2017.

Adriano A Rampini and S Viswanathan. Collateral and capital structure. Journal of
 Financial Economics, 109(2):466­492, 2013.

William F. Sharpe. Mutual fund performance. Journal of Business, 39:119­138, 1966.

Robert M. Solow. The production function and the theory of capital. The Review of
  Economic Studies, pages 103­107, 1955.

Robert M. Solow. Technical change and the aggregate prodution function. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 39(3):312­320, 1957. URL http://www.jstor.org/
  stable/1926047.

Mindy Xiaolan Zhang. Who bears firm-level risk? Implications for cash flow volatility.
 Un, 2014.




                                         34
A       Appendix: Data Documentation
A.1     Measuring Intangible Capital

In order to calculate the intangible value factor, we first calculate the stock of intan-
gible assets at the firm-level using methodology introduced by prior works (Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou, 2013b,a, 2014; Zhang, 2014; Peters and Taylor, 2017).
    In the U.S., accounting rules for intangible capital are different depending on
whether an intangible asset is created internally or acquired through a purchase. In-
tangible assets created internally are expensed and typically do not appear explicitly
on the balance sheet. This means that the replacement cost of internally generated
intangible capital must be calculated based on past investments. We calculate intan-
gible capital by accumulating past spending on SG&A using the perpetual inventory
method using assumptions described in section 2.
    On the other hand, intangible assets acquired through a purchase -- for instance,
by acquiring another firm -- are capitalized on the balance sheet as "Goodwill".
However, goodwill suffers from known issues of impairment and also incorporates
acquisition costs for non-intangible capital, which could contaminate our measure.
Thus, for all our specifications, we subtract goodwill from the Fama and French
measure of book equity.
    In a robustness exercise, we further break down a firm's intangible capital (Int)
as the sum of two components -- knowledge capital or Intknow (e.g. R&D spending)
and organization capital or Intorg (e.g. human capital, brand capital, and customer
relationships). Following previous works, we use the R&D and SG&A line items as
proxies for Intknow and Intorg , respectively. Specifically, we estimate the following for
Intknow :

                          Intknow
                             i,t  = (1 - R&D )Intknow
                                                 i,t-1 + R&Di,t ,                            (3)

where Intknow
          i,t  is the stock of knowledge capital, R&D is an industry-specific depre-
ciation rate, and R&Di,t is the real expenditures on R&D, which is measured by
Compustat variable xrd. Data on industry-specific depreciation rates are obtained
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and range from 10% to 40%.9
    9
    We apply  = 0.15 for the majority of industries that are not assigned a specific depreciation
rate.



                                               35
   The book stock of organization capital, Intorg , can be similarly estimated by ap-
plying the law of motion

                         Intorg                 org
                            i,t = (1 - SG&A )Inti,t-1 + SG&Ai,t ,                           (4)

where SG&A is now the depreciation rate for SG&A expenses and SG&Ai,t is real
SG&A expenditure, calculated by subtracting xrd from xsga and deflating the result-
ing stock by the consumer price index. Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013b), Eisfeldt
and Papanikolaou (2013a), and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014) provide detailed
justification for this procedure. For our analysis, we follow the convention of  = 0.2
and  = 0.3. We verify that using different values of reasonable depreciation and
investment rates do not meaningfully change our results. Finally, our robustness
measure of total intangible capital is calculated as:

                                  Inti,t = Intknow
                                              i,t  + Intorg
                                                        i,t .                               (5)


A.2     Intangible Value Factor

The key empirical goal of estimating intangible capital is to construct a modified
book-to-market equity ratio (B/M ), which is in turn used to form the Fama and
French (1992, 1993) value factor. Book assets serve as a balance sheet benchmark for
each firm's intrinsic value, and the ratio between this anchor and the market equity
value measures the extent of over- or under-valuation. To improve the measurement
of value, we add intangible capital (Int) computed in Section A.1 to the book value of
each firm (Bit ). For this, we closely follow the data description and factor construction
methods outlined in Fama and French (1993).
    The Fama-French factors are constructed using six annually rebalanced and value-
weighted portfolios formed on size and book-to-market.10 The value factor, commonly
abbreviated as HML (High Minus Low), is the average return on the two value port-
folios minus the average return on the two growth portfolios

               1                            1
       HML =     (Small Value + Big Value) - (Small Growth + Big Growth),                   (6)
               2                            2
  10
    The six portfolios span the combination of two size (Small and Big with cutoff at median)
and three book-to-market (Value, Neutral, and Growth with book-to-market ratios in the top 30th
percentile, between the 30th and 70th percentiles, and the bottom 30th percentile, respectively)
portfolios.


                                              36
where stock returns are measured monthly and obtained from the Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRSP). Following this methodology, we construct HMLINT using
book-to-market values that are augmented with intangible capital.


A.3    Other Measures of Intangible Value

Our main measure of HMLINT follows the Fama and French convention of sorting by
the book-to-market ratio across all firms in a given period. We additionally construct
various alternative measures of intangible value in order to analyze the unique pricing
ability of HMLINT and ensure the robustness of our main results.
    In terms of distinct portfolios, HMLIME is a value factor that sorts firms into high
and low buckets based on Int/ME instead of (B + Int)/ME. Additionally, HMLUINT
sorts firms on (B + Int)/ME but only goes long firms that are uniquely in the long
leg of HMLINT (i.e. not sorted in the long leg of HMLFF ), and goes short firms that
are uniquely in the short leg of HMLINT (i.e. not sorted in the short leg of HMLFF ).
HMLULS refers to the portfolio that is long the firms that are uniquely in the long leg
of HMLINT as well as firms that are uniquely in the short leg of HMLFF , and short
firms that are uniquely in the short leg of HMLINT as well as firms that are uniquely
in the long leg of HMLFF . For the aforementioned factors, "long" and "short" leg
returns are value-weighted separately prior to taking their difference, resulting in a
zero-cost portfolio. Lastly, HMLLS is simply a factor that goes long HMLINT and short
HMLFF . Note that for HMLLS , there may be firms in both the long and short legs but
with different portfolio weights as those were calculated when forming the individual
factors. Put simply, we assume an investor can passively buy HMLINT and sell HMLFF
in exactly offsetting amounts.
    We also incorporate several alternative methodologies for constructing HMLINT in
order to ensure the robustness of our main results on pricing and outperformance.
First, we sort firms into long and short buckets within each industry group using
the 12 industry portfolio definitions from Ken French's website. This helps address
concerns that the sorts may be heavily tilted towards a particular industry. Similarly,
we have a version of HMLINT that drops financials (SIC codes 6000-6999), regulated
utilities (4900-4999), and firms categorized as public service, international affairs, or
non-operating establishments (9000+), which is in line with common practice in the
literature. We also include a version that only looks at high-tech firms, following
the augmented 5 industry designations adopted from Zhang (2014). Note that when

                                           37
conducting analysis on the industry filters, we reproduce the Fama and French test
assets using the filtered sample (25 sorted on size and book to market, 10 sorted on
momentum, 10 sorted on profitability, and 10 sorted on investment).




                                        38
B     Internet Appendix: Not for print publication

In this Internet Appendix, we report pricing and outperformance results using var-
ious robustness measures of HMLINT . Details on data construction can be found in
Appendix A.


B.1   Further Long and Short Leg Analysis

In this section, we study the relative performance of the long and short legs of HMLINT
and HMLFF . The top panel of Figure B1 shows that on net, the returns to going long
the long leg of intangible value, and short the long leg of traditional value has had
positive returns over the full sample, and each subsample. Similarly, the short leg of
HMLINT consistently underperforms the short leg of HMLFF , meaning that the short
side of the intangible value strategy is also more profitable (Figure B1, bottom panel).
These results together show that the outperformance of intangible value is coming
from both the long and short legs, and are not driven by a single leg. However,
the long leg's outperformance is more pronounced starting in the mid 1990s while
the short leg's outperformance is consistent throughout the full sample period. The
outperformance in recent years following the dip in 2017 is mostly driven by the short
leg, as discussed in the main text.




                                          39
                                                                                                                                    Figure B1


                                 103
                                                  HINT                                                                            HINT                                                            100.4           HINT
Cumulative returns (logscale)




                                                                                  Cumulative returns (logscale)




                                                                                                                                                                  Cumulative returns (logscale)
                                     2.5          HFF                                                                             HFF                                                                             HFF
                                10
                                                                                                                   101
                                                                                                                                                                                                  100.2
                                 102

                                101.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                  100.5
                                 101

                                                                                                                                                                                                  10-0.2
                                100.5

                                 100                                                                               100                                                                            10-0.4
                                           1975     1985   1995     2005   2015                                              1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019                                            2007      2010   2013   2016   2019
                                                             Date                                                                           Date                                                                            Date

                                                                                                                   101
                                 102              LINT                                                                            LINT                                                                            LINT
Cumulative returns (logscale)




                                                                                  Cumulative returns (logscale)




                                                                                                                                                                  Cumulative returns (logscale)
                                                   LFF                                                                             LFF                                                            100.4            LFF
                                                                                                                  100.8

                                101.5
                                                                                                                  100.6                                                                           100.2
                                      1
                                 10
                                                                                                                  100.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                100.5                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                  10

                                                                                                                                                                                                  10-0.2
                                 100                                                                               100
                                           1975     1985   1995     2005   2015                                              1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019                                            2007      2010   2013   2016   2019
                                                             Date                                                                           Date                                                                            Date




        Note: The top panel plots the cumulative returns of the long leg of HMLINT (solid blue line) and
       the long leg of HMLFF (dashed black line). In the bottom panel, we plot the cumulative returns
       of the short leg of HMLINT (solid blue line) and the short leg of HMLFF (dashed black line). Each
       panel plots on a dollar invested in each leg from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. HMLINT
       adds intangible assets to the book equity term of the book-to-market equity ratio prior to the HML
       portfolio sorts. Further details on factor construction can be found in Section 2 and Appendix A.




                                                                                                                                          40
B.2   Separately Accumulating Knowledge and Organization Capital

Our main measure for intangible capital uses the perpetual inventory method on
SG&A expenses because R&D expenditures, the key driver of knowledge capital, is
incorporated into SG&A. Previous works such as Peters and Taylor (2017), however,
separate out knowledge capital-related investment by first subtracting R&D from
SG&A, and then applying industry-specific depreciation rates for R&D. Below we
test whether constructing intangible capital this way alters our main results.
    Table B1 reproduces the baseline asset pricing test results in Table 1. We find
that replacing HMLINT with the version that treats intangible capital components
separately yields consistent pricing performance. In particular, for the three-factor
model with momentum, the intangible value factor reduces the alpha of the model
by 8%, and reduces the root mean square error by 5%. For the five-factor model
with momentum, HMLINT retains significance at over the 1% level and the root mean
square error falls by 3%. We conclude that our asset pricing tests are robust to
treating intangible capital components separately.
    Table B2 shows single factor models that test the outperformance of intangible
value relative to traditional value. Consistent with the main results in Table 5, the
alpha of HMLINT over HMLFF is highly significant at 2.96% for the full sample, and
the outperformance persists in each sub-period. Patterns regarding the evolution of
outperformance over time are also consistent with results shown in Table 5.
    Table B3 displays alphas of the traditional and intangible value factors in the
three and five factor models, plus momentum. Consistent with results from 9, only
the alpha for the three factor model with intangible value is positive and significant.




                                          41
                                        Table B1

             Pricing Errors: Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015)
three factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. When
calculating BINT , we accumulate 30% of non-R&D SG&A expenses and add knowledge
capital separately to book equity values (See Appendix A for details). In terms of test
assets, columns (1) and (2) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-market
and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (3) and (4) additionally include 10
investment and 10 profitability portfolios. Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are
reported in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January 1975 to December 2018.
All coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly percentages multiplied
by twelve).


                                (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)

                    (%)        12.97     11.92      8.73      9.52
                               (4.04)    (3.70)    (2.92)    (3.19)
                   M ktRF      -0.36      -0.28     -0.05     -0.12
                              (-1.11)    (-0.86)   (-0.17)   (-0.37)
                   SM B         0.22      0.23      0.29      0.29
                               (1.68)    (1.71)    (2.28)    (2.23)
                   HM LFF       0.30                0.25
                               (2.33)              (1.98)
                   HM LINT                0.36                0.37
                                         (2.88)              (2.87)
                   M OM         0.54      0.55      0.53      0.54
                               (2.78)    (2.82)    (2.74)    (2.78)
                   RM W                             0.31      0.31
                                                   (2.76)    (2.77)
                   CM A                             0.16      0.12
                                                   (1.75)    (1.33)

                   Adj. R2     73.66     77.97      78.21    79.59
                   RMSE         0.43      0.41      0.34     0.33




                                           42
                                       Table B2

           Single Factor Models for Intangible and Traditional Value
In this table, we study the relative performance between the HMLFF and HMLINT
factors. Specifically, we report alphas and betas of a regression of each return on the
other, for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble and
the Great Recession. When calculating BINT , we accumulate 30% of non-R&D SG&A
expenses and add knowledge capital separately to book equity values (See Appendix
A for details). The data are monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018. We
include t-statistics that adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors are
annualized in percent per year.


                         Full sample      1975-1994        1995-2006     2007-2018
                              (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)

         A. HMLINT
               t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                t


            (%)              2.96            2.02               4.26       2.75
                            (5.50)          (2.68)             (3.65)     (2.62)
           HM LFF            0.62           0.65                0.63       0.56
                            (30.02)        (23.59)             (19.45)    (10.84)
           Adj. R2           75.05             76.46           77.44       67.91
           RMSE              3.56               3.25           4.00        3.53
           /RMSE             0.83              0.62             1.07       0.78

         B. HMLFF                  INT
               t =  + HM LINT · HMLt   +                   t

            (%)              -2.73           -1.14              -3.82      -4.20
                            (-3.53)         (-1.08)            (-2.41)    (-2.76)
           HM LINT           1.21           1.18                1.24       1.22
                            (32.87)        (24.11)             (19.94)    (13.57)
           Adj. R2           75.07             76.46           77.44       67.91
           RMSE               4.98              4.40           5.60         5.23
           /RMSE             -0.55             -0.26           -0.68       -0.80




                                          43
                                       Table B3

                  Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value: Alphas
In this table, we report portfolio alphas and betas of a regression of different variants
of HML portfolio returns on traditional factor models. Columns (1) and (2) use
the Fama and French (1992, 1993) three factor model, and columns (3) and (4) use
the Fama and French (2015) five factor model. Both specifications are augmented
with the momentum factor. When calculating BINT , we accumulate 30% of non-R&D
SG&A expenses and add knowledge capital separately to book equity values (See
Appendix A for details). We include t-statistics that adjust for heteroskedasticity
in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January 1975 to December 2018. All
coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly percentages multiplied by
twelve).


                             HMLFF     HMLINT       HMLFF     HMLINT
                               (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)

                  (%)         -0.40      1.79        -0.52      0.79
                             (-0.49)    (2.47)      (-0.64)    (1.19)
                 M ktRF       -0.04      -0.00       -0.02      0.03
                             (-1.73)    (-0.15)     (-0.95)    (1.81)
                 SM B         -0.11      0.12        -0.11      0.14
                             (-5.76)    (6.67)      (-5.01)    (7.10)
                 HM LINT      0.96                   0.88
                             (36.44)                (24.38)
                 HM LFF                 0.82                    0.69
                                       (25.93)                 (17.78)
                 M OM         -0.06      0.02        -0.06      0.00
                             (-3.89)    (1.62)      (-4.15)    (0.22)
                 RM W                                -0.02      0.12
                                                    (-0.70)    (3.90)
                 CM A                                 0.17      0.25
                                                     (3.39)    (5.63)

                 Adj. R2      80.85     80.09        81.46      82.21
                 RMSE         4.36      4.04          4.29       3.82


                                           44
B.3   Fama and French 12 Industry Sorts

In this section, we test whether the main outperformance results are robust to sorting
firms within industries. Note that the results on pricing tests are reported in Table
4.
    Table B4 shows single factor models that test the outperformance of intangible
value relative to traditional value. Again, the alpha of HMLINT over HMLFF is positive
and highly significant for all periods, consistent with findings in Table 5.
    Table B5 displays alphas of the traditional and intangible value factors in the
three and five factor models, plus momentum. Here, the alphas for both the three
and five factor models with intangible value are positive and significant, while the
alphas for models with traditional value are negative and significant at the 1% level
in the case of the five factor model.
    Figure B2 plots the cumulative returns for intangible value strategies that sort
firms within industries. We see that compared to the baseline results from Figure 3,
the outperformance of intangible value is more consistent in the most recent decade,
especially after 2017.




                                         45
                                       Table B4

           Single Factor Models for Intangible and Traditional Value
In this table, we study the relative performance between the HMLFF and HMLINT
factors. Specifically, we report alphas and betas of a regression of each return on
the other, for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble
and the Great Recession. Book-to-market value sorts for HM LINT are done at the
industry level using 12 industry portfolio definitions from Ken French's website. The
data are monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018. We include t-statistics that
adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors are annualized in percent per
year.


                         Full sample      1975-1994        1995-2006     2007-2018
                              (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)

         A. HMLINT
               t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                t


            (%)              2.96            2.02               4.26       2.76
                            (5.50)          (2.68)             (3.65)     (2.62)
           HM LFF            0.62           0.65                0.63       0.56
                            (30.02)        (23.59)             (19.45)    (10.84)
           Adj. R2           75.05             76.46           77.44       67.91
           RMSE              3.56               3.25           4.00        3.53
           /RMSE             0.83              0.62             1.07       0.78

         B. HMLFF                  INT
               t =  + HM LINT · HMLt   +                   t

            (%)              -2.73           -1.14              -3.82      -4.20
                            (-3.53)         (-1.08)            (-2.41)    (-2.76)
           HM LINT           1.21           1.18                1.24       1.22
                            (32.87)        (24.11)             (19.94)    (13.57)
           Adj. R2           75.05             76.46           77.44       67.91
           RMSE               4.98              4.40           5.60         5.23
           /RMSE             -0.55             -0.26           -0.68       -0.80




                                          46
                                       Table B5

                  Intangible Value vs. Traditional Value: Alphas
In this table, we report portfolio alphas and betas of a regression of different variants
of HML portfolio returns on traditional factor models. Columns (1) and (2) use the
Fama and French (1992, 1993) three factor model, and columns (3) and (4) use the
Fama and French (2015) five factor model. Both specifications are augmented with the
momentum factor. Book-to-market value sorts for HM LINT are done at the industry
level using 12 industry portfolio definitions from Ken French's website. We include
t-statistics that adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. The sample is monthly
from January 1975 to December 2018. All coefficients are reported in percentage per
year (monthly percentages multiplied by twelve).


                             HMLFF     HMLINT       HMLFF     HMLINT
                               (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)

                  (%)         -1.73      2.85        -2.26      2.51
                             (-1.92)    (4.61)      (-2.58)    (3.83)
                 M ktRF       -0.03      -0.01        0.01      -0.00
                             (-1.52)    (-1.05)      (0.32)    (-0.01)
                 SM B         -0.06      0.05        -0.04      0.05
                             (-2.25)    (2.77)      (-1.56)    (2.85)
                 HM LINT      1.18                   0.98
                             (30.08)                (18.57)
                 HM LFF                 0.62                    0.56
                                       (25.69)                 (20.12)
                 M OM         -0.05      0.01        -0.07      0.00
                             (-1.91)    (0.41)      (-3.14)    (0.01)
                 RM W                                 0.07      0.02
                                                     (2.13)    (0.77)
                 CM A                                 0.32      0.13
                                                     (4.95)    (3.04)

                 Adj. R2      76.21     75.47        78.60      76.14
                 RMSE         4.86      3.53          4.61       3.48



                                           47
                                                                                                              Figure B2


                     12.5
                                                                                          4                                                                           1.50
                                  HMLINT                                                          HMLINT                                                                           HMLINT
                                  HMLFF                                                           HMLFF                                                                            HMLFF
                     10.0
                                                                                          3                                                                           1.25
Cumulative returns




                                                                     Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                 Cumulative returns
                      7.5

                                                                                          2                                                                           1.00
                      5.0


                                                                                          1                                                                           0.75
                      2.5


                      0.0                                                                 0                                                                           0.50
                            1975       1985   1995     2005   2015                            1995    1999    2003   2007   2011   2015   2019                               2007          2010   2013   2016   2019
                                                Date                                                                 Date                                                                         Date

                     2.5                                                                  2.2                                                                         1.6



                                                                                          1.9
Cumulative returns




                                                                     Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                 Cumulative returns
                     2.0                                                                                                                                              1.4

                                                                                          1.6

                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                      1.2
                                                                                          1.3


                     1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                      1.0

                           1975       1985    1995     2005   2015                              1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019                                          2007       2010       2013   2016   2019
                                                Date                                                           Date                                                                               Date

                     25           HMLINT                                                  4          HMLINT                                                                        HMLINT
                                  HMLFF                                                              HMLFF                                                                         HMLFF
                                                                                                                                                                      2.0
                                    SMB                                                                SMB                                                                           SMB
                     20            UMD                                                                UMD                                                                           UMD
Cumulative returns




                                                                     Cumulative returns




                                                                                                                                                 Cumulative returns




                                   RMW                                                    3           RMW                                                                           RMW
                                    CMA                                                                CMA                                                                           CMA
                     15                                                                                                                                               1.5

                                                                                          2
                     10
                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                      5
                                                                                          1

                      0                                                                                                                                               0.5
                           1975      1985     1995     2005   2015                            1995    1999    2003   2007   2011   2015   2019                              2007       2010       2013   2016   2019
                                                Date                                                                 Date                                                                         Date




    Note: The top panel in this figure plots the cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the HMLFF
   and HMLINT portfolios from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. The middle panel plots the
   cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the portfolio that is long the HMLINT portfolio and short
   the HMLFF portfolio, starting from the beginning of 1975, 1995, and 2007. The bottom panel plots
   the cumulative returns of one dollar invested in the factors from the three and five factor models plus
   momentum, along with the the HMLFF and HMLINT portfolios from the beginning of 1975, 1995,
   and 2007. HMLINT adds intangible assets to the book equity term of the book-to-market equity ratio
   prior to the HML portfolio sorts. Further details on factor construction can be found in Section 2
   and Appendix A.




                                                                                                                     48
B.4   Industry Filters

In this section, we report main results after implementing two distinct industry filters.
First, we drop financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999), regulated utilities (4900-4999),
and firms categorized as public service, international affairs, or non-operating estab-
lishments (9000+), as is common in the literature. Additionally, we report a version
of results that only keep high-tech firms, as defined in Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2014).
    Table B6 reproduces the baseline asset pricing test results dropping financials,
utilities, and public service firms from the sample. While in general the alphas are
higher and adjusted R2 is lower than reported in Table 1, we find that dropping these
industries do not materially change the pricing results. In particular, for the three-
factor model with momentum, the intangible value factor reduces both the alpha
and root mean square error. For the five-factor model with momentum, HMLINT is
significant and the root mean squared error falls. When only analyzing high-tech
firms (Table B7), the R2 falls quite significantly. While the patterns regarding alphas
and betas are consistent with those in Table 1, the root mean squared error increases
slightly for both models when including HMLINT . However, the difference is minor and
we can conclude that dropping highly regulated industries or focusing on a specific
high-tech industry yields similar or better asset pricing performance compared to
models with HMLFF .
    Tables B8 and B9 shows single factor models that test the outperformance of
intangible value relative to traditional value. Consistent with the main results in
Table 5, the alpha of HMLINT over HMLFF is highly significant at for the full sample
for both industry filter versions. However, the outperformance is no longer significant
in the most recent period (2007-2018). However, patterns regarding the evolution of
outperformance over time are consistent with results shown in Table 5.
    Tables B10 and B11 displays performance statistics for HMLFF , HMLINT , and a
portfolio that is long HMLINT and short HMLFF . Consistent with Table 8, we see
that intangible value outperforms traditional value in all periods in expectation, and
significantly so in the full sample as well as in earlier years.




                                           49
                                        Table B6

   Pricing Errors Excluding Utilities, Financials, and Public Service Firms
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015) three
factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms of test
assets, columns (1) and (2) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-to-market
and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (3) and (4) additionally include 10
investment and 10 profitability portfolios. When forming portfolios and test assets, we
drop financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999), regulated utilities (4900-4999), and firms
categorized as public service, international affairs, or non-operating establishments
(9000+). Fama and MacBeth (1973) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The
sample is monthly from January 1975 to December 2018. All coefficients are reported
in percentage per year (monthly percentages multiplied by twelve).


                                (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)

                    (%)        13.68     12.26     11.14     12.53
                               (4.06)    (3.56)    (3.33)    (3.85)
                   M ktRF      -0.40      -0.29     -0.20     -0.32
                              (-1.18)    (-0.84)   (-0.58)   (-0.95)
                   SM B         0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00
                               (1.21)    (1.28)    (1.42)    (1.41)
                   HM LFF       0.00                0.00
                               (2.32)              (2.10)
                   HM LINT                0.39                0.41
                                         (2.74)              (2.82)
                   M OM         0.47      0.47      0.48      0.48
                               (2.34)    (2.38)    (2.42)    (2.42)
                   RM W                             0.33      0.31
                                                   (2.58)    (2.45)
                   CM A                             0.07      0.05
                                                   (0.75)    (0.52)

                   Adj. R2     65.72     70.23      71.19    74.66
                   RMSE         0.46      0.43      0.37     0.35



                                           50
                                        Table B7

                       Pricing Errors for High Tech Firms
This table represents pricing results for the Fama and French (1992, 1993, 2015)
three factor and five factor models augmented with the momentum factor. In terms
of test assets, columns (1) and (2) use 25 portfolios double-sorted on size and book-
to-market and 10 portfolios sorted on momentum. Columns (3) and (4) additionally
include 10 investment and 10 profitability portfolios. When forming portfolios and
test assets, we limit the sample of firms to those in "high tech" industries using
the BEA Industry Economic Accounts (Zhang, 2014). Fama and MacBeth (1973)
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample is monthly from January 1975
to December 2018. All coefficients are reported in percentage per year (monthly
percentages multiplied by twelve).


                                (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)

                    (%)        15.57      14.48      9.41     8.93
                               (2.75)     (2.50)    (1.79)   (1.69)
                   M ktRF      -0.32       -0.23     0.16     0.20
                              (-0.74)     (-0.53)   (0.41)   (0.50)
                   SM B         0.21       0.22      0.22     0.22
                               (1.44)     (1.47)    (1.49)   (1.51)
                   HM LFF       0.28                 0.23
                               (1.78)               (1.47)
                   HM LINT                 0.33               0.29
                                          (1.98)             (1.74)
                   M OM         0.58       0.59      0.60     0.61
                               (1.57)     (2.63)    (2.70)   (2.75)
                   RM W                              0.18     0.17
                                                    (1.01)   (0.95)
                   CM A                              0.07     0.08
                                                    (0.47)   (0.59)

                   Adj. R2     37.93      38.01     33.07    32.56
                   RMSE         0.83       0.83     0.74      0.74



                                           51
                                        Table B8

            Single Factor Models Excluding Utilities, Financials, and
                             Public Service Firms
In this table, we study the relative performance between the HMLFF and HMLINT
factors. Specifically, we report alphas and betas of a regression of each return on the
other, for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble and the
Great Recession. When forming the HMLFF and HMLINT portfolios, we drop financial
firms (SIC codes 6000-6999), regulated utilities (4900-4999), and firms categorized as
public service, international affairs, or non-operating establishments (9000+). The
data are monthly and the sample period is 1975 to 2018. We include t-statistics that
adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All factors are annualized in percent per
year.


                          Full sample      1975-1994        1995-2006     2007-2018
                              (1)                (2)              (3)        (4)

         A. HMLINT
               t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                 t


            (%)               3.14            2.74               5.45       1.79
                             (3.85)          (2.19)             (3.53)     (1.16)
           HM LFF            0.77            0.77                0.75       0.81
                            (28.09)         (15.81)             (18.70)    (13.49)
           Adj. R2           68.57              61.85           75.41       67.50
           RMSE              5.40                5.41           5.47        5.32
           /RMSE             0.58               0.51             0.99       0.34

         B. HMLFF                  INT
               t =  + HM LINT · HMLt   +                    t

            (%)              -1.63            0.06               -3.98      -2.38
                            (-1.81)          (0.05)             (-2.05)    (-1.54)
           HM LINT           0.89            0.80                1.01       0.83
                            (27.97)         (19.71)             (17.81)    (17.87)
           Adj. R2           68.57              61.85           75.41       67.50
           RMSE               5.78               5.50           6.38         5.38
           /RMSE             -0.28               0.01           -0.62       -0.44




                                           52
                                       Table B9

                     Single Factor Models for High Tech Firms
In this table, we study the relative performance between the HMLFF and HMLINT
factors. Specifically, we report alphas and betas of a regression of each return on the
other, for the full sample as well as for sub-periods around the Internet Bubble and
the Great Recession. When forming the HMLFF and HMLINT portfolios, we limit the
sample of firms to those in "high tech" industries using the BEA Industry Economic
Accounts (Zhang, 2014). The data are monthly and the sample period is 1975 to
2018. We include t-statistics that adjust for heteroskedasticity in parentheses. All
factors are annualized in percent per year.


                         Full sample      1975-1994        1995-2006     2007-2018
                              (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)

         A. HMLINT
               t   =  + HM LFF · HMLFF
                                    t +                t


            (%)              3.63            2.49               7.47       1.19
                            (3.63)          (1.78)             (3.29)     (0.66)
           HM LFF            0.80           0.81                0.81       0.68
                            (26.39)        (18.69)             (15.58)    (11.78)
           Adj. R2           70.31             75.15           72.17       49.38
           RMSE              6.62               5.93           7.90        6.14
           /RMSE             0.55              0.42             0.95       0.19

         B. HMLFF                  INT
               t =  + HM LINT · HMLt   +                   t

            (%)              -1.81           -0.62              -4.49      -1.85
                            (-1.71)         (-0.42)            (-1.86)    (-1.00)
           HM LINT           0.88           0.93                0.89       0.73
                            (29.77)        (21.63)             (17.78)    (12.57)
           Adj. R2           70.31             75.15           72.17       49.38
           RMSE               6.98              6.38           8.26         6.39
           /RMSE             -0.26             -0.10           -0.54       -0.29




                                          53
                                            Table B10

              Performance Statistics Excluding Utilities, Financials, and
                                Public Service Firms
This table summarizes the risk and return associated with HMLFF and HMLINT . The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics for the test that the average return, E[R], is different
from zero. All factors are annualized in percent per year. When forming the HMLINT
and HMLFF portfolios, we drop financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999), regulated utilities
(4900-4999), and firms categorized as public service, international affairs, or non-operating
establishments (9000+). The underlying data are monthly and the full sample period is
1975 to 2018. HMLLS refers to the portfolio that is long HMLINT and short HMLFF . The
information ratio is given by E[Rp - Rb ]/ (Rp - Rb ), where Rp is the portfolio return and
Rb is the benchmark return. The appraisal ratio is /RMSE of a regression of portfolio
returns on benchmark returns. The benchmark portfolios for HMLFF and HMLINT are
HMLINT and HMLFF , respectively.


                              Full sample         1975-1994         1995-2006         2007-2018
                                  (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)

              E[R]                3.66               5.94              6.31             -2.76
                                 (2.36)             (2.98)            (1.70)           (-1.01)
                                 10.31               8.91             12.86              9.44
        FF
  HML         [0.05, 0.95]   [-49.77, 61.23]    [-40.11, 64.71]   [-51.91, 80.25]   [-56.44, 46.94]
              Sharpe              0.36               0.67              0.49             -0.29
              Information        -0.32              -0.26             -0.38             -0.35
              Appraisal          -0.20              -0.01             -0.34             -0.40

              E[R]                5.98               7.33             10.15             -0.46
                                 (4.11)             (3.74)            (3.19)           (-0.17)
                                  9.64               8.75             11.04              9.34
        INT
  HML         [0.05, 0.95]   [-42.12, 57.30]    [-37.64, 56.68]   [-41.49, 68.93]   [-48.54, 53.60]
              Sharpe              0.62               0.84              0.92             -0.05
              Information         0.27               0.23              0.39              0.23
              Appraisal           0.49               0.53              0.76              0.15

              E[R]                2.31               1.39              3.85              2.31
                                 (2.61)             (1.08)            (2.10)            (1.43)
  HMLLS                           5.88               5.76              6.36              5.59
              [0.05, 0.95]   [-30.32, 35.10]    [-31.60, 33.96]   [-31.45, 36.39]   [-28.71, 32.08]
              Sharpe              0.39               0.24              0.61              0.41
                                              Table B11

                       Performance Statistics for High Tech Firms
This table summarizes the risk and return associated with HMLFF and HMLINT . The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics for the test that the average return, E[R], is different
from zero. All factors are annualized in percent per year. When forming the HMLFF and
HMLINT portfolios, we limit the sample of firms to those in "high tech" industries using the
BEA Industry Economic Accounts (Zhang, 2014). The underlying data are monthly and
the full sample period is 1975 to 2018. HMLLS refers to the portfolio that is long HMLINT
and short HMLFF . The information ratio is given by E[Rp - Rb ]/ (Rp - Rb ), where Rp
is the portfolio return and Rb is the benchmark return. The appraisal ratio is /RMSE
of a regression of portfolio returns on benchmark returns. The benchmark portfolios for
HMLFF and HMLINT are HMLINT and HMLFF , respectively.


                             Full sample           1975-1994         1995-2006          2007-2018
                                 (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)

             E[R]                4.72                 6.88              7.77              -1.93
                                (2.44)               (2.41)            (1.72)            (-0.75)
                                12.81                12.79              15.66              8.99
       FF
 HML         [0.05, 0.95]   [-62.45, 70.69]      [-59.48, 75.43]   [-83.40, 93.24]    [-55.33, 51.82]
             Sharpe              0.37                 0.54              0.50              -0.22
             Information        -0.38                -0.18              -0.72             -0.27
             Appraisal          -0.26                -0.10              -0.54             -0.29

             E[R]                7.39                 8.05             13.79              -0.12
                                (4.03)               (3.03)            (3.19)            (-0.05)
                                12.14                11.90              14.98              8.62
       INT
 HML         [0.05, 0.95]   [-57.13, 79.49]      [-64.39, 77.47]   [-69.21, 108.96]   [-43.31, 47.01]
             Sharpe              0.61                 0.68              0.92              -0.01
             Information         0.30                 0.19              0.42               0.32
             Appraisal           0.49                 0.41              0.67               0.20

             E[R]                2.67                 1.17              6.02               1.81
                                (2.49)               (0.81)            (2.48)             (0.93)
 HMLLS                           7.11                 6.41              8.40               6.77
             [0.05, 0.95]   [-37.93, 39.95]      [-37.12, 32.04]   [-33.88, 53.66]    [-42.87, 38.22]
             Sharpe              0.38                 0.18              0.72               0.27
