                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PRICE CEILING, MARKET STRUCTURE, AND PAYOUT POLICIES

                                           Mao Ye
                                          Miles Zheng
                                          Xiongshi Li

                                      Working Paper 28054
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28054


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         November 2020
We thank Jim Angel, Heitor Almeida, Dion Bongaerts, Eric Budish, John Campbell,
Tarun Chordia, Gregory Eaton, Amy Edwards, Harry Feng, Slava Fos, John Friedman, Robin
Greenwood, Gustavo Grullon, Joel Hasbrouck, Jiekun Huang, Steven Ho, Mathias Kronlund,
Pete Kyle, Mark Leary, Yoon Kang Lee, Mark Loewenstein, George Pennacchi, Neal Pearson,
Joshua Pollet, Jeffrey Pontiff, Jim Poterba, Amir Rubin, Gideon Saar, Martin Schmalz,
Antoinette Schoar, Paul Schultz, Beibei Shen, Ji Shen, Andriy Shkilko, Elvira Sojli, Jeff Smith,
Chester Spatt, Adi Sunderam, Alexei Tchistyi, Anjan Thakor, Kumar Venkataraman, Scott
Weisbenner, Russell Wermers, Yufeng Wu, Yuhai Xuan, Liu Yang, Chen Yao, Bart Yueshen,
and participants at Arrowstreet Capital, Boston College, Case Western Reserve University,
Emory University, George Washington University, Harvard Business School, University of
British Columbia, University of Hong Kong, University of Illinois, University of Iowa,
University of Maryland, Cornell University Market Microstructure Ph.D. Seminar,
Microstructure Exchange, 2018 Guanghua International Symposium, 2019 CICF, 2019 NFA,
2019 EFA, 2019 WRDS Advanced Research Scholar Program, 3rd SAFE Market Microstructure
Meeting, 4th Sydney Market Microstructure Meeting, and 8th ITAM Finance Conference for
helpful suggestions. Ye acknowledges support from National Science Foundation grant 1838183
and the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mao Ye, Miles Zheng, and Xiongshi Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Ceiling, Market Structure, and Payout Policies
Mao Ye, Miles Zheng, and Xiongshi Li
NBER Working Paper No. 28054
November 2020
JEL No. G18,G35

                                           ABSTRACT

To prevent firms from manipulating prices, U.S. regulators set price ceilings for open-market
share repurchases. We find that market structure reforms in the 1990s and 2000s dramatically
increased share repurchases because they relaxed constraints that prevent firms from competing
with other traders under price ceilings. The 2016 Tick Size Pilot, a controlled experiment that
partially reversed previous reforms, significantly reduced share repurchases. Market structure
frictions provide a unified explanation for two puzzles: the dividend puzzle exists because
previous research has overlooked market structure frictions; share repurchases increase relative to
dividends over time because market structure reforms gradually reduce these frictions.


Mao Ye                                           Xiongshi Li
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign         198 Daxue Xi Road
343K Wohlers Hall                                Nanning, Guan
1206 South Sixth Street                          China
Champaign, IL 61820                              lixiongshi1@gmail.com
and NBER
maoye@illinois.edu

Miles Zheng
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
yzheng60@illinois.edu
Miller and Modigliani (1961) demonstrate that, in a frictionless market, it does not
matter whether firms pay out through dividends or share repurchases. The
irrelevance of the payout structure generates two fundamental puzzles that are
summarized in Figure 1. The first is the dividend puzzle: Black (1976) argued that
firms should not pay dividends at all because dividends are taxed more heavily (for
most investors) than capital gains, and capital gains are not taxed until the gains are
realized. The value of aggregated dividends was, however, about 20 times greater
than that of share repurchases in his period. The second puzzle is the secular
increase in share repurchases relative to dividends: Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and
Schmalz (2014) show that share repurchases increased 40-fold over dividends from
1970 through 2012, even though the tax rate disadvantage of dividends gradually
decreased and dropped to 0 after the 2003 dividend tax cut (Chetty and Saez 2005).
This dramatic and persistent increase has even led to policy proposals designed to
limit share repurchases. 1
                                Insert Figure 1 about Here
          In this paper we show that market structure frictions provide the first unified
explanation for these two puzzles. Share repurchases do not replace dividends
completely because firms encounter market structure frictions when they
repurchase shares in the open market; share repurchases become more prevalent
than dividends over time because market structure reforms gradually reduce these
frictions.
          Market structure frictions for share repurchases extend well beyond


1
    Limit Corporate Stock Buybacks, accessed on June 27, 2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/03/opinion/chuck-schumer-bernie-sanders.html.




                                                1
traditional channels such as bid­ask spreads. Prior to 1982, firms could barely
repurchase shares because regulators may regard share repurchases as price
manipulation. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 10b-18, which
was implemented in 1982, jumpstarted repurchases because it provides a safe
harbor for issuers against anti-manipulative provisions (Grullon and Michaely
2002). On the other hand, Rule 10b-18 imposes price ceilings on share repurchase:
firms should buy their shares at prices that do not exceed the highest independent
bids or last transaction prices. The purpose of price ceilings is to prevent firms from
inflating their share prices by outbidding other traders. Price competition, as a
consequence, becomes secondary to share repurchases, and market structure
emerges as the first-order effect, because competition under any price ceiling
depends on two market structure features: 1) Whose orders execute first at the same
price? 2) How many traders compete with issuers at the same price?
          Price ceilings under Rule 10b-18 also have two unique features. First, price
ceilings constrain issuers but not other traders. Second, price ceilings must be
satisfied at the time when repurchasing orders are executed. 2 Therefore, an issuer
needs to monitor the price ceiling dynamically after she enters an order to buy back
shares. When other traders increase their independent bids, an issuer's original
order loses price priority of execution because other traders outbid them. When
other traders decrease their independent bids, an issuer may run the risk of
outbidding the price ceiling set by other traders. As a consequence, execution of
share repurchases under Rule 10b-18 involves significant monitoring costs, and


2
    SEC Division of Trading and Markets: Answers to Frequently Asked Questions Concerning Rule
10b-18, accessed on June 27, 2020. https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/r10b18faq0504.htm.




                                               2
market structure is essential in determining the size of this monitoring cost.
          The price ceilings for share repurchases were surprisingly binding, which
provides one explanation of the dividend puzzle. Before 1994, the U.S. market,
particularly NASDAQ, was dominated by professional liquidity providers, such as
dealers. In dealer-market models (Ho and Stoll 1981; Glosten and Milgrom 1985),
it is impossible for firms to repurchase at the bid price because buy orders always
occur at the offer price; it is also impossible to buy at a price that is equal to or less
than the most recent transaction price because buy orders push prices up. Dealer
markets in reality certainly do not follow these models exactly, but these models
highlight the main conflicts between the dealer-market structure and share
repurchases: Rule 10b-18 asks issuers to provide liquidity when they repurchase
shares, but pure dealer models implicitly ban share repurchases because only
dealers can provide liquidity.
          One main purpose of market structure reforms in the U.S. over the past
several decades has been to provide "an opportunity to obtain execution without
dealer intervention." 3 Figure 1 depicts large surges in share repurchases after these
reforms, each of which removes one main friction discouraging issuers from
competing with other traders at the price ceiling. Before 1994, a NASDAQ dealer
enjoyed execution priority over her customers. The Manning Rule of 1994 forbade
a dealer from trading ahead of or through her customers, thereby increasing the
execution priority for issuers. The Order Handling Rules of 1997 further
strengthened customers' execution priority beyond the Manning Rule (Hasbrouck
2007). The Common Cents Pricing Act of 1997 reduced the minimum price


3
    Exchange Act Section 11A(a)(1), 15 U.S.C. 78k-1(a)(1).




                                                3
variation (the tick size) from $1/8 to $1/16 in the same year, and then to 1 cent in
2001. A more continuous price grid reduces the market depth at the best price
(Goldstein and Kavajecz 2000), thereby reducing the level of competition under the
price ceiling. In 2003, the NYSE installed auto quotes. Issuers began using
computer algorithms to monitor markets in real time. This change broke down the
physical boundary around the stock exchange and leveled the playing field for
issuers and market makers.
       To establish the causal impact of market structure on share repurchases, we
begin our analysis using a controlled experiment--the 2016 Tick Size Pilot--
followed by event studies that focus on market structure reforms in the 1990s and
2000s. The Tick Size Pilot offers two unique features. First, it was designed to
partially reverse the market structure reforms discussed above and its sample period
falls outside the period when the two puzzles came into play. Second, the Tick Size
Pilot included randomly selected test stocks and control stocks. The SEC increased
the tick size for 1,200 test stocks from 1 cent to 5 cents, whereas the tick size for
the 1,199 control stocks remained at 1 cent. We find that this two-year pilot reduced
repurchase payouts in test firms by 21% but did not affect dividend payouts. The
total payouts in test firms decreased by 14%, representing a payout reduction of
$33.6 billion.
       We find that the queuing channel contributes to the large reduction in share
repurchases. To test this channel, we partition firms into a tick-constrained group
and a tick-unconstrained group. The tick-constrained group includes firms whose
pre-Pilot quoted spreads were less than 5 cents. The Tick Size Pilot therefore
imposed a binding constraint on price competition and increased market depth by




                                          4
214%. Queuing, or early arrival to the market to beat rivals at the same price
(Kornai 1980; Shleifer and Vishny 1991, 1992; Yao and Ye 2018), became more
important after the pilot than it was before the pilot. As issuers tend to lose time
priority over high-frequency traders (HFTs), 4 we find that share repurchases in
tick-constrained test firms dropped by 45%. In comparison, market depth changed
only marginally for tick-unconstrained test firms, and we find that these firms did
not experience significant reductions in share repurchases. Furthermore, among the
tick-constrained test group, firms that experienced above-median increases in bid
depth reduced share repurchases 24% more than below-median firms did.
          The Tick Size Pilot imposed an additional trade-at rule on test group 3,
preventing the execution of dark orders that do not improve the National Best Bid
and Offer (NBBO) by more than 2.5 cents. The trade-at rule, which aimed to
encourage market transparency, unintentionally banned share repurchases through
dark pools because of the price ceiling imposed by Rule 10b-18, which regards
buying above the best-bid price an indicator of price manipulation. We find that
tick-constrained firms in test group 3 (groups 1 and 2) reduced share repurchases
by 55% (36%). The 19% difference indicates the importance of dark pools for
repurchases. Therefore, the recent proliferation of dark pools may contribute to the
secular increase in share repurchases over dividends. Firms can bypass queues in
stock exchanges by using dark pools, which usually do not follow the time priority
rule. The trade-at rule implicitly banned share repurchases in dark pools and led to



4
    Our conversation with HFTs reveals that, even if an issuer hires an HFT, the share repurchase
algorithm still cannot win time priority because a repurchase algorithm needs to check for
compliance with SEC Rule 10b-18, and this additional step increases latency.




                                                5
a large reduction in repurchases despite exerting modest or no effects on aggregate
trading activity (Rindi and Werner 2019).
       In 2018, the SEC terminated the Tick Size Pilot Program, and we find that
share repurchases for tick-constrained firms bounce back by 45% once the tick size
drops to the pre-Pilot level. After establishing that there is a causal relationship
between market structure and share repurchases, we conduct event studies on
historical market structure reforms. The reforms include major changes in market
structure identified in the literature (Hasbrouck 2007). Also, these reforms evoke
quasi-treatment groups and quasi-control groups because they affect some stocks
severely but barely affect others. We match control firms to treatment firms based
on pre-treatment firm characteristics to control for firm heterogeneity. We also
include other explanations of firm payouts as control variables in our regressions
to control for alternative channels.
       In the Tick Size Pilot study, we find that a large tick size harms issuers
because issuers may not win time priority over HFTs. The main economic intuition
that emerged from the controlled experiment, however, is not that HFTs harm share
repurchases, but that the priority rule at the same price plays a central role in share
repurchases. Decades ago, NASDAQ dealers enjoyed much higher priority than
HFTs do today. Prior to 1994, a NASDAQ dealer could trade ahead of or through
her customers' limit orders even if those customers submitted the orders earlier
(Hasbrouck 2007). Using matched non-NASDAQ stocks as the control group, we
find that share repurchases for NASDAQ firms increased by 69% after the 1994
Manning Rule granted execution priority to customers' limit orders. The 1997
Order Handling Rules, which extended issuers' execution priority over all dealers




                                           6
in the market, led to another 42% increase in share repurchases by NASDAQ firms.
          We find that share repurchases increased when the SEC reduced the tick
size following the 1997 Common Cents Pricing Act. We assign stocks exhibiting
above-median decreases in quoted spreads to the treatment group and matched
remaining stocks to the control group (Fang, Tian, and Tice 2014). Treatment firms
increased share repurchases by 68% following the tick size reduction from $1/8 to
$1/16 in 1997. The increase was 32% following decimalization in 2001. Notice that
the overall share repurchases decreased after decimalization, possibly because of
the economic recession after 2001. 5 The 32% difference suggests that treatment
firms reduce share repurchases to a lesser extent than matched control firms.
          Finally, we examine the impact of automated trading in share repurchases
using the installation of automated quotes by the NYSE in 2003 (Hendershott,
Jones, and Menkveld 2013) as a quasi-natural experiment, and we use matched non-
NYSE stocks as the control group. The transition from manual to automated
execution breaks down the physical barrier of the market and reduces monitoring
costs; issuers can now use computer algorithms to compete with exchange
specialists even when issuers are not physically on the exchange floor. In addition,
specialists lost their last-mover advantage because order executions no longer need
their approval (MacKenzie 2017). We find that the installation of automated quotes
is associated with a 24% increase in share repurchases by NYSE firms. Chetty and
Saez (2005) estimate that the 12% reduction in dividend tax rates in 2003 caused a
20% increase in dividend payouts. The 24% increase in share repurchases by NYSE
firms implies that the market structure effects are equivalent to a 14.4% change in


5
    See https://www.nber.org/cycles/november2001/.




                                               7
tax rates.
        Our paper contributes to the tax literature. Poterba and Summers (1985) and
Chetty and Saez (2010) assume that share repurchases incur exogenous costs to
explain why firms pay dividends despite the tax advantage of repurchases. Chetty
and Saez (2010) point out that "understanding the microeconomic foundations of
the cost of share repurchases is an issue of great importance for future work,
independent of its potential implications for taxation." We show that market
structure frictions provide a micro-foundation for such costs. Market structure
frictions also explain why dividends decrease relative to share repurchases even
though the tax disadvantage of dividends decreases over time. The most salient
puzzle appears in Chetty and Saez (2005, Figure IX; 2006, Figure 5), who find that
share repurchases increased more than dividends following the 2003 dividend tax
cut. The transitions from manual (high-touch) executions to automated (low-touch)
executions of share repurchase during the same sample period provide the first
explanation of this puzzle. Our results indicate that market structure frictions can
be large enough to overwhelm the tax advantages of share repurchases.
        We contribute to the corporate finance literature by providing the first
unified explanation for both the dividend puzzle and the secular increase in share
repurchases. Prior explanations of the dividend puzzle focus on the advantages of
dividends, such as their higher signaling costs (John and Williams 1985), more
credible forms of corporate governance (La Porta et al. 2000), self-control (Shefrin
and Statman 1984), and proportional payouts (Brennan and Thakor 1990). These
interpretations cannot, however, explain the secular increase in share repurchases
without assuming that such advantages continue to decrease over time.




                                         8
Explanations of the secular trend in share repurchases, on the other hand, rely on
their advantages, such as preserving the value of executive option compensation
(Fenn and Liang 2001), offsetting earnings-per-share (EPS) dilution led by option
exercise (Kahle 2002), improving agreements between investors and managers
(Huang and Thakor 2013), and serving as a more flexible payout mode
(Jagannathan, Stephens and Weisbach 2000). These interpretations grant additional
benefits to share repurchases other than tax and cannot explain the dividend puzzle.
          Explaining the secular increase in share repurchases faces two hurdles.
First, why does this economic driver continue to move in only one direction?
Second, why does this economic driver last for decades? These two hurdles rule
out traditional payout channels, such as the signaling, agency, and tax channels as
well as market timing and catering (Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and Schmalz 2014).
Market structure frictions, however, overcome these two hurdles. First, one major
goal of all market structure reforms is to provide executions without dealer
interventions. These reforms therefore benefit issuers at the expense of professional
market makers. Second, regulators did not and could not achieve this goal in one
step. Instead, market structure reforms continued over several decades and are still
taking place today. The two most recent policy initiatives were designed to increase
price ceilings for share repurchases, and we predict that such deregulation would
further boost share repurchases. 6


6
    The Investor Stock Exchange recently asked the SEC to allow firms to repurchase shares by
matching the midpoint price in dark pools (IEX 2018). The SEC (2010) proposed using the volume-
weighted average price (VWAP) as an alternative benchmark for complying with the pricing
condition of Rule 10b-18. Both the midpoint price and the VWAP would increase current price
ceilings for share repurchases.




                                              9
        Our results indicate that the impacts of market microstructure on corporate
policies go beyond traditional channels such as liquidity and price discovery.
Combined with other frictions such as price ceilings, market structure can impose
first-order frictions that are as severe as implicit bans. Our results also point to two
new dimensions of research on liquidity: "liquidity-for-whom" and "liquidity-
from-where." Regarding "liquidity-for-whom," our results indicate the need to
define liquidity differently for different types of traders. Although a market with
greater depth is generally considered a more liquid market (Goldstein and Kavajecz
2000), it may harm share repurchases because Rule 10b-18 encourages issuers to
provide liquidity while a market with greater depth crowds out issuers' limit orders.
Regarding "liquidity-from-where," our results indicate that the distribution of
liquidity across platforms matters. Dark pools are important for share repurchases
because passive matching dovetails with the reasoning behind Rule 10b-18.



                         I. The Controlled Experiment

                A. The U.S. Tick Size Pilot Program and the Data
In 2012, The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act ("JOBS Act") directed the SEC
to study whether reductions in U.S. stock tick sizes in the late 1990s and early 2000s
could be driving the decline in the number of initial public offerings (IPOs). In
2014, the SEC ordered the national securities exchanges (NSEs) and the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) to develop a pilot program. On May 6,
2015, the SEC issued an order approving the plan to implement the Tick Size Pilot
Program. The Program began on October 3, 2016 and ended on October 1, 2018.
        The Program included 2,399 stocks, comprising all Reg NMS stocks that




                                          10
satisfied the following criteria during a three-month measurement period before
Program implementation: a share price of at least $1.50 each day, a volume-
weighted average price of at least $2, average sales volume of fewer than one
million shares, market capitalization below $3 billion, and a closing price above $2
on the last day of the measurement period. 7 NSEs and FINRA then divided these
stocks into 27 categories based on three criteria: (1) a low, medium, or high share
price; (2) low, medium, or high market capitalization; and (3) low, medium, or high
volume. Stocks were then randomly drawn to form three test groups from each
category so that each test group contained 400 stocks. The remaining 1,199 stocks
were assigned to a control group.
          Stocks in the control group continued to be quoted and traded at the existing
1 cent tick size; stocks in test group 1 could be quoted only in $0.05 increments but
could still be traded at 1 cent increments; stocks in test group 2 could be quoted and
traded only at $0.05 increments. Stocks in test group 3 adhered to all the same
requirements as those in test group 2 but were also subject to a "trade-at" rule,
which granted execution priority to displayed orders unless non-displayed orders
could improve prices by at least 2.5 cents, with certain exceptions (SEC 2015).
          We obtained lists of test and control stocks from FINRA's website. We
obtained quarterly share repurchases, dividends, and firm-level financial
information from Compustat's North America Fundamentals Quarterly files. We
define our payout variables following existing conventions (Fama and French 2001;
Almeida et al. 2016): repurchase payouts equal total expenditures in common stock


7
    Reg NMS stocks are listed on stock exchanges such as the NYSE and NASDAQ and are reported
pursuant to the national market system plan for reporting transactions.




                                                 11
repurchases divided by lagged assets and dividend payouts equal common stock
dividends divided by lagged assets. Total payouts equal the sum of repurchase
payouts and dividend payouts. Payout structure equals (repurchase payouts +1) /
(dividend payouts +1). 8 Size is the natural log of book assets. Profitability is
income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by
lagged assets. Growth opportunity is the market value of assets divided by lagged
assets. We calculate spread, turnover, and depth measures using Daily TAQ data
following Holden and Jacobsen (2014): percent quoted spread is the time-weighted
difference between the NBBO divided by the midpoint. Total turnover is the
average daily total share volume divided by shares outstanding. Market depth is the
average of the displayed best-bid and best-offer depth at the NBBO price.
          Our sample selection process is as follows. We drop stocks with missing
information in the Compustat database and the Daily TAQ database. Following the
literature on Tick Size Pilot studies (Albuquerque, Song, and Yao 2019; Rindi and
Werner 2019), we retain only common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 or 11) that
remained throughout the Tick Size Pilot period. Following the payout literature, we
exclude regulated utility and financial firms (SIC codes 4200-4299 and 6000-6999)
because companies in these industries face additional regulations and hence might
exhibit divergent payout behavior (Fama and French 2001; Chetty and Saez 2005).
Our final sample contains 602 firms in the three test groups and 654 firms in the
control group.
          Our difference-in-differences (DID) specification is as follows:


8
    We add 1 to both the numerator and the denominator because the latter often equals zero (Fama
and French 2001).




                                                12
, =  +  +  ×  ×  +   × , + , ,                                                   (1)
where i indexes firm, t indexes time, and , is the dependent variable.  are
firm fixed effects and  are year-quarter fixed effects.  is a dummy
variable that equals one if the observation is in the post-treatment period and zero
if it is in the pre-treatment period.  is a dummy variable that equals
one if the firm is in the treatment group and zero if it is in the control group. We
specify the definitions of  ,  , and , in detail for each test.
, are the control variables. , is an error term. The main coefficient of
interest is  , which estimates the average treatment effects on . All variables are
winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the firm level.

        B. The Effects of the Tick Size Pilot Program on Payout Policies
In Table 1 we report the average effects of the Tick Size Pilot on the corporate
payout variables following equation (1), where  equals one if a stock
is in the three test groups and zero if the stock is in the control group, while 
equals one if the observation is in the post-treatment period (2016 Q4­2018 Q3)
and zero if it is in the pre-treatment period (2014 Q4­2016 Q3). Controls include
size, profitability, and growth opportunity, as in Fama and French (2001).
                            Insert Table 1 about Here
       The results reported in Table 1 indicate that, in the Tick Size Pilot Program,
treatment firms decreased repurchase payouts by 0.092%, which represents a 21%
decline compared with the pre-treatment average repurchase payout of 0.43%.
Corporate dividend payouts did not change significantly. Therefore, treatment
firms reduced their repurchase payouts but did not increase dividend payouts. The




                                          13
results are consistent with dividend-smoothing motives (Leary and Michaely 2011;
Michaely and Roberts 2012). As a result, total payouts decreased by 0.097%, which
represents a 14% decline compared with the pre-treatment average total payouts of
0.67%. Our back-of-the-envelope calculation demonstrates the economic
magnitude of the treatment effect: treatment firms reduced their total payouts by
$33.6 billion during the eight quarters of the Tick Size Pilot. In addition, the payout
structure of the treatment firms decreased by 0.083, a 6.64% decrease relative to
the pre-treatment mean of 1.25. Therefore, the Tick Size Pilot Program, an initiative
that was designed to reverse market structure reforms enacted in previous decades,
also reverses the secular increase in repurchases relative to dividends.

                             C. The Queuing Channel
Next, we examine the two underlying channels that cause the dramatic reduction in
share repurchases: the queuing channel and the dark pool channel. In this subsection,
we discuss the queuing channel. First, to account for heterogeneous treatment
intensity, we partition treatment firms into tick-constrained and tick-unconstrained
subsamples based on their average dollar-quoted spreads one quarter before the
Pilot (2016 Q3). Tick-constrained firms had pre-Pilot quoted spreads that were
lower than 5 cents, and we define the other firms as tick-unconstrained firms.
Because the firms are partitioned into two subsamples, we create matched control
samples for the treatment tick-constrained and tick-unconstrained subsamples
based on pre-treatment repurchase payouts, dividend payouts, and the three control
variables (size, profitability, and growth opportunity) to minimize the differences




                                          14
between the subsamples of treatment and control firms. 9
           In Panel A of Table 2, we report the summary statistics and the mean
differences between the treatment and matched control sample for the payout
variables in the pre-treatment period. The t-test results show that the mean
differences are not statistically significant.
           In columns (1)­(4) in Panel B we report the DID regression results for tick-
constrained firms, while in columns (5)­(8) we report the results for tick-
unconstrained firms. The results show that the treatment effects of the Tick Size
Pilot are concentrated in tick-constrained firms. Tick-constrained firms reduced
their repurchase payouts by 0.183%, which represents a 45% decline from the
average pre-treatment level of 0.41%. Consistent with the dividend-smoothing
hypothesis, these firms did not experience significant changes in dividend payouts.
Their total payouts declined by 0.187%, which represents a 31% decline compared
with the average pre-treatment total payouts. In addition, the payout structure
decreased by 0.146 from 1.253. In comparison, none of the payout variables was
changed significantly by the tick-unconstrained firms.
                                   Insert Table 2 about Here
           The comparison between tick-constrained and tick-unconstrained firms is
consistent with the proposition that market structure frictions drive the treatment
effects on repurchase payouts. The next question is to determine which market
structure frictions are the main economic drivers of the dramatic decrease in share
repurchases. Panel C in Table 2 presents the DID regression results for the three


9
    All of our matching variables are measured prior to the treatment to ensure that they are unaffected
by the treatment (Roberts and Whited 2013).




                                                   15
main candidates based on standard liquidity measures: percentage quoted spreads,
share turnover, and market depth. For tick-constrained firms, the Tick Size Pilot
caused a 41% increase in percentage quoted spreads (0.32/0.77), a 16% decrease in
total share turnover (0.14/0.92), and a 214% increase in market depth (12.90/6.01),
whereas the changes for tick-unconstrained firms are either much smaller or
statistically insignificant.
        We first rule out total share turnover as the main driver of the decrease in
share repurchases. The volume condition in Rule 10b-18 prohibits firms from
purchasing more than 25% of the preceding four-week average daily volume on
any trading day, but we find that the repurchase program represents only 6% of the
volume in our sample. In addition, Rule 10b-18 exempts firms from one block trade
each week, which further relaxes the 25% volume constraint. Therefore, the volume
constraint is not binding, making it hard for this friction to be the main driver of the
45% decrease in repurchase payouts.
        The 41% increase in the proportional bid­ask spread is equivalent to only
about a 2-cent increase in the nominal bid­ask spread. Our conversations with
issuers and their brokers also indicate that a two-cent increase in the quoted spread
is unlikely to be the main driver of the decrease in share repurchases. Firms inform
us that 2 cents do not represent a strong disincentive against repurchasing shares;
commissions to brokers could even be higher. Repurchasing brokers relate that a 2-
cent increase in the bid­ask spread has at most secondary effects because they do
not need to pay for the bid­ask spread. More surprisingly, because Rule 10b-18
encourages issuers to use limit orders in share repurchases, an increase in the bid­
ask spread can benefit issuers if they can successfully execute their limit orders




                                          16
because a wider spread means higher revenue for limit orders conditional on
execution.
          Surprisingly, an increase in depth is the most likely driver of the reduction
in share repurchases. We find empirical evidence, and our conversations with
brokers and stock exchanges also help to confirm this interpretation. Generally, a
market with greater depth is considered more liquid, particularly for large traders.
Jones and Lipson (2001) find, for example, that the reduction in the tick size in
1997 reduced transaction costs for small orders but increased these costs for large
orders as a result of the reduction in depth. An increase in depth, however, does not
help issuers because they are discouraged from demanding liquidity on the ask side.
An increase in depth on the bid side harms issuers because they face more intense
competition from other liquidity providers. As issuers cannot trade as quickly as
HFTs (SEC 2018), long queues are unfavorable for issuers because they may not
win time priority. 10 Our discussion with HFTs reveals that, even if issuers hire
HFTs for share repurchases, the repurchase algorithms cannot run as fast as other
HFTs because of the additional latency caused by checking compliance with Rule
10b-18.
          Next, we partition tick-constrained firms into two subgroups based on their
increase in bid-side depth to further investigate the queuing channel. In Panel D in



10
     Certainly, if the price does not move, an issuer may execute her order when orders with higher
time priority all execute. The queue, however, is dynamic because the price moves. If the price
moves up before the execution of an order to repurchase, the issuer needs to place the order in a new
queue with a higher price. If the price moves down before the execution of an order to repurchase,
the issuer needs to check whether the execution of her order at the original price may violate 10b-
18. In summary, although a longer queue cannot eliminate share repurchases, it constrains them.




                                                 17
Table 2 we report the DID regression results. We find firms that experienced a
larger increase in bid-side depth reduced share repurchases to an even greater
extent: firms with an above-median increase reduced share repurchases by 56%
(0.264/0.469) whereas firms with a below-median increase reduced share
repurchases by only 32% (0.115/0.357), and the difference is statistically
significant (p-value < 0.01). These results are consistent with the queuing channel.

                                D. The Dark Pool Channel
In this subsection, we test whether dark pools affect share repurchases. In dark
pools, issuers can jump ahead of queues because these systems do not enforce time
priority. For example, a dark pool can use broker priority (Degryse and Karagiannis
2018) and this priority can help issuers if their repurchase brokers own the dark
pool. A dark pool can also follow volume priority, and this priority can help issuers
if they buy back a large number of shares. 11 We hypothesize that dark pools help
issuers repurchase shares. As test group 3 in the Tick Size Pilot faced an additional
trade-at requirement that restricted dark-pool trading, we predict that the firms in
test group 3 experienced a greater reduction in share repurchases than firms in other
test groups.
           The results reported in Table 3 reveal the treatment effects of the Tick Size
Pilot on share repurchases for tick-constrained firms in test group 3 and tick-
constrained firms in test groups 1 and 2. The treatment effect for tick-constrained
firms in test group 3 is -0.26% (a 55% reduction compared with the pre-treatment
mean), whereas the treatment effect for tick-constrained firms in test groups 1 and


11
     For volume priority, see
https://www.bidstrading.com/wp content/uploads/bids_greenwich_questionnaire.pdf.




                                             18
2 is -0.14% (a 36% reduction compared with the pre-treatment mean). The
difference is both economically (19%) and statistically significant (p-value < 0.01).
The results also show insignificant effects on tick-unconstrained firms in both test
group 3 and test groups 1 and 2.
                                  Insert Table 3 about Here
          The greater reductions in share repurchases in test group 3 imply two
necessary conditions. First, firms use dark pools extensively to repurchase shares.
Second, the trade-at rule significantly reduced issuers' ability to repurchase shares
in dark pools. The question then arises: why does the 2.5 cent price improvement
requirement in dark pools lead to the additional 19% reduction in share
repurchases? The conflict between the trade-at rule and Rule 10b-18 provides the
answer. Rule 10b-18 discourages firms from buying shares at prices above
independent bids. Without the trade-at rule, dark pools could passively match
orders using independent bid prices, 12 and issuers could avoid competing with
HFTs for execution in stock exchanges. The trade-at rule requires dark pools to
match orders at a price that is 2.5 cents above the independent bid. 13 However,
Rule 10b-18 implies that buying shares at prices above independent bids indicates
price manipulation. Therefore, tick-constrained firms in test group 3 faced an
implicit ban on repurchasing in dark pools and double constraints on share
repurchases in both exchanges and dark pools. The results suggest that the conflicts


12
     Dark pools use both midpoint prices or non-midpoint prices within the NBBO as reference prices
(Menkveld, Yueshen, and Zhu 2017). Anecdotal evidence suggests that firms use dark pools to
repurchase shares (see, for example, https://wallstreetonparade.com/2015/06/a-closer-look-at-
goldman-sachs-stance-on-share-buybacks).
13
     SEC (2015) provides a few exemptions to this requirement.




                                                 19
between new and old regulations can generate unintended consequences for firms.

                                E. Additional Tests
In column (1) of Table 4, we report results that show the reversal effects following
the end of the Tick Size Pilot using the four quarters after the Pilot's end (2018 Q4
to 2019 Q3) as the post-Pilot-end period and the four quarters before the Pilot's end
(2017 Q4 to 2018 Q3) as the pre-Pilot-end period. Tick-constrained firms increased
their repurchases by 45% (0.122/0.271) in the post-Pilot-end period. We then
conduct placebo tests using the two-year period before the Pilot implementation as
a placebo shock. In column (2) we present the results. We find no significant
changes in repurchases.
                            Insert Table 4 about Here
       One limitation of our controlled experiment is that it involves only small
and medium-sized stocks. To mitigate the concern that the results apply only to
small stocks, we follow Yagan (2015) and split the sample equally based on pre-
treatment firm size proxied by total assets. We report the results in columns (3) and
(4) of Table 4. For small (large) firms, we find a 46.3% (44.9%) reduction in
repurchases compared with the pre-treatment mean (0.155/0.335 vs. 0.220/0.490).
Both reductions are statistically significant. The results suggest that market
structure frictions do not concentrate in small firms and the economic mechanism
revealed by the controlled experiment is likely applicable to a broader sample.
       In column (5) of Table 4 we present the results for the Repurchase dummy,
which equals one if a firm repurchases shares during the quarter and zero otherwise.
We find no significant changes in the fraction of repurchasing firms. Our results
therefore come mainly from the intensive margin, i.e. reductions in share




                                         20
repurchases by repurchasing firms. The results are similar when we analyze
treatment groups 1 and 2 or treatment group 3 separately.
         Finally, we examine the effects of the Tick Size Pilot on self-tender offers.
We obtain self-tender offer data from the Securities Data Company (SDC). Tender
offer equals the value of self-tender offers divided by the lagged assets (in
percentages). The results reported in column (6) of Table 4 show that the Tick Size
Pilot has no significant effects on corporate self-tender offers. Two factors
contribute to this result. First, the Tick Size Pilot led to changes in the structure of
the secondary market, which has no direct effect on firm incentives to make self-
tender offers. Second, open-market share repurchases have been growing in
popularity, and self-tender offers are rarely used by firms (Grullon and Ikenberry
2000).




         II. Historical Market Structure Reforms and Payout Policies

In this section we examine whether the effects of market structure frictions on the
share repurchases we identify in the controlled experiment extend to a broader
sample. We conduct three market structure event studies centered on the market-
structure reforms in the 1990s and 2000s. In Subsection II.A, we discuss our
investigation of the effects of the 1994 Manning Rule and the 1997 Order Handling
Rules. In Subsection II.B, we examine the effects of the reductions in tick size
following the 1997 Common Cents Pricing Act. In Subsection II.C, we discuss the
effects of the NYSE's jumpstart of algorithmic trading in 2003.
         The reforms represented in our sample include major changes in market




                                          21
structure identified in the literature (Hasbrouck 2007). Also, these reforms evoke
quasi-treatment and quasi-control groups because they affect some stocks intensely
but barely affect others. Comparing the quasi-treatment and quasi-control groups
helps us to control for confounding events on share repurchases that are unrelated
to market-structure frictions. To control for firm heterogeneity, we match the
treatment firms with the control firms based on repurchase payouts, dividend
payouts, size, profitability, and growth opportunities. Table A.1 in the Appendix
presents the pre-treatment summary statistics and mean differences for our event
studies. The results suggest that treatment firms and their matched controls are
similar before the events. To control for alternative channels, we control for size,
profitability, and growth opportunities (Fama and French 2001) as well as
managerial stock holdings (Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner 2007), managerial
options holdings (Fenn and Liang 2001), and exercised and exercisable options
(Kahle 2002). We also control for the relative tax advantage of share repurchases,
measured as the difference between the dividend tax and the capital gains tax
(Chetty and Saez 2005), the financial flexibility advantage of share repurchases
(Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach 2000) proxied by cash-flow volatility (the
standard deviation of profitability in the past five years) and non-operating cash
flows (scaled by lagged total assets), and valuation-based explanations such as
market timing (Dittmar and Field 2015) proxied by future three-year market-
adjusted returns. We also limit our sample period to one year before and after the
events. In all these tests, we use the same sample filters that we used with the Tick
Size Pilot analyses and follow the DID regression using equation (1). Observations
are at annual frequency.




                                         22
        A. Execution Priority: Manning Rule and the Order Handling Rules
In this section, we investigate the importance of execution priority using the 1994
Manning Rule and the 1997 Order Handling Rules as quasi-natural experiments.
Before 1994, NASDAQ dealers could trade ahead of or through their customers'
limit orders. For example, suppose that a dealer quoted a $100 bid price and a $102
offer price. A customer who wanted to buy at a bid price of $100 has lower
execution than the dealer because the dealer could trade ahead of her customers. A
dealer could even trade through her customers. A NASDAQ dealer who received a
customer order to buy at $101 did not have to display the order as a new, more
aggressive quote; the dealer could buy for his own account at prices below $101
(thus trading through the customer order). The customer was entitled to execution
only when the market offer price dropped to 101, which makes the customer order
marketable. The Manning Rule, approved by the SEC on June 29, 1994, prohibited
dealers from trading ahead of or through their customers, 14 thereby increasing the
execution priority of issuers over their own dealers.
          The Manning Rule applied only to NASDAQ-listed firms. Firms listed on
other exchanges were not affected. For example, NYSE specialists faced
competition for order flow from floor traders and public limit orders, limit order
prices were incorporated in prices displayed on the market, and limit orders took
precedence over specialists (Christie and Schultz 1994). Therefore, 
equals one for NASDAQ firms and zero for matched firms listed on other


14
     The Manning Rule is a result of the 1988 Manning decision. A customer of an NASD member
firm, William Manning, alleged that the dealer had accepted his limit order, failed to execute it, and
violated its fiduciary duty to him by trading ahead of the order (Securities Exchange Act Release
No. 44357).




                                                 23
exchanges, while  equals one if an observation is in 1995 and zero if it is in
1993.
          The results reported in Panel A of Table 5 show that the Manning Rule is
estimated to generate a 69% increase in repurchase payouts for NASDAQ firms
(0.419/0.605). We find no significant effects on dividend payouts. In addition, total
payouts increased by 33% (0.412/1.237) and the payout structure increased by 26%
(0.341/1.318) for NASDAQ firms. The increase in share repurchases and total
payouts as well as the shift in payout composition towards share repurchases match
the long-term time-series trend in payouts (Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and Schmalz
2014) and are consistent with the results of the Tick Size Pilot and other event
studies discussed in our paper.
          The uniqueness of the Manning Rule is that it affects repurchases through
the extensive and intensive margins, whereas other market structure reforms affect
repurchases mainly through the intensive margin. We find that the fraction of
repurchasing firms increased by 4.4%, representing a 20% increase over the pre-
treatment level (4.4%/22.5%). These results suggest that the Manning Rule relaxed
the constraints on whether NASDAQ firms could repurchase, whereas other market
structure reforms related more directly to how much they can repurchase. 15
          The 1997 Order Handling Rules further increased the execution priority of
customer limit orders. Prior to 1997, a NASDAQ dealer did not need to display
customer's limit orders. If an issuer submitted a buy limit order at the best


15
     NASDAQ market makers began adopting odd-eighth quotes in 1994 (Christie and Schultz 1994;
Christie, Harris, and Schultz 1994), which is equivalent to a reduction in the tick size. The odd-
eighth is unlikely to drive the extensive margin. Also, without the Manning Rule, issuers would find
it hard to compete with dealers at the bid price irrespective of the tick size.




                                                   24
independent bid, the order could be invisible to other dealers and their customers.
The Order Handling Rules required dealers to display all public orders when these
orders were at the best bid or offer. 16 Once the issuer's limit order becomes visible,
it can trade with the customers of other dealers, either because they choose to
transact with the limit order or because other dealers forward a customer's
marketable order to the limit order to fulfill the best execution obligation. Therefore,
the Order Handling Rules extended an issuer's execution priority from one dealer
to all dealers.
           Order Handling Rules apply to all U.S. markets, but they are specifically
targeted at NASDAQ stocks (Barclay et al. 1999).  equals one for
NASDAQ firms and zero for matched firms listed on other exchanges, 
equals one if an observation is in 1998 and zero if it is in 1996.
           The results we report in Panel B of Table 5 indicate a 42% (0.437/1.040)
increase in repurchase payouts for NASDAQ firms; this treatment effect is
insignificant for dividend payouts. We also find a 31% (0.477/1.540) increase in
total payout and a 22% (0.359/1.666) increase in payout structure. The results
suggest the first-order importance of execution priority when issuers face price
ceilings on repurchases.
                                   Insert Table 5 about Here

             B. The 1997 Tick Size Reduction and the 2001 Decimalization
In our controlled-experiment analyses, we show that an increase in the tick size
reduces share repurchases. As an external validity check on the effects of the tick


16
     Barclay et al. (1999) note that the Order Handling Rules include four sets of rules, but the Limit
Order Display Rule is the most relevant rule for issuers.




                                                   25
size changes, we examine the effects of the 1997 tick size reduction from $1/8 to
$1/16 and the 2001 decimalization on firm payouts following the 1997 Common
Cents Pricing Act. Goldstein and Kavajecz (2000) and Bessembinder (2003) show
that these two tick size reductions decreased both the bid­ask spread and market
depth. Our market structure channel, in turn, predicts increases in repurchase
payouts following both tick size reductions.
       We follow prior literature (e.g. Fang, Tian, and Tice 2014) and define
 as equal to one for firms that experience above-median decreases in
the bid­ask spread and zero for other matched firms, while  equals one if the
observation is in one year before the tick size reduction and zero if it is in one year
after the tick size reduction. In Panels C and D of Table 5 we report the results,
which show that, following the 1997 tick size reduction, repurchase payouts
increased by 68% in treatment firms (0.578/0.849); there were no significant effects
on dividend payouts. Total payouts increased by 42% (0.555/1.321) and the ratio
of repurchase payouts to dividend payouts increased by 39% (0.576/1.478).
Following the 2001 decimalization, repurchase payouts increased by 32% for
treatment firms (0.554/1.744); there were no significant effects on dividend payouts.
Total payouts increased by 21% (0.501/2.375), and the ratio of repurchase payouts
to dividend payouts increased by 26% (0.552/2.108). These results show that,
following the tick-size reductions, firms faced fewer market-structure frictions and
repurchased more shares.

                   C. 2003 NYSE Automated Quote Installation
In this subsection, we explore the importance of automated execution using NYSE
automated quote installation as a quasi-natural experiment. The transition from




                                          26
manual to automated execution seems like a minor technical detail, but it
fundamentally reshaped share repurchase business in two ways. First, auto quotes
blurred the physical barrier of the market; issuers could use computer algorithms to
compete with specialists on liquidity provision. When executions were manual,
other liquidity providers could compete with specialists only when other liquidity
providers were present, either by being on the floor or being in the limit order book.
Automated execution significantly levels the playing field for issuers and
specialists because issuers' computer algorithms can submit, cancel, and adjust
limit orders in response to changing market conditions, just like specialists.
Computer algorithms can also check compliance with Rule 10b-18 in real time.
Second, auto quotes remove the last-mover advantage that specialists enjoyed.
Before auto quotes were installed, NYSE specialists disseminated quotes manually
and approved each transaction by pressing the `enter' key (MacKenzie 2017). As a
consequence, specialists enjoyed the last-mover advantage because they could
condition their actions on incoming orders. For example, specialists could choose
to participate in trades from their own accounts by improving quotes from existing
limit orders, and specialists could stop the execution of incoming marketable orders
by promising price improvement for such orders in the future. In both cases,
specialists stepped ahead of other liquidity providers, including issuers. After
automated execution became available, specialists lost their last-mover advantage
because executions occurred in the absence of specialists' approval. The loss of
specialists' execution privilege increased execution priority for issuers.
       In this event study we define  as equal to one for NYSE firms
and zero for matched firms listed on other exchanges; for example, NASDAQ




                                          27
stocks shifted to electronic trading before 2003 because of the proliferation of
Electronic Communication Networks (Barclay, Hendershott and McCormick
2003), while  equals one if the observation is in 2004 and zero if it is in
2002. The results are reported in Panel E of Table 5 and show that the
implementation of auto quotes on the NYSE caused a 24% (0.413/1.716) increase
in repurchase payouts; it had no significant effects on dividend payouts.
       These results suggest one explanation of the increase in share repurchases
over dividend payouts following the 2003 dividend-tax cut, as documented in
Chetty and Saez (2005; 2006). The transition of repurchase execution from manual
(high-touch) execution to automatic (low-touch) execution reduced repurchasing
frictions and thus increased share repurchases around 2003.
       Overall, the evidence we have presented in this section is consistent with
our hypothesis that market structure reforms and the resulting reductions in market
structure frictions contribute to the secular increase in share repurchases we
observe. On the other hand, market structure frictions associated with share
repurchases have always existed, which can help explain why share repurchases do
not crowd out dividend payouts completely.



                                  III. Conclusion

When U.S. firms repurchase shares in the open market, they face price ceilings
established by SEC Rule 10b-18. These price ceilings, in turn, give market structure
a first-order role in share repurchases. We show that market structure frictions can
reconcile two seemingly contradictory puzzles. The dividend puzzle exists because
previous studies typically overlook market structure frictions; share repurchases




                                         28
increase relative to dividends over time because market structure reforms gradually
reduce these frictions. The 1994 Manning Rule and the 1997 Order Handling Rules
increased issuers' execution priority at the price ceilings. Tick-size reductions in
1997 and 2001 reduced queue competition under the price ceilings. Automated
execution (e.g. the 2003 NYSE auto quote installation) helps issuers by breaking
down the physical boundary around stock exchanges and eliminating the last-mover
advantage enjoyed by specialists. We show that all these market reforms
significantly increased share repurchases. The Tick Size Pilot Program, which
partially reversed the market reforms by increasing the tick size, caused significant
reductions in share repurchases.
       We find that market structure can have first-order effects on corporate
policies when firms trade directly on the open market and face other constraints
such as price ceilings. These two conditions point out possible new directions for
research at the intersection of market microstructure and corporate finance. Our
results also open up two new research dimensions for liquidity: liquidity-for-whom
and liquidity-from-where. Although a market with greater depth is generally
considered more liquid, we find that such a market may impose constraints on
repurchasing issuers because they face additional regulatory constraints imposed
by Rule 10b-18. Regulations can blur the definition of liquidity for distinct groups
of traders, indicating the importance of liquidity-for-whom. We find that dark pools
are important for share repurchases because these platforms allow issuers to avoid
queues at price ceilings. We find that the trade-at rule, which unintentionally
banned share repurchases in dark pools, led to additional decreases in share
repurchases, indicating the importance of liquidity-from-where.




                                         29
                                 REFERENCES
Albuquerque, Rui A., Shiyun Song, and Chen Yao, 2019, The price effects of
     liquidity shocks: A study of SEC's tick-size experiment, Journal of Financial
     Economics Forthcoming.
Almeida, Heitor, Vyacheslav Fos, and Mathias Kronlund, 2016, The real effects of
     share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 119, 168-185.
Barclay, Michael J., William G. Christie, Jeffrey H. Harris, Eugene Kandel, and
     Paul H. Schultz, 1999, Effects of market reform on the trading costs and depths
     of Nasdaq stocks, Journal of Finance 54, 1-34.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, 2003, Trade execution costs and market quality after
     decimalization, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 747-777.
Black, Fischer, 1976, The dividend puzzle, Journal of Portfolio Management 2, 5-
     8.
Brennan, Michael J., and Anjan V. Thakor, 1990, Shareholder preferences and
     dividend policy, Journal of Finance 45, 993-1018.
Brown, Jeffrey, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, Executive financial
     incentives and payout policy: Firm responses to the 2003 dividend tax cut,
     Journal of Finance 62, 1935-1965.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez, 2005, Dividend taxes and corporate behavior:
     Evidence from the 2003 dividend tax cut, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     120, 791-833.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez, 2006, The effects of the 2003 dividend tax cut on
     corporate behavior: Interpreting the evidence, American Economic Review 96,
     124-129.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez, 2010, Dividend and corporate taxation in an
     agency model of the firm, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2,
     1-31.
Christie, William G., and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, Why do NASDAQ market makers
     avoid oddeighth quotes?, Journal of Finance 49, 1813-1840.
Christie, William G., Jeffrey H. Harris, and Paul H. Schultz, 1994, Why did
     NASDAQ market makers stop avoiding odd-eighth quotes?, Journal of
     Finance 49, 1841-1860.
Degryse, Hans, and Nikolaos Karagiannis, 2018, Once upon a broker time? Order
     preferencing and market quality, Working Paper, KU Leuven.
Dittmar, Amy, and Laura C. Field, 2015, Can managers time the market? Evidence
     using repurchase price data, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 261-282.




                                         30
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: changing
     firm characteristics or lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial
     Economics 60, 3-43.
Fang, Vivian W., Xuan Tian, and Sheri Tice, 2014, Does stock liquidity enhance
     or impede firm innovation?, Journal of Finance 69, 2085-2125.
Efron, Bradley, and Robert J. Tibshirani, 1994, An introduction to the bootstrap,
     CRC press.
Farre-Mensa, Joan, Roni Michaely, and Martin Schmalz, 2014, Payout policy,
     Annual Review of Financial Economics 6, 75-134.
Fenn, George W., and Nellie Liang, 2001, Corporate payout policy and managerial
     stock incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 45-72.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices
     in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of
     Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Goldstein, Michael, and Kenneth Kavajecz, 2000, Eighths, sixteenths, and market
     depth: changes in tick size and liquidity provision on the NYSE, Journal of
     Financial Economics 56, 125-149.
Grullon, Gustavo, and David L. Ikenberry, 2000, What do we know about stock
     repurchases?, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 13, 31-51.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2007, Empirical market microstructure: The institutions,
     economics, and econometrics of securities trading, Oxford University Press.
Hendershott, Terrence, Charles M. Jones, and Albert J. Menkveld, 2011, Does
     algorithmic trading improve liquidity?, Journal of Finance 66, 1-33.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans R. Stoll, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under transactions
     and return uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 47-73.
Holden, Craig W., and Stacey Jacobsen, 2014, Liquidity measurement problems in
     fast, competitive markets: Expensive and cheap solutions, Journal of Finance
     69, 1747-1785.
Huang, Sheng, and Anjan V. Thakor, 2013, Investor heterogeneity, investor-
     management disagreement and share repurchases, Review of Financial Studies
     26, 2453-2491.
Investors Stock Exchange, 2018, Petition for rulemaking to amend rule 10b-18,
     New York, NY.
Jagannathan, Murali, Clifford Stephens, and Michael Weisbach, 2000, Financial
     flexibility and the choice between dividends and stock repurchases, Journal of
     Financial Economics 57, 355-384.




                                        31
John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A
     signalling equilibrium, Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.
Jones, Charles M., and Marc L. Lipson, 2001, Sixteenths: direct evidence on
     institutional execution costs, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 253-278.
Kahle, Kathleen M., 2002, When a buyback isn't a buyback: Open market
     repurchases and employee options, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 235-
     261.
Kornai, Janos. 1980. Economics of shortage. Amsterdam: Elsevier
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W.
     Vishny, 2000, Agency problems and dividend policies around the world,
     Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.
Leary, Mark T., and Roni Michaely, 2011, Determinants of dividend smoothing:
     Empirical evidence, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3197-3249.
MacKenzie, Donald, 2017, A material political economy: Automated trading desk
     and price prediction in high-frequency trading, Social Studies of Science 47,
     172-194.
Menkveld, Albert J., Bart Zhou Yueshen, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2017, Shades of
     darkness: A pecking order of trading venues, Journal of Financial Economics
     124, 503-534.
Michaely, Roni, and Michael R. Roberts, 2012, Corporate dividend policies:
     Lessons from private firms, Review of Financial Studies 25, 711-746.
Miller, Merton, and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the
     valuation of shares, Journal of Business 34, 411-433.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985, The economic effects of
     dividend taxation, Recent Advances in Corporate Finance, Dow Jones-Irwin
     Publishing.
Rindi, Barbara, and Ingrid M. Werner, 2019, U.S. tick size pilot, Working paper,
     Bocconi University and Ohio State University.
Roberts, Michael R., and Toni M. Whited, 2013, Endogeneity in empirical
     corporate finance, Handbook of the Economics of Finance 2, 493-572.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2010, Proposed rule: Purchases of certain
     equity securities by the issuer and others, Washington, DC.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015, Plan to implement a tick size pilot
     program, Washington, DC.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2018, Assessment of the plan to implement
     a tick size pilot program, Washington, DC.




                                        32
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash
     dividends, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1991, Reversing the Soviet economic
     collapse, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 341-360.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, The waste of time and talent under
     socialism, Working Paper, Harvard University, and University of Chicago.
Yagan, Danny, 2015, Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the
     2003 dividend tax cut, American Economic Review 105, 3531-63.
Yao, Chen, and Mao Ye, 2018, Why trading speed matters: A tale of queue
     rationing under price controls, Review of Financial Studies 31, 2157-2183.




                                        33
Figure 1
Market Structure Reforms and Corporate Payouts
In this figure we plot aggregate repurchases made and dividends paid by publicly
listed U.S. companies from 1971 through 2012. The methodology is the same as that
followed in Farre-Mensa, Michaely, and Schmalz (2014). The magnitudes are
reported in billions of real 2012 U.S. purchasing power dollars. Repurchases are
calculated as total expenditures on the purchase of common and preferred stocks
(PRSTKC) minus any reduction in the value of the net number of preferred stocks
outstanding (PSTKRV). Dividends are calculated as the total amount of dividends
declared on a company's common/ordinary capital. The vertical lines show 1982
Rule 10b-18 adoption and historical market structure reforms. In 1982, the SEC
adopted Rule 10b-18, which provides a safe harbor for issuers against anti-
manipulative provisions. The 1994 Manning Rule increases the execution priority of
issuers. The 1997 Order Handling Rules further strengthened customers' execution
priority beyond the Manning Rule. The 1997 Common Cents Pricing Act reduced
the minimum price variation (tick size) from $1/8 to $1/16 in the same year, and
finally to 1 cent. In 2003, NYSE installed auto quotes, which broke the physical
boundary around the stock exchange and leveled the playing field for issuers and
market makers.




                                        34
                                       Table 1
               Tick Size Pilot Program and Payout Policies
In this table we report the difference-in-differences (DID) regression results for the
payout variables: repurchase payouts, dividend payouts, total payouts, and payout
structure. Treatment is a dummy variable that equals one if a stock is in one of the
three test groups and zero if it is in the control group. Post is an indicator variable
that equals one if the year-quarter is in the post-treatment period (2016 Q4­2018 Q3)
and zero if it is in the pre-treatment period (2014 Q4­2016 Q3). Controls include
size, profitability, and growth opportunity, as in Fama and French (2001). All
variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard
errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown
in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                Difference-in-Differences Regression Results
                         Repurchase       Dividend          Total          Payout
                           Payouts         Payouts        Payouts         Structure
                             (1)                (2)          (3)             (4)
Treatment×Post           -0.0919***       -0.00462      -0.0965***       -0.0832***
                           (-2.72)          (-0.32)        (-2.67)         (-2.74)
Controls                     Yes               Yes          Yes              Yes
Firm FE                      Yes               Yes          Yes              Yes
Year FE                      Yes               Yes          Yes              Yes
Cluster by firm              Yes               Yes          Yes              Yes
N                           19629           19629          19629           19629
R2                          0.382              0.702        0.486           0.396




                                          35
                                                                        Table 2
                                                           The Queuing Channel

In Panel A, we present the pre-treatment summary statistics and the mean difference test results for the treatment group and the matched control
group. We partition firms into constrained and unconstrained subgroups. The tick-constrained sample includes a firm if its average dollar-
quoted spread for the quarter prior to the Pilot implementation (2016 Q3) is below 5 cents, while other firms are in the unconstrained sample.
In Panel B, we report the DID regression results for corporate payout variables. In Panel C, we report the DID regression results for market
liquidity measures. In Panel D, we report the DID regression results for repurchase payouts when we partition the tick-constrained sample
equally into two groups based on the increase in bid-side depth. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on
standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                   Panel A: Pre-Treatment Summary Statistics for the Constrained Sample and the Unconstrained Sample
                                       Tick-Constrained Sample                                             Tick-Unconstrained Sample
                        Treatment        Control                       t-test                  Treatment      Control                   t-test
                          Mean            Mean                  Diff            p-value          Mean          Mean              Diff            p-value
Repurchase payouts        0.409           0.396                0.013            0.679            0.439         0.435          0.004              0.898
Dividend payouts          0.202           0.176                0.026            0.108            0.271         0.269          0.002              0.907
Total payouts             0.611           0.572                0.039            0.278            0.711         0.705          0.006              0.871
Payout structure          1.253           1.289                -0.036           0.232            1.239         1.213          0.026              0.353
                                                Panel B: Regression Results for Payout Variables
                                  Tick-Constrained Sample                                         Tick-Unconstrained Sample
                     Repurchase      Dividend         Total            Payout             Repurchase       Dividend      Total              Payout
                      Payouts        Payouts         Payouts       Structure               Payouts         Payouts      Payouts            Structure



                                                                          36
                     (1)                (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)       (8)
Treatment×Post    -0.183***       -0.00479        -0.187***     -0.146***            -0.0249           -0.0240         -0.0489      -0.0427
                   (-3.46)            (-0.24)      (-3.19)        (-3.10)            (-0.46)            (-1.42)        (-0.90)      (-0.93)
Controls            Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes
Firm FE             Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes
Year-quarter FE     Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes
Cluster by firm     Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes
N                   8546              8546          8546            8546             10314              10314           10314       10314
R2                  0.441             0.821         0.520           0.466             0.363             0.734           0.482        0.373
                                         Panel C: Regression Results for Market Liquidity Variables
                                          Tick-Constrained Sample                                      Tick-Unconstrained Sample
                             Percentage                                                  Percentage
                                                  Total Share          Market                                     Total Share      Market
                               Quoted                                                        Quoted
                                                   Turnover                Depth                                   Turnover         Depth
                               Spread                                                         Spread
                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                (4)                    (5)            (6)
Treatment×Post                0.316***             -0.144***           12.90***              0.0131                -0.0292         4.652***
                              (11.98)               (-3.41)                (18.15)            (0.34)                (-1.04)         (9.30)
Controls                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes             Yes
Firm FE                         Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes             Yes
Year-quarter FE                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes             Yes



                                                                      37
Cluster by firm           Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                 Yes
N                        8522                 8522                8522              10299                10284                10299
    2
R                        0.756                 0.587             0.611                0.851              0.600                0.702
                        Panel D: Results for Partitioning Samples Based on Increase in Bid-Side Depth
                                                        Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts
                                 Small Increase in Bid-Side Depth                          Large Increase in Bid-Side Depth
                                                (1)                                                      (2)
Treatment×Post                               -0.115*                                                  -0.264***
                                              (-1.77)                                                   (-3.21)
Controls                                        Yes                                                       Yes
Firm FE                                        Yes                                                       Yes
Year-quarter FE                                Yes                                                       Yes
Cluster by firm                                Yes                                                       Yes
N                                              4303                                                     4243
    2
R                                             0.438                                                     0.443
p-value (Small=Large)                                                    < 0.01




                                                             38
                                        Table 3
                               The Dark Pool Channel
In this table we report the regression results for repurchase payouts by comparing
firms in test groups 1 and 2 with firms in test group 3. The tick-constrained sample
includes a firm if its average dollar-quoted spread for the quarter prior to the Pilot
implementation (2016 Q3) is below 5 cents, while other firms are in the
unconstrained sample. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-
statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered
at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The p-values reported in
the last row are estimated based on the null hypothesis that the coefficients are equal
for the two groups under consideration, using the bootstrap method (Efron and
Tibshirani, 1994).
                       Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts
                               Test Groups 1 and 2                   Test Group 3
                       Tick-             Tick-                Tick-           Tick-
                    Constrained      Unconstrained        Constrained     Unconstrained
                         (1)              (2)                  (3)              (4)
Treatment×Post       -0.139**           -0.0191            -0.258***         -0.0449
                       (-2.18)          (-0.31)              (-2.68)          (-0.48)
Controls                Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
Firm FE                 Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
Year-quarter FE         Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
Cluster by firm         Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
N                       6107             7006                 2433             3329
R2                     0.449             0.363                0.414           0.368
p-value (test groups 1&2= test group 3, tick-constrained samples): < 0.01




                                          39
                                                                        Table 4
                                             Tick Size Pilot Program: Additional Analyses
In this table we report the results of additional analyses of the Tick Size Pilot Program. The sample includes tick-constrained firms. In columns
(1) and (2) we report the results of the reversal and placebo tests, respectively. In the reversal test, we define the post-treatment period as 2018
Q4­2019 Q3 and the pre-treatment period as 2017 Q4­2018 Q3. In the placebo test, we define the post-treatment period as 2014 Q4­2016 Q3
and the pre-treatment period as 2012 Q4­2014 Q3. In columns (3) and (4) we report results of tests of sensitivity to firm size by equally
partitioning the sample based on pre-treatment total assets. In column (5) we report the DID regression results on a repurchase dummy. In column
(6) we report the DID regression results for tender offer. Controls include size, profitability, and growth opportunity, as in Fama and French
(2001). All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroscedasticity and
clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                   Dependent Variable: Repurchase Payouts                          Repurchase Dummy                Tender offer
                       Reversal and Placebo Tests           Result Sensitivity on Firm Size
                      Reversal Test     Placebo Test        Small Firms        Large Firms
                            (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)                    (5)                         (6)
 Treatment×Post          0.122**           0.0560             -0.155**            -0.220***               0.0171                      0.00350
                          (2.05)            (0.88)             (2.36)              (2.75)               0.74                           (1.00)
 Controls                  Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                    Yes                          Yes
 Firm FE                   Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                    Yes                          Yes
 Year-quarter FE           Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                    Yes                          Yes
 Cluster by firm           Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                    Yes                          Yes
 N                         4028             7593                4288                4258                   8546                        8546
 R2                       0.538             0.369               0.472               0.412                 0.600                        0.064




                                                                          40
                                                                     Table 5
                           Event Studies: Historical Market Structure Reforms and Payout Policies
This table reports the results of event studies designed to test the effects of historical market structure reforms. In the event study for the 1994
NASDAQ Manning Rule, Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on NASDAQ and zero if it is a matched firm listed on one of the other U.S.
exchanges, while Post equals one if an observation is in 1995 and zero if it is in 1993. In the event study for the 1997 Order Handing Rule,
Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on NASDAQ and zero if it is a matched firm listed on another U.S. exchange, while Post equals one if
an observation is in 1998 and zero if it is in 1996. In the event study for the 1997 tick size reduction, Treatment equals one if a firm experiences
an above-median decrease in the spread and zero otherwise, while Post equals one if an observation is in 1998 and zero if it is in 1996. In the
event study for the 2001 decimalization, Treatment equals one if a firm experiences an above-median decrease in the spread and zero otherwise,
while Post equals one if an observation is in 2002 and zero if it is in 2000. In the event study for the 2003 implementation of automated quotes
on the NYSE, Treatment equals one if a firm is listed on the NYSE and zero if it is a matched firm listed on another U.S. exchange, while Post
equals one if an observation is in 2004 and zero if it is in 2002. We use matched control samples by matching control firms to treatment firms
based on pre-treatment average repurchase payouts, dividend payouts, size, profitability, and growth opportunity. Control variables include
size, profitability, and growth opportunity (Fama and French 2001) as well as managerial stock holdings (Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner 2007)
and managerial options holdings (Fenn and Liang 2001); exercised and exercisable options (Kahle 2002); the relative tax advantage of share
repurchases measured as the difference between the dividend tax and the capital gains tax (Chetty and Saez 2005); the financial flexibility
advantage of share repurchases (Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach 2000) proxied by cash-flow volatility (the standard deviation of
profitability in the past five years) and non-operating cash flow (scaled by lagged total assets); and valuation-based explanations such as market
timing (Dittmar and Field 2015) proxied by future three-year market-adjusted returns. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.
t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                    Repurchase Payouts Dividend Payouts          Total Payouts    Payout Structure     Repurchase Dummy           Tender Offer
                            (1)                    (2)                (3)                (4)                    (5)                     (6)
                                                     Panel A: 1994 NASDAQ Manning Rule
Treatment×Post           0.419***               -0.00752           0.412***           0.341***               0.0440**                 0.0627
                           (3.24)                (-0.21)             (3.01)             (3.28)                 (2.03)                  (1.28)



                                                                        41
                                    Panel B: 1997 Order Handling Rule
Treatment×Post    0.437**    0.0404             0.477**           0.359**   0.00189   0.0358
                   (2.33)    (1.14)              (2.51)            (2.27)    (0.09)   (0.67)
                                      Panel C: 1997 Tick Size Reduction
Treatment×Post    0.578**    -0.0228            0.555**          0.576***   0.0516*   0.124
                   (2.31)    (-0.64)             (2.19)            (2.76)   (1.83)    (1.08)
                                        Panel D: 2001 Decimalization
Treatment×Post    0.554***   -0.0528            0.501***         0.552***   -0.0249   0.0453
                   (3.37)    (-1.30)             (2.96)            (3.98)   (-1.10)   (0.68)
                                       Panel E: 2003 NYSE Auto Quote
Treatment×Post    0.413**    0.0837             0.496**            0.179    0.0237    0.152
                   (1.96)    (1.26)              (2.24)            (0.82)   (0.93)    (1.58)
Controls            Yes       Yes                 Yes               Yes      Yes       Yes
Firm FE             Yes       Yes                 Yes               Yes      Yes       Yes
Year FE             Yes       Yes                 Yes               Yes      Yes       Yes
Cluster by firm     Yes       Yes                 Yes               Yes      Yes       Yes




                                                     42
                                                           Appendix Table A.1
                Pre-treatment Summary Statistics: Event Studies on Historical Market Structure Reforms
In this table we present pre-treatment summary statistics and the mean differences for the treatment group and the matched control group for
the event studies of historical market structure reforms. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.
                                    Panel A: 1994 Manning Rule                                     Panel B: 1997 Order Handling Rule
                      Treatment        Control                    t-test                 Treatment       Control                  t-test
                         Mean           Mean               Diff                p-value     Mean           Mean            Diff            p-value
Repurchase payouts       0.605          0.544             0.061                0.543       1.040          0.973          0.067             0.612
Dividend payouts         0.631          0.622             0.009                0.892       0.499          0.492          0.007             0.906
Total payouts            1.237          1.166             0.071                0.578       1.540          1.465          0.075             0.622
Payout structure         1.318          1.280             0.038                0.648       1.666         1.617          0.049              0.651
                                  Panel C: 1997 Tick Size Reduction                                  Panel D: 2001 Decimalization
                      Treatment        Control                    t-test                 Treatment      Control                  t-test

                         Mean           Mean             Diff              p-value         Mean          Mean            Diff             p-value
Repurchase payouts       0.849          0.784            0.065             0.646           1.744         1.656          0.088              0.531
Dividend payouts         0.472          0.438            0.034             0.567           0.631         0.602          0.029              0.568
Total payouts            1.321          1.222            0.098             0.535           2.375         2.259          0.117              0.443
Payout structure         1.478         1.483          -0.005               0.972           2.108         2.126         -0.017              0.886
                                  Panel E: 2003 NYSE Auto Quote




                                                                           1
                     Treatment   Control           t-test
                      Mean       Mean      Diff                 p-value
Repurchase payouts     1.716     1.559     0.157                0.437
Dividend payouts       1.075     0.983     0.092                0.234
Total payouts          2.792     2.543     0.249                0.261
Payout structure       1.929     1.929     0.000                0.999




                                                            2
