                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        REPUTATION AND EARNINGS DYNAMICS

                                       Boyan Jovanovic
                                         Julien Prat

                                      Working Paper 28052
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28052


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Fatih Guvenen for providing us with data and participants of the SED 2015, Barcelona
GSE summer forum 2015, NASM 2016, and Minnesota Macro 2016 for their comments. Boyan
Jovanovic thanks the NSF for its 2015-2018 grant for the project "Reputations in
Macroeconomics." Julien Prat acknowledges the support of the Investissements d'Avenir grant
(ANR-11-IDEX-0003/Labex Ecodec/ANR-11-LABX-0047). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Boyan Jovanovic and Julien Prat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Reputation and Earnings Dynamics
Boyan Jovanovic and Julien Prat
NBER Working Paper No. 28052
November 2020
JEL No. E24

                                       ABSTRACT

Cyclical patterns in earnings can arise when contracts between firms and their workers are
incomplete, and when workers cannot borrow or lend so as to smooth their consumption. Effort
cycles generate occasional large changes in earnings. These large changes are transitory,
consistent with recent empirical findings.


Boyan Jovanovic
New York University
Department of Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Boyan.Jovanovic@nyu.edu

Julien Prat
CREST
15 Boulevard Gabriel Peri
92245 Malakoff Cedex
France
julien.prat@ensae.fr
1        Introduction
Recent analyses of large panel data sets reveal that earnings fluctuate in ways that
cannot be captured by the linear models commonly used in the literature on earnings
dynamics. In particular, earnings data show occasional changes far larger than pre-
dicted by a log-normal distribution ­ see Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and Song (2015)
and Arellano, Blundell and Bonhomme (2017), henceforth GKOS and ABB respective-
ly.
    These unusual events are routinely attributed to external shocks such as layoffs
triggering falls off the job ladder. Since large income fluctuations reduce the wel-
fare of risk-averse agents, it seems natural to conjecture that they are not initiated by
them. We show that career-concerned agents may in fact prefer to go through periods
of low and high effort. We call these oscillations reputation cycles.
    We change the career concerns model of Holmström (1999) by assuming that the
agent is risk-averse and cannot borrow or lend. Since reputational investment pays
off only in the future, a worker's incentive to maintain or improve her reputation de-
pends on her discount factor. If she is risk averse, her discount factor depends neg-
atively on her consumption growth. When the worker cannot smooth her consump-
tion by other means,1 this force can then give rise to cycles in her effort, and thus in
her earnings. The mechanism works as follows: When effort is low, the worker's con-
sumption is low relative to her future consumption which means that her discount
factor is also low. This reduces her incentive to create a good reputation and low ef-
fort is self fulfilling. In other words, the discount factor and reputational concerns are
low because consumption growth is high. Conversely, in a period of high effort, cur-
rent consumption is higher than future consumption, which means that the discount
factor is also large and so high effort is self fulfilling too.
    The model delivers several insights. First, evidence has shown that tangible in-
vestment is inhibited by liquidity constraints ­ Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988).
We find that the opposite may hold, at least as far as reputational investment ­ an in-
tangible ­ is concerned. Under the set of calibrated parameters, cyclical paths may
entail higher average reputation capital than does the rest point solution of the mod-
el, although cyclical paths exist only if the agent cannot borrow or lend.
    Second, in terms of pure theory, we establish the existence of a new class of equi-
libria. Repeated games are known to have equilibria that shift from period to period
    1
        Kaplan, Weidner and Violante (2014) estimate that one third of U.S. consumers are hand to mouth.


                                                     2
with no change in the payoff functions in the stage game ­ e.g., Green and Porter
(1984), Mailath and Samuelson (2016, Sec. 4.3.1). In dynamic games with type uncer-
tainty of which ours is an example, Markovian equilibria can also entail fluctuating
effort ­ e.g., Board and Meyer-ter-Vehn (2013) and Cisternas (2018). With a risk averse
agent, however, we show that the Holmström model acquires a cyclical equilibrium.2
Moreover, cyclical equilibria can arise even though the agent has a publicly known
retirement date.
    Third, we explore the model's quantitative properties using micro-data on earn-
ings dynamics to calibrate its parameters. The variance coefficients can be recovered
from Lange's (2007) estimates about the speed of employer learning. In the calibra-
tion of the model with stochastic cycles, income growth decomposes into small, fully
persistent changes and larger, mean-reverting changes (see Fig. 7). These prediction-
s are in line with recent evidence from U.S. panel data on earnings: GKOS and ABB
detect significant deviations from lognormality, with a small but noticeable share of
individuals experiencing very large changes. They also find that the degree of persis-
tence appears to be non-linear in the size of the shocks as large shocks exhibit much
stronger mean reversion than small shocks. Hubmer (2018) shows that a life-cycle
version of the standard job ladder model can capture the large negative skewness and
high excess kurtosis of earnings data. Our analysis indicates that endogenous fluc-
tuations in effort can also help to explain these large deviations from the log-normal
framework, while addressing the systematic correlation between the persistence and
the size of income shocks.
    Finally, the model can generate a negative relation between exogenous income
noise and the volatility of earnings: Income can become more volatile when repu-
tational concerns rise in response to a reduction in the noise accompanying the re-
lation between effort and output. Agency theory suggests that a reduction in noise
raises the incentives to provide effort, and we show that this can trigger a rise in the
volatility of earnings. For cycles in effort to exist, incentives to provide effort can-
not be too weak. Noise with which the agent's output is observed deters effort and
it also obstructs the formation of cycles. This bears on the question of why income
inequality has risen ­ Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom, von Wachter (2018), henceforth
   2
    The career concerns literature focuses on risk-neutral agents. A notable exception is Bouvard and
Levy (2019) who consider a problem where the sender's payoff function is concave because she is
facing heterogenous receivers. Bouvard and Levy also find that concave preferences generate multiple
equilibria even though they do not analyze self-sustaining cycles but focus instead on the emergence
of an inefficient steady-state.


                                                 3
SPGBW. Paradoxically, we find that an increase in inequality could have in part been
caused by a decline in exogenous volatility. In particular, a decline in the noisiness of
technology will strengthen reputational concerns and may raise equilibrium income
volatility. Hence what SPGBW measure as a rise in the volatility of observed income
may in fact be the result of a decline in exogenous output noise.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out the model. Section 3 charac-
terizes the rest point of the model where effort remains constant, while Section 4 ex-
plains how and when cycles may emerge. We parametrize the model in Section 5 and
explore its quantitative implications. Then we review major hypotheses for endoge-
nous cycles in Section 6.1 so as to highlight the novelty of reputation cycles. Several
extensions are discussed in Section 6.2, while Section 7 concludes. All the proofs are
relegated to the Appendix.


2       Model
In Holmström (1999) a risk-neutral agent faces a spot market with risk-neutral buyer-
s. The unique equilibrium then entails a monotonic time path of effort. We will show
that if one assumes that the agent is risk averse, multiple equilibria arise and in some
of them effort follows a 2-period cycle. We assume the following:
    A1. Non-contractible effort and output;
    A2. Risk averse agent facing short-term risk-neutral buyers;
    A3. Agent cannot borrow or lend.
We maintain these assumptions throughout.

       Production.--Each period an agent produces output yt by exerting hidden effort
at :
                                    yt =   t   + at + " t :                           (1)

Here "t   N (0; 2
                " ) is an i.i.d. shock. The variable is the agent's efficiency;        is
unknown, even to the agent, and the common prior is N ; 2 .

   Earnings.--Contracts in which the period-t payment is contingent on yt are not
feasible. Instead, buyers pay the agent up front and the payment reflects the market
belief at the beginning of the period. Thus the agent exerts effort only so as to raise
her future income. Output has a persistent effect on prices because it affects the


                                               4
market's belief about the agent's efficiency which fluctuates over time as follows

                                                                      2
                               t   =   t 1   +     t;   with   N 0;       :                     (2)


   Information.--Each period the agent chooses an a from A while everyone ob-
serves y . The agent can also observe + " but not its components. The market's
participants observe y only, but since they will deduce a from equilibrium, they too
will be able to infer + ". However, the market and the agent observe different sig-
nals whenever the agent deviates and take a different action than the one anticipated
by the market. We account for such divergence by using E [ ] and E [ ] to denote the
market's and the agent's expectation, respectively.

       Timing.--Within a period, events unfold as follows:

   1. There are many identical and risk neutral potential buyers, and they get ze-
      ro rents. Hence the up-front payment the agent gets is E [yt j y t ] ; where y t
           t 1
      fys gs =0 is her public history.

   2. The agent chooses at , privately.

   3. Output yt is realized, and it becomes part of the publicly observed history y t+1 .

   Preferences.--The agent is risk averse and infinitely lived. Her preferences as of
date 0 read
                                   X1
                                        t
                                          U (ct ; at ) ;
                                             t=0

with 2 (0; 1) denoting the discount factor. To neutralize the wealth effect, we will
focus on per-period utility functions that exhibit constant absolute risk aversion so
that U(c; a) = exp( (c g (a))):

    Equilibrium.--We will examine equilibria in pure strategies in which the agen-
t's behavior along the path of play might depend on calendar time only but not on
the history of output.3 An equilibrium must satisfy the following three requirements.
First, payments are set competitively by the market. Second, the agent chooses her
effort so as to maximize expected payoffs. Third, the market conjecture at is verified.
   3
    Deterministic action profiles will be equilibrium strategies under the CARA-GHH preferences that
we shall use ­ see Proposition 2 and the associated discussion. For GHH preferences see Greenwood,
Hercowicz and Huffman (1988).


                                                         5
Definition 1 A deterministic equilibrium is a profile fat ; at ; ct g1                    1
                                                                      t=0 such that fat gt=0 is
a function of time only and:
1. Expected profits are zero in every period as ct = E [yt j y t ] = E [ t + at j y t ] :
2. Effort at is chosen optimally
                                      "                                                                #
                                                               X
                                                               1
                                                                       t+s
          at = arg max Et U (ct ; a
                                  ^t ) +                                       U (ct+s ; at+s ) ; for all t = 0; 1; :::               (3)
                        a
                        ^t 2A
                                                               s=1


3. The market's conjecture fat g1
                                t=0 is correct, so that at = at for all t = 0; 1; :::



   Market beliefs.--In order to interpret the output signal, the market's participants
need to conjecture the agent's behavior. For a given conjecture fas gt   1
                                                                      s=0 , a sufficient
statistic for the information revealed about t is the sequence xt = fxs gt 1
                                                                         s=0 , where


                                            xt       yt        at =        t   + at          at + " t :                               (4)

The market treats x as the signal. On path, i.e., when at = at , xt N ( t ; 2
                                                                            " ) : Because
  and " are normal, the posterior is also normal: t         N mt ; 2;t : The posterior
variance evolves deterministically

                                                     2                 1                       2
                                                      ;t   =         2               2
                                                                                         +         ;                                  (5)
                                                                    ;t 1+        "

                                                           2
and converges in the long-run to                               , whose value is obtained setting                   ;t      =   ;t 1   in
(5) so that4                                                         s                             !
                                                               2                         2
                                                 2         "                             "
                                                     =                     1+4           2
                                                                                                1 :                                   (6)
                                                           2

   We will focus on stationary learning (Holmström, 1999, Sec. 2.2). Hence we as-
sume that the agent's initial is drawn from N ; 2 . Then ;t = remain constant
and time is not a state. Let mt denote the mean of the market's belief about t , which
we will also refer to as the agent's reputation. m obeys the following law of motion
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                               "
             mt+1 = E [               t+1   j mt ; xt ] = mt + (1                        ) xt ; where      2       2
                                                                                                                       :              (7)
                                                                                                           "   +
   4                     2                                 2
     Observe that @          =@   "   < 0 and @                =@      < 0 as fluctuations in output and efficiency lower
stationary precision.



                                                                       6
As (4) shows, by deviating from at , the agent can raise xt , manipulate mt+1 and drive
a wedge between her own belief and that of the market. We now analyze the agent's
incentives to do that.


2.1    Investment in reputation
The zero-profit condition for market's participants is satisfied when ct = E [yt j y t ] =
mt + at , with mt obeying the law of motion (7). We focus on equilibria in which at is
deterministic. The agent's action a must solve:
                                "                                             #
                                    X
                                    1
                                           t+s
             at = arg max Et                     U mt+s + at+s ; at+s             ; for all t = 0; 1; :::    (8)
                       at 2A
                                    s=0


This requirement ensures that: (i) given the law of motion of beliefs derived in the
previous subsection, equilibrium strategies satisfying (8) maximize the agent's utility;
(ii) given the equilibrium actions, beliefs are updated via Bayes rule which is well
defined for all a since all output levels occur with positive probability at a . Solutions
to problem (8) are therefore optimal.
     We now establish a sufficient condition for the existence of deterministic equilib-
ria.5 Whenever the agent deviates, she drives a persistent wedge between her belief
and that of the market. Thus a deviation that is not attractive on the equilibrium path
might nonetheless be profitable off path, and so the necessary condition is not gen-
erally sufficient. We now show that this concern does not apply when U ( ) is in the
CARA-GHH class.
Proposition 1 Assume that the per-period utility function is

                         U(c; a) = U (c           g (a)) =      exp(        (c     g (a)));                  (9)

with > 0; g 0 ( ) > 0 and g 00 ( )             0: A deterministic profile fat g1
                                                                               t=0 is an equilibrium
profile if and only if

                                           1         X
                                                     1
                         U2 (ct ; at ) =                    (   )s   t
                                                                         Et [U1 (cs ; as )] :               (10)
                                                    s=t+1
   5
     Note that the dynamic stability we consider here is quite distinct from the notion of strategic sta-
bility explored by Kohlberg and Mertens (1986). The latter, defined for finite games, is concerned with
robustness to certain kinds of perturbations of the game in question, while we are looking at stable
solutions of a dynamic strategic system.


                                                        7
    The proof is in the Appendix and it proceeds in two steps. First, we establish
that optimal strategies are deterministic on and off the equilibrium path whenev-
er the market's conjecture at is deterministic.6 This result holds because shocks to
the agent's reputation follow a martingale process, a requirement that holds in our
stationary learning model as well as in non-stationary environments. Then income
shocks, which reflect the history y t , will in turn drop out of the first-order condition
because buyers are risk neutral and their beliefs have the martingale property.7 Mar-
tingale types of shocks matter for the decisions of the agent only if her preferences
display a wealth effect, which can be turned off using the CARA-GHH specification.
We can therefore focus, without loss of generality, on sequences of deterministic ac-
tions. This restriction enables us to prove the concavity of the agent's objective in the
space of action sequences, thus directly establishing the sufficiency of the first order
condition.8
    The left-hand side of the necessary condition (10) is the marginal disutility, while
the right-hand side is the discounted benefit because a marginal increase in effort
raises the posterior mean at date s by @ms =@at = (1             ) s t 1 , for all s > t.9 Since
c is increasing in m and m is a martingale, expected consumption depends on the
agent's current reputation. Hence the optimality condition (10) varies with mt and
in general so would at ; contrary to our assumption that at depends on t only. To
ensure that Et [U1 (cs ; as )=U2 (ct ; at )] is not affected by mt , we neutralize the wealth
effect by assuming that the agent's utility function is CARA. This restriction ensures
that the agent's discount factor no longer depends on mt because it is the forecastable
component of ms for all s > t.

Proposition 2 When the per-period utility function is CARA, a deterministic profile
   6
     We consider Markov strategies where the agent's action might depend on the history of the game
through calendar time t as well as the market's and the agent's beliefs. Allowing for arbitrary devia-
tions, we show in Lemma 1 that, when the utility function is CARA, optimal strategies on and off the
equilibrium path do not depend on the agent's reputation. Hence they are independent of output
history and are a function of calendar time only.
   7
     See the proof of Proposition 2 and, in particular, the derivation of (33) which holds because the
current level of m does not carry additional information about its evolution in the future. Note that
this would not anymore be the case if the agent's type t were to follow a mean-reverting process
instead of a random walk, as stipulated in (2) :
   8
     A recent paper by Cisternas (2018) provides bounds guaranteeing sufficiency in more general set-
tings in which optimal actions may depend on the posterior m.
   9
     Eq. (10) is the counterpart of Holmström's (1999), eq. (22), with the essential addition of the terms
U2 (ct ; at ) and Et [U1 (cs ; as )] :




                                                    8
f at g 1
       t=0 is an equilibrium profile with interior effort if and only if


                           1       X
                                   1
                 0
               g (at ) =                  (r )s   t
                                                      exp ( [at   g (at )   (as   g (as ))]) ;        (11)
                                  s=t+1


where                                                       2 2
                                          r           exp         :                                   (12)
                                                             2

      The effective discount factor r is higher than because consumption is stochastic
and the agent is prudent (U 000 ( ) > 0). A mean-preserving spread in consumption rais-
es expected marginal utility in future periods, and so makes the agent more patient.
This precautionary motive is stronger when the coefficient of risk-aversion is large
because governs the curvature of the marginal utility function. The discount factor
r is also increasing in 2 because beliefs, and thus consumption, are more volatile
when types are less persistent. By contrast, r does not depend on the output variance
  2                                           2
  " . This surprising result arises because " has two countervailing effects. To describe
them, it is useful to recall that mt+1 = mt + (1     ) xt , and that consumption is linear
                                   2
in m as ct = mt + at . Hence " has a positive effect on consumption volatility since
it raises the variance of the market signal x. However, 2    " also raises the gain parame-
ter as the market puts less weight on recent observations when production is more
noisy. This additional inertia in the updating rule exactly compensates the direct im-
pact on the variance of the signal, thus leaving consumption volatility unchanged.10
In the remainder of the paper, we guarantee that expected returns are bounded by
focusing on cases where r < 1.11


3        Rest Point
Before analyzing cycles, we first show that the model has a rest point where effort
remains constant over time. Characterizing the stationary equilibrium has two main
benefits. First, it will enable us to compare its welfare properties with those of cycles.
Second, it will allow us to characterize the region where cycles occur by relating it to
the local stability of the rest point. To keep the analysis as general as possible, we
    10
      Note that this finding holds because prior precision is set equal to its stationary level 2 . For any
other value, the conditional variance of m would not anymore be independent of 2         ":
   11
      Another reason to rule out configurations where r > 1 is that they may exhibit excessive levels of
effort at the rest point instead of insufficient ones.


                                                        9
distinguish two main configurations: those where the rest point is at a corner of the
feasible set because costs are linear in a, and those where the rest point lies in the
interior of the feasible set because costs are strictly convex in a.


3.1   Rest point with linear costs
Suppose that g (a) = a with 2 (0; 1) to ensure that effort raises output net of disu-
tility. We rule out infinite effort by imposing an upper-bound a on the feasible set
A = [0; a]. With linear costs, optimality can only be restored through changes in
the discount factor because both marginal costs and marginal returns are constant.
To see why, assume that both at and at+1 belong to the interior of A and substitute
g 0 at+1 on the right-hand side of (11) to obtain the recursive condition
                                  "                             #
                                      U 0 ct+1      g (at+1 )
                 g 0 (at ) = Et                                     1   + g 0 at+1      :          (13)
                                         U 0 (ct    g (at ))

The recursive incentive constraint highlights that increasing at has two benefits:
   (i) It raises t + 1 earnings by (1 ), and
   (ii) it enables the agent to reduce her effort in period t + 1 by and undo the
deviation, thereby restoring the reputation associated to the equilibrium path in t + 2
and beyond.
   Both benefits are converted into today's utils through multiplication by the sto-
chastic discount factor Et U 0 ct+1 g (at+1 ) =U 0 (ct g (at )) . Since the utility func-
tion is CARA, (13) reads

         g 0 (at ) = r exp   at        g ( at )     at+1    g (at+1 )    1        + g 0 at+1   :   (14)

Reinserting the linear cost function g (a) = a into (14), we finally find that

                             U 0 (at+1 (1           ))
                                                       =                      :                    (15)
                              U 0 (at (1           ))    r(1 + (        1))

Taking expectations about at+1 as given, at adjusts until the equality is satisfied. The
equilibrium path is fully determined by the ratio of marginal costs to discounted mar-
ginal returns on the right-hand side of (15). Since this ratio is constant, all paths con-
verge to a when it is lower than one or, conversely, converge to zero when it is higher



                                                      10
than one. The dynamics become explicit if one uses (9) to rewrite (15) as

                                                1
                          at+1 = at                     log                          :                (16)
                                           (1       )                r(1 + (   1))

The law of motion is obtained projecting at on a line parallel to the 45-degree line
with an intercept equal to the constant on the right-hand side of (16). As shown in
Appendix A.2, Fig. 10, in the knife-edge case where the intercept is zero, i.e., when
  = (1     )=(r 1    ), the dynamic map and 45-degree line coincide so that any action
in A is a potential rest point. Besides this particular case, the action path converges
to a when the intercept is positive or to zero when the intercept is negative. Hence at
can be constant solely at one of the boundary of the action set.
    If marginal costs are low, so that < (1            )=(r 1     ), agents are tempted to
raise their effort above that of the rest point a   ^. Hence a^ is sustainable only if such
                                              12
deviations are not feasible, that is if a
                                        ^ = a. This solution is also efficient because the
cost parameter < 1 while marginal productivity is one. Conversely, when marginal
costs are high, so that > (1       )=(r 1       ), reputational concerns are too weak and
^ = 0 is the only rest point.
a


3.2     Rest point with convex costs
We now generalize our setup by assuming that disutility is strictly convex in effort. If
(i) U (c; a) = U (c g (a)), (ii) g 0 (0) = 0 and (iii) A = R+ , the incentive constraint (10)
always admits an interior solution for a . Hence the recursive condition (14) holds.
We will show in the next section that many sequences at satisfy it. The simplest one
is obtained setting at+1 equal to at to derive the rest point solution

                                                             1
                                         ^ = g0
                                         a          1
                                                                 1
                                                                         :
                                                         r

Efficient effort would require instead that a = g 0 1 (1). Thus, when r is smaller than
one, a^ < g 0 1 (1) and effort at the rest point is suboptimal because costs are paid up-
  12
     Formally, the incentive constraint (11) does not have to hold as an equality at the bounds of the
feasibility set. When < (1       )= r 1        and as = a = a  ^ for all s > t, (11) holds as an equality
                             1
                1        (r    )
if at = a + (1 ) log       1       and as an inequality if at = a: Hence setting effort equal to a^ in all
future periods does not pin-down a unique effort level in the current period. The equilibrium path can
converge from below to the rest-point a  ^ or remain constant at a
                                                                 ^: In the latter case, the agent would like
to raise her effort but is constrained by the requirement that a a.


                                                        11
front, whereas reputational benefits accrue slowly over time. This delay explains why
the gap between efficient and actual effort is larger when the agent is more impatient.


4        Cycles
Having characterized the rest point, we now explain how and when cycles become
possible. As in the previous section, we follow a heuristic approach by focusing first
on the simpler model with linear costs.


4.1      Cycles with linear costs
Deterministic output.--To build our intuition, we first assume that output is deter-
ministic, i.e., " = 0. Then 2 = 2 since all the uncertainty is due to the fact that
the agent's type changes from period to period. If were to remain constant, each
type would be revealed once and for all after the first output realization. This simpli-
fied environment enables us to isolate the impact of the discount factor. As shown
in Proposition 3, the model exhibits stationary cycles of period two when agents are
sufficiently patient. Moreover, two-period cycles can Pareto dominate the rest point
                                     ^ = 0 because effort costs are too high.13
^ when it is inefficient, i.e., when a
a

Proposition 3 Assume that (i) costs are linear in effort (g (a) = a with 2 (0; 1));
(ii) a 2 [0; a]; and (iii) output is deterministic ( " = 0) : Two-period cycles in which
effort oscillates between 0 and a become possible if and only if r 2 (r; r), where r =
  exp (    (1     ) a) and r = exp ( (1     ) a) : Moreover, whenever r 2 (r; ), the rest
point a^ = 0 is Pareto dominated by cycles.

    Cycles arise because the discount factor fluctuates procyclically. High at = a en-
tails above-normal consumption, leading to a low marginal utility U 0 (ct g (at )). The
opposite is true next period as at+1 = 0 delivers low consumption and relatively high
marginal utility U 0 (ct+1 g (at+1 )). Thus Et [U 0 (cs g (as )) =U 0 (ct g (at ))] is large to-
day, and this justifies the higher investment in reputation building. A similar but
    13
     Consumers are indifferent between all the different equilibria because they always pay a fair price
for the services of the agent. Hence, raising the agent's welfare is equivalent to a Pareto improvement
in the overall allocation.




                                                  12
opposite mechanism operates in the next period, making low effort optimal. The os-
cillations of the discount factor capture the willingness of the agent to smooth con-
sumption. Since the benefits of her action only accrue in the following period, she
finds it optimal to transfer resources from good to bad times by overinvesting.
    To better understand the forces at work, it is insightful to study the incentive con-
straint at the upper-bound a: Full effort is incentive compatible if and only if14

                                            U 0 (0)
                                   r                     = r exp ( (1   ) a) :      (17)
                                       U 0 ((1      ) a)

Reputational returns are on the right-hand side of (17), and they are increasing in
effort a because it raises the ratio of marginal utilities between bad and good times.
Quite intuitively, smaller oscillations become sustainable when the power of incen-
tives is strengthened. Take for example an increase in the discount factor . It raises r
as patient agents tend to be more concerned by their reputation. Hence the required
wedge between marginal utilities is decreasing in which allows the model to gen-
erate cycles for lower values of a. A similar mechanism is triggered by changes in the
degree of risk aversion because the effective rate of time preference r is increasing in
  . This effect is reinforced by the positive impact that has on the curvature of the
marginal utility function. When agents are more prudent, similar oscillations in con-
sumption generate greater swings in the discount factor, which lowers the value of a
that restores incentive compatibility.
    To sum-up, the agent must be sufficiently prudent and not too impatient for cy-
cles to emerge. Note that Proposition 3 also requires that agents are not too patient
since it imposes an upper-bound on the effective discount factor (r < ). Although
cycles can emerge even when this requirement is violated, they will not be welfare
improving because, as explained before, the rest point is efficient when costs are
lower than r.15

    Stochastic output.--We now consider the full model where output is stochastic.
When " differs from 0, today's action affects beliefs on-the-equilibrium path not on-
ly in the next period, but also in all future periods. The rate of decay of past obser-
vations is controlled by the parameter , whose value is equal to 0 when output is
noiseless. Proposition 4 takes into account the impact of by extending Proposition
 14
      See proof of Proposition 4 for a derivation of (17).
 15
      Remember that = 0 when " = 0:


                                                      13
3 to environments where output is noisy.

Proposition 4 Assume that (i) costs are linear (g (a) = a with 2 (0; 1)); and (ii)
a 2 [0; a]. There exists an interval (r; r), with r < +(1 )(1 ) , such that two-period
cycles in which effort oscillates between 0 and a become possible if and only if r 2
(r; r) : Moreover, whenever r 2 r; +(1 )(1 ) , the rest point a
                                                              ^ = 0 is Pareto dominat-
ed by cycles:

    As with deterministic output, welfare improving cycles can arise solely if the agent
is sufficiently patient and prudent. We can also show that they require output to not
be too noisy. Thus, although " is, by the usual account, a measure of idiosyncratic
uncertainty, higher " does not necessarily translate into more income volatility for
the agent. An increase in " lowers the power of incentives because recent observa-
tions are less informative when realized output is a noisier measure of actual quality.
This implies in turn that cycles are not sustainable if " is too high.

Proposition 5 There exists a unique output variance " such that cycles of period two
are never sustainable when " > " . Moreover, (i) when > r, cycles are sustainable if
and only if a log(   =r)
                   (1 )
                         and " 2 [0; " ]; (ii) when     r, there exists an output variance
 " 2 [0; " ) such that cycles are sustainable for all " 2 [ " ; " ].


    According to Proposition 5, a reduction in the noisiness of the technology can
raise income volatility. This paradoxical behavior occurs if: (i) " is initially higher
than the upper-bound " , so that at is at the rest point; and (ii) the drop in " is large
enough to ensure that the new value is smaller than " , so that effort may cycle be-
tween 0 and a. Then the cross-sectional and conditional variance of income will be
negatively correlated with " . As mentioned in the introduction, this relates to the
evidence on rising inequality in SPGBW.
    The variance of income increments from period to period is given by16

                 Var mt+1 + at+1        (mt + at ) = (1         )2    2
                                                                      "   +   2
                                                                                  + Var (at )
                                                         2
                                                     =       + Var (at ) :                      (18)

The variance of at is obviously equal to 0 at the rest point. It can jump to a2 =4 when
 " crosses the " threshold from above if the agent selects the cycling equilibrium.

 16
      See the proof of Proposition 2 in the Appendix for a derivation of the second equality.


                                                    14
                     0 .6 5

                                                                          R e st P o in t
                      0 .6
                                                                          C ycle


                     0 .5 5



                      0 .5



                     0 .4 5



                      0 .4



                     0 .3 5
                           0   0 .1   0 .2   0 .3    0 .4   0 .5   0 .6      0 .7           0 .8




Figure 1: C ROSS - SECTIONAL E ARNINGS VARIANCE AS A F UNCTION OF                                  ".
Notes: = 3; r = :8; = :9;    = :4; = :3; A = [0; 1]:

The drop in output uncertainty could therefore trigger an increase in the conditional
volatility of income.
    To characterize its impact on the cross-sectional variance, we must first ensure
that a stationary distribution of types exists. The simplest way to do so is to assume
that agents randomly exit the market with probability per period. Since each agent's
productivity is a geometrically distributed random variable and an additional period
of life adds 2 to the variance of m, the time-invariant distribution of types (m) is a
                                                               P
mixture of normal distributions with variance: Var(mt ) = 2 1    t=1 t (1    )t :17 Given
that income variance is equal to Var(mt )+Var(at ), raising " above the " threshold
can reduce income variance. Provided that agents were coordinated on the reputa-
tion cycle, an increase in " will trigger a switch to the rest point and a fall in the
cross-sectional variance, as depicted in Fig. 1. The impact of the other volatility pa-
rameter is less intriguing because it strengthens the power of incentives. It is there-
fore positively correlated with income variance since a switch to the cycling regime
will be triggered by an increase in , as opposed to a decrease in " . Note that also
directly increases the volatility of income by augmenting the variance of income in-
crements from period to period (see Ed. (18)). As a result raises the discount factor
r, which further supports the emergence of cycles.
  17
    More precisely, we know from (18) that mt+1 N mt ; 2 : Hence, the cross-sectional variance of
m among the cohort of agents that have been active for t periods is equal to t 2 . The overall variance
of m is obtained summing up the variances across all cohorts and weighting them by the fraction,
        t
 (1    ) , of agents in each cohort t.



                                                    15
4.2     Cycles with Convex Costs
We now turn our attention to the model with convex costs introduced in Section 3.2.
We first analyze the stability conditions under which all paths starting in the vicinity
of the rest-point converge back to it. Then we show that, when the cost function is
quadratic, deterministic 2-period cycles are sustainable whenever the rest point is
backward unstable.

    Stability of the rest point.--Since today's action at is determined by tomorrow's
action at+1 , we analyze the backward dynamics of the model. Hence we say that the
rest point is locally unstable when the paths that land in its vicinity gradually diverge
from the rest point as time unfolds backwards. Under risk neutrality, the rest point is
always backward stable.18 Any other anticipations than at+1 = a     ^ generate diverging
trajectories, hence the unique deterministic equilibrium requires that at = a     ^ for all
t. By contrast, the rest point can be backward unstable when the agent is risk averse.
Then, for any initial anticipation a1 in the neighborhood of a^, there exists a determin-
istic path that converges to a ^. The condition under which equilibrium multiplicity
arises is laid-out in Proposition 6.

Proposition 6 Assume that g (a) is strictly convex with g 0 (0) = 0. Then the rest point a
                                                                                         ^
is backward unstable if and only if

                              1      + 2 g 0 (^
                                              a)   g 00 (^
                                                         a)
                                          0           0
                                                            < 2 (1    g 0 (^
                                                                           a)):                      (19)
                               1     + g (^  a)    g (^  a)

    Equation (19) depends on the action a    ^ at the rest point, and so only implicitly de-
scribes the parameter values under which multiple equilibria arise. We can nonethe-
less easily establish a couple of observations. First, when the coefficient of absolute
risk aversion goes to zero, condition (19) is violated and the rest point is backward
stable.19 Second, if a
                     ^ is efficient, the rest point is again backward stable. To see why,
note that the impact of , as measured by the term on the right hand side of (19),
is proportional to 1 g 0 (^ a). Thus risk aversion is irrelevant when g 0 (^ a) = 1, that is
when the action is efficient. Intuitively, the curvature of the utility function matters
  18
     Formally, let ' at+1 = at denote the implicit map resulting from (14). The rest point is sta-
ble when the absolute value of the derivative of ' (at+1 ) at the rest-point is less than one, i.e., when
     a) =daj < 1: See Fig. 2 for an illustration of the model's dynamics under risk neutrality.
jd' (^
  19
     This is not obvious from (19) because affects a      ^ through its impact on r. However, since r con-
                                                                        1
verges to when goes to zero, lim !0 a        ^ ( ) = g 0 1 (1    )=           . Hence the LHS of (19) con-
verges to a positive value, whereas the RHS goes to zero, and so (19) never holds in the limit.


                                                   16
only to the extent that changes in a affect utility. Benefits and costs are set equal at
the first best and a marginal increase in effort leaves utility unchanged. However, we
have seen that a ^ is inefficient whenever the agent discounts the future. Then raising
a lowers her marginal utility, thus making it attractive to provide more effort today in
order to raise tomorrow's consumption. This is why an increase in effort is followed
by a drop and a return to the rest point if the curvature of the utility function is high
enough.

   Cycles.--When the rest point is backward unstable, there exists a continuum of de-
terministic equilibria whose paths start in the vicinity of the stationary solution and
gradually converge to it. But the model can also generate more complex behaviors
with persistent oscillations. We now focus on the simplest equilibria in such class,
namely deterministic cycles of period two.

Proposition 7 When the costs function is quadratic, i.e., g (a) = a2 =2, deterministic
2-period cycles are sustainable whenever the rest point is locally unstable.

    The reason why cycles are sustainable is the same as in the model with linear cost-
s: Procyclical fluctuations in the discount factor make it optimal to work hard when
consumption is high and to reduce effort when consumption is low. This mecha-
nism is closely related to the one that renders the rest point backward unstable, and
Proposition 7 shows that the two phenomena are indeed concomitant when disutility
is quadratic in effort.
    Inspecting the phase portrait generated by the incentive constraint (13) helps one
understand how cycles arise. We highlight the impact of risk aversion by also report-
ing the model's dynamics when agents are risk neutral. Then, as shown in the left-
hand panel of Fig. 2, the mapping between at and at+1 is linear with a slope greater
than one. Hence the rest point a ^ is the only effort level that does not generate diverg-
ing action paths.
    We introduce risk aversion in the right-hand panel of Fig. 2. The dynamic map
solves the recursive equation (14) with a quadratic cost function g (a) = a2 =2, and is
therefore equivalent to

         exp     ( at   at 2 =2) at = r exp        at+1     2
                                                          at+1 =2   1   + at+1 :     (20)

   Let us first explain why small values of at can never be incentive compatible. Let-
ting at go to zero, we see that the expression on the left hand side of (20) also con-

                                              17
                                   R IS K N E U T R AL IT Y                                R IS K AV E R S IO N
                    2                                                       2


                   1.8                                                     1.8


                   1.6                                                     1.6


                   1.4                                                     1.4


                   1.2                                                     1.2
           a t+1




                                                                   a t+1
                    1                                                       1


                   0.8                                                     0.8


                   0.6                                                     0.6


                   0.4                                                     0.4


                   0.2                                                     0.2


                    0                                                       0
                         0   0.5   â        1           1.5   2                  0   0.5   â       1          1.5   2

                                            a                                                     a
                                                t                                                     t



Figure 2: P HASE P ORTRAITS WITH L INEAR AND CARA U TILITY.
Notes: = :7;    = :85; = 5; g (a) = a2 =2:

verges to zero. By contrast, the expression on the right hand side of (20) has a pos-
itive minimum. By continuity, there always exists an a > 0 such that (20) does not
hold whenever at 2 [0; a]. In economic terms, there is no expectation about at+1 that
sustains an effort level smaller than a. Intuitively, the dynamic map in Fig. 2 is empty
close to the origin because today's marginal loss converges to 0 whereas tomorrow's
marginal returns are bounded from below by 1           .
    Besides this empty interval, we see that, instead of the one-to-one mapping pre-
vailing under risk neutrality, the dynamic map under risk aversion is a correspon-
dence which associates a pair of incentive compatible at+1 to any at . The incen-
tive constraint is satisfied by two different at+1 because tomorrow's effort shifts the
discount factor and the marginal costs in opposite directions. Increasing at+1 rais-
es tomorrow's consumption, which lowers the discount factor and counteracts the
increase in marginal costs g 0 (at+1 ). When the elasticity of the discount factor with re-
spect to at+1 is higher than that of the marginal costs, it is possible to perturb a pair
of sustainable actions and restore incentive compatibility by adjusting at+1 until its
effect on the discount factor offsets the change in marginal costs.
    Effort settles down at the rest point a
                                          ^ when the expectation-formation mechanism
always selects the lower branch of the phase portrait. By contrast, 2-period cycles


                                                                  18
Figure 3: B ACKWARD I NSTABILITY OF THE R EST P OINT a
                                                     ^ AS A F UNCTION OF ,           AND    .

are regime switching equilibria whose actions oscillate between the upper and lower
branch.

    Stability region.--Equation (19) enables us to identify the region with multiple
equilibria. The rest point is backward unstable and 2-period cycles arise whenever
the parameters fall inside the surface depicted in Fig. 3. We use two different angles
to depict the instability region because its shape is strongly asymmetric.
    Looking first at the discount factor , we see that it has an ambiguous impact as
cycles emerge only for intermediary values of . When goes to 0, so does the rest
point a^ because the agent is not anymore concerned by her reputation. Hence the
marginal disutility of effort g 0 (^
                                   a) also converges to 0, and the instability condition (19)
is always violated. Reputational returns are so low that an increase in today's effort
can be incentive compatible solely if the marginal disutility of effort in the next period
increases more than proportionally. Thus the slope of the relationship between at+1
and at is smaller than 1 when evaluated at a       ^, which ensures that the rest point is
locally stable. Conversely, as goes to 1, a     ^ converges to the efficient level of effort
which, as explained above, is always backward stable.
    Comparing the impact of the coefficient of risk aversion in the right and left-
hand panels of Fig. 3, we notice that has a stronger effect on the instability region

                                             19
when is low. This is because does not only increase risk aversion but also renders
the agent more prudent. As explained before, the precautionary motive increases the
level of effort at the rest point. When a^ is already close to its efficient level because is
high, as in the right-hand panel of Fig. 3, then the precautionary channel counteracts
the risk aversion channel. By contrast, when is low, as in the left-hand panel of Fig.
3, the risk aversion channel dwarfs the precautionary channel, so that raising makes
it much more likely for cycles to be sustainable.
      The last variable included in Fig. 3 is the gain parameter which controls the iner-
tia of beliefs. Remember that varying is equivalent to adjusting the output variance
  2         2                                                20
  " , with " going from 0 to infinity as goes from 0 to 1.      As already discussed in Sec-
tion 4, decreasing makes it more likely that cycles arise by strengthening the power
of incentives. However, it also increases the value of the rest point, which may coun-
teract the direct impact of when the rest point is close to its efficient level. As was
the case for , this countervailing force explains why the instability region is much
less sensitive to changes in in the right-hand panel of Fig. 3, where and thus a         ^ are
both close to one.

    Output volatility and income variance.--Studying the model with linear costs, we
proved that a reduction in the noisiness of the technology may raise income variance.
A similar conclusion can be numerically established in the model with convex costs.
For instance, taking the parameters reported below in Table 1 and varying the value
of " , we indeed find that income variance and output volatility can be negatively
correlated when effort fluctuates endogenously.
    The upper panel of Fig. 4 reports effort in the high and low states of 2-period
cycles along with its value at the rest point. Cycles are sustainable when incentives
are strong enough. Hence they arise when , and consequently " , are below a cer-
tain threshold.21 The cross-sectional variance of income increases as " crosses this
bifurcation point because effort is not anymore the same across all agents. The bot-
tom panel is the analog of Fig. 1; this experiment confirms that an increase in in-
come variance can be caused by a reduction in the volatility of the underlying shocks.
Moreover, we see that the calibrated value of " in Table 1 falls well within the region
  20
     By contrast, the variance of types 2 affects two parameters at once. Raising 2 leads to a decrease
in as well as an increase in r, which is equivalent to raising in Fig. 3. In general, these two adjust-
ments tend to reinforce each other, thus making it more likely that cycles are sustainable.
  21
     Note that Fig. 3 shows that it is not always possible to generate cycles by lowering , especially
when is close to one so that the rest point is not too far from its efficient level.


                                                  20
              0.8

              0.6

              0.4

              0.2
                0.1   0.15    0.2   0.25       0.3    0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55   0.6




              0.1
             0.08
             0.06
             0.04
             0.02
                0.1   0.15    0.2   0.25       0.3    0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55   0.6




Figure 4: E QUILIBRIUM E FFORT AND E ARNINGS VARIANCE AS A F UNCTION OF                      ".
Notes: Other parameters reported in Table 1.


where cycles are sustainable. This again relates to the evidence on rising inequality
in SPGBW.


5     Earnings Persistence

5.1    Deterministic cycles
Parametrization.--We have established that reputation cycles become possible when
the risk-aversion and the patience of the agent belong to some intermediate range.
To see whether these two requirements are likely to be met in practice, we use micro
data to pin down the parameters.
    We now assume that agents are workers who maximize their expected utility, and
that a is a worker's hidden labor supply. We focus on quadratic disutility so that
g (a) = a2 =2 so that the model has only five parameters f ; ; ; " ; g. For the year-
ly discount factor, we set = 0:95. The exit rate determines the average length of
a worker's career. Assuming that reputation is occupation specific, we target Kam-
bourov and Manovskii's (2008) finding that occupational mobility at the one-digit
level averaged 13% per year in PSID data over the 1968-1997 period.
    The two variance parameters f " ; g are chosen to match the speed of employer
learning and the labor wedge. We rely on the labor wedge because it is the most wide-
ly documented measure of labor market inefficiency. Let denote the labor wedge

                                                     21
which we define as the gap between the marginal product of labor (MPN) and the
marginal rate of substitution (MRS), so that   1 MRS/MPN. The labor wedge mea-
sures the extent to which agents underinvest in their reputation. In the absence of
distortions, = 0 because both MRS and MPN are equal to the wage. At the rest
point of our model, however, labor supply is inefficiently low and the MRS is lower
than the wage. Hence the labor wedge is positive and equal to22
                                                  1
                                              r        1
                                        ^=        1
                                                           2 (0; 1) ;                                 (21)
                                              r

where and r are defined in (7) and (12). We write ^ for the wedge when labor supply
is at the rest point so that a = a^. We set ^ = 0:4 to match the average labor wedge in
the US over the last fifty years, as documented by Shimer (2009).
     For our second moment, we target the frequency at which the market updates its
beliefs, i.e., the speed with which information about the agent's performance leaks
out to the general public. Its value has been estimated by Lange (2007) in his empiri-
cal analysis about the speed of employer learning. Using AFQT scores to infer ability,
Lange's estimates of the learning speed implies that = :71.23
     Together with Eqs. (7), (21), these estimates for and enable us to to pin down
  " and    conditional on . The upper panel of Fig. 5 shows that reputation cycles are
consistent with our calibration strategy whenever        3:3: The amplitude of the oscil-
lations increases with , as greater fluctuations are required to offset the increase in
the curvature of the utility function. The lower panel of Fig. 5 shows that effort at the
rest point is always smaller than average effort in the cycling regime, thus substanti-
ating our claim that cycles can incentivize investment in reputation.24 Although is a
CARA-utility parameter, we can convert the requirement that          3:3 into a statement
about CRRA utility as follows: By adjusting average ability , we can normalize aver-
  22
      The wage can be normalized to one without loss of generality. The technology being linear in
supplied labor a, the MPN is also equal to one and so the labor wedge at the rest point is equal to
^ = 1 MRS/MPN= 1 g 0 (^       a) = 1 r 1 1 ; i.e., (21): Note that the macro and micro labor wedges are
identical in steady-state because all agents behave in the same way. Hence our definition is consistent
with the aggregate measure provided by Shimer (2009).
   23
      Lange (2007) uses K1 to denote the speed of learning parameter and defines it on page 11, eq.
(11). Comparing its expression with that of in (7), one sees that K1 = 1           . Although learning in
Lange's model is non-stationary, as types remain constant over time, the similarity between K1 and
holds because K1 captures the speed of learning during the first year of a worker's career. Since ability
is occupation specific in our calibration, we have to correct the empirical estimate K   ^ 1 by the rate at
                                        ^
which workers switch occupation, as K1 = K1 (1          ) = (1    ) (1   ):
   24
      Note that cycles are not always welfare improving. Alternative calibrations show that they can also
push average effort below its value at the rest point.


                                                      22
                     1.2
                               Low Effort
                      1        High Effort
                               Rest Point
                     0.8

                     0.6

                     0.4

                           3           3.5   4        4.5        5         5.5       6




                     0.8       Cycles
                               Rest Point

                     0.7



                     0.6


                           3           3.5   4        4.5        5         5.5       6




Figure 5: D ETERMINISTIC C YCLES AS A F UNCTION OF THE C OEFFICIENT OF R ISK AVER-
SION .
Notes: Baseline parameters reported in Table 1.


age consumption and output to unity at the rest point.25 Then also corresponds to
the average coefficient of relative risk aversion. Picking = 4, while setting " = :117
and      = :04, ensures that we exactly match our labor wedge and speed of learning
targets. Our choice of parameters is summarized in Table 1.


    Earnings persistence.--We now explain why reputation cycles generate earnings
profiles with large shocks that are less persistent than small shocks, as documented
in GKOS and ABB. To relate mean reversion to the size of the shocks, we follow GKOS
in reporting today's earnings changes against the expected value of future earnings
changes k years from now, for different values of k . The resulting impulse response
functions are depicted in Fig. 6. They measure the fraction of each shock that has
mean-reverted. The points that are on the horizontal line indicate perfect persistence
of today's shocks, whereas those that are on the 45 degrees line indicate full mean
reversion.26
    We first report in the left-hand panel of Fig. 6 the impulse responses when effort
is at the rest point. Then earnings shocks, whatever their sizes, are fully persistent be-
  25
     More precisely, setting = 0:4 ensures that consumption at the rest point is on average equal to 1
since E [^
         c] = + a^ = + 1 ^, and ^ has been set equal to 0:4 to match the evidence in Shimer (2009).
  26
     The impulse response functions are estimated using a simulated panel dataset made of 100 waves,
each one of them containing 5.000 workers. We delete the first 50 waves to limit the impact of the initial
conditions, thus basing our estimates on 500.000 observations.


                                                   23
                                                Table 1: Calibrated Parameters
                                                           D IRECTLY CALIBRATED PARAMETERS
PARAMETERy        VALUE            I NTERPRETATION                           S OURCE
                  .95              Discount factor                           Standard
                  .4               Mean initial ability                      Normalize consumption c ^= 1
                  .13              Career switching rate                     Kambourov et al. (2008)
                                                       I NDIRECTLY CALIBRATED PARAMETERS
              y
PARAMETER          =4     =9.1     I NTERPRETATION                           TARGET                              S OURCE
 "                .117 .051        Output noise                              Labor wedge ^= .4                   Shimer (2009)
                  .040 .017        Type volatility                           Speed of learning = :71             Lange (2007)
                                         I NDIRECTLY CALIBRATED PARAMETERS OF STOCHASTIC MODEL
              y
PARAMETER         Value            I NTERPRETATION                           TARGET                              S OURCE
                  .124             Volatility observable productivity Impulse response of log earnings changes Guvenen et al. (2015)
                  .75              Switching probability              Impulse response of log earnings changes Guvenen et al. (2015)
                  9.1              Coefficient of risk aversion       Impulse response of log earnings changes Guvenen et al. (2015)
Notes. y When applicable, parameter values are for yearly frequency.




cause beliefs, and thus wages, follow a martingale process. We introduce reputation
cycles in the right-hand panel of Fig. 6. Large shocks are now driven by changes in
effort, with cycles considerably widening the range of income fluctuations. Focusing
on horizons that are even (k = 1; 3; 5), large shocks are completely transitory because
they follow the agent's effort whose value oscillates from one period to the next.


5.2       Three fit-improving extensions
The following three extensions improve the model's fit to the impulse-response evi-
dence in GKOS.

     1. Observed characteristics: Given that some output characteristics may be ob-
        servable, we add a state pt such that the output of a worker with t years of occu-
        pational experience reads

                                                           yt =          + at + " t +          pt ;                              (22)
                                                                   |t      {z }               |{z}
                                                                       U nobservable     Observable


        where
                                                                                               2
                                         pt = p t      1   + t ; with          t       N 0;        and p1 = 0:

        Since pt is persistent, it drops out of the incentive constraints for the same rea-
        son that mt does.


                                                                            24
                                       Rest Point                              Cycles
                  0.25                                           0.8
                                                      k=1                                     k=1
                                TRANSITORY
                   0.2                                k=2                                     k=2
                                                      k=3        0.6                          k=3
                  0.15                                k=4                                     k=4
                                                      k=5        0.4                          k=5
                   0.1

                                                                 0.2
                  0.05

                    0                                              0

                 -0.05
                                                                 -0.2
                         PERSISTENT
                  -0.1
                                                                 -0.4
                 -0.15
                                                                 -0.6
                  -0.2

                 -0.25                                           -0.8
                         -0.2   -0.1      0     0.1   0.2               -0.5     0      0.5




Figure 6: I MPULSE R ESPONSES OF D ETERMINISTIC C YCLES M ODEL .
Notes: Using the parameters in Table 1 when = 4, we generate a balanced panel dataset of 50 waves,
with 5.000 workers per wave. For each period, we assign workers into 10 groups based on their current
log-earnings growth. Then, for workers in each group, we compute the average of log k-year earnings
growth, i.e., E [log (ct+k =ct ) jlog (ct =ct 1 )] for k = 1; 2; 3; 4; 5.


   2. Some workers can borrow and lend: Cycling equilibria arise only if agents can-
      not borrow and lend. According to Kaplan, Violante and Weidner (2014) only
      one third of agents are so constrained. Hence we assume that two thirds of
      workers can smooth their income and implement the rest point solution since
      that is the only deterministic equilibrium that exists in that case. This adds no
      new parameters.

   3. Stochastic cycles: Our model exhibits a significant departure from GKOS data
      as the degree of mean reversion dramatically changes when the forward horizon
      k goes from even to odd. Whenever k is odd, shocks are fully persistent because
      effort reverts to its original value. This suggests that, in order to reproduce the
      data, one needs to consider cycles whose lengths are not deterministic.
      Thus we allow agents to switch stochastically, instead of deterministically, be-
      tween periods of low and high effort. Signals that raise at are "good news" be-
      cause they bring the worker closer to first best, signals that lower at are bad
      news.27 We continue to focus on action paths with two levels only, but assume
  27
   This relates to the good-news and bad-news literature. By contrast to our signals, Board and
Meyer-ter-Vehn (2013), e.g., have endogenous signals to which effort can respond.


                                                            25
       that, at each level, effort changes state with probability , or remains constant
       with the complementary probability. This lowers the discount factor but other-
       wise leaves incentives as before; details are in Appendix A.4. One coordination
       device may be task assignment as in Bar-Isaac and Hörner (2014) ­ assignment
       to a demanding task indicating an expectation that effort will be high, and vice
       versa.


5.3    Extended calibration
We keep the baseline parameters reported in Table 1, and select the values of the
coefficient of risk aversion and of the two new parameters f ; g that minimize
the distance between the persistence of earning shocks predicted by the model and
their empirical counterparts in GKOS.28 As reported in the third column of Table 1,
we obtain the best fit when = :75; = :124 and = 9:1:

    Distribution of earnings growth.--The density of earnings changes predicted by
the model, and the one observed in GKOS data, are reported in the upper-panel of
Fig. 7. We also include a normal density with the same standard deviation as in the
data. Fig. 7 shows that the simulated and empirical densities display high kurto-
sis since they have much sharper peaks than the normal distribution. In our model,
the extra kurtosis is generated by reputation cycles because the two other sources of
income shocks, namely changes in reputation and observable productivity, are inde-
pendently drawn from normal distributions. The impact of reputation cycles is no-
ticeable on the shoulders of the simulated distribution, that is in the regions around
the positive and negative standard deviations, where the model generates slightly
more mass than in the data.

    Persistence of earnings changes.--The impulse responses of median income work-
ers are reported in Fig. 7. The prediction of the model are now very much in line with
GKOS data. First, the impulse responses display similar shapes. According to our
model, the nonlinearity of the impulse response is explained by the fact that small
  28
    More precisely, the empirical moments are summarized by the vector m    ^ which contains the av-
erage persistence of earnings shocks at an horizon of 3 years for 20 equally-sized quantiles. Using
m( ) to denote the simulated moments generated by the vector of parameters              f ; ; g, we
compute the quadratic distances d( )     (m( ) m  ^ ) (m( ) m   ^ i ) : Our calibrated vector ^ solves
^ = arg min 2[0;1] R2
                    +
                      d( ).



                                                 26
           3                                                                         Data
          2.5                                                                        Model
                                                                                     Normal
           2

          1.5

           1

          0.5


                -2    -1.5     -1          -0.5        0    0.5         1      1.5            2




           1

         0.5

           0

         -0.5

          -1

                     -1             -0.5               0          0.5                1



Figure 7: H ISTOGRAM OF L OG E ARNINGS C HANGES AND I MPULSE R ESPONSES OF S TO -
CHASTIC C YCLES M ODEL .
Notes: Parameters reported in Table 1. Following GKOS, we focus on the impulse response of median
income workers, i.e. workers whose income at t 1 falls between the 46th and 55th percentile.




                                                  27
to medium shocks are very persistent because they result from changes in reputa-
tion or observable productivity, which are permanent by assumption. By contrast,
large shocks are driven by reputation cycles that tend to revert over time. Given
that the empirical relevance of large transitory shocks could already be inferred from
GKOS, our contribution consists in providing a microfoundation for their emergence.
Adding a stochastic switching rate ( = :75) smooths the impulse responses, as one-
fourth of saving-constrained agents do not adjust their effort from one period to the
next.
    Besides fitting the persistence of earnings shocks at each quantile, our simulation-
s also approximate the size of the shocks, log (ct ) log (ct 1 ), reported on the horizon-
tal axis of the lower panel of Fig. 7. Achieving a good fit along both dimensions was
made possible by the adjustment of the coefficient of risk aversion . As shown in Fig.
5, reputation cycles are wider when increases. Our calibration indicates that match-
ing the actual size of earning shocks requires setting the coefficient of risk aversion
around 9.

    Earnings volatility.--According to our model, hand-to-mouth agents should ex-
hibit higher earnings volatility since they cycle between periods of low and high ef-
fort. This prediction is broadly consistent with the empirical findings in Ziliak et al.
(2011) and Dahl et al. (2011) according to which earnings volatility is much higher
among high school dropouts. They find that differences in earnings volatility across
educational groups are mostly accounted for by employment transitions, and argue
that further research should strive to assess whether the employment transitions that
lead to higher volatility are voluntary or not. Reputation cycles support the first inter-
pretation since high school dropouts are more likely to be saving-constrained, and as
such may find it optimal to supply different amounts of labor over time.


6     Discussion

6.1   Related models

We have shown that reputation cycles capture the non-linear persistence of income
shocks. To the best of our knowledge, no other explanation has yet been advanced.
Standard models of income dynamics may account for the non-linear persistence of


                                           28
either positive or negative shocks, but not both as our model does. Take for instance
search models with on-the-job search. The loss of a high-paying job can trigger a
large income loss that is not fully persistent as workers can search their way out of
low paying jobs. A positive income shock, on the other hand, is more persistent since
it is triggered by the find of a higher-paying job as in Burdett and Mortensen (1996)
for example. Hence on-the-job search does not explain the transitory nature of large
income gains. A natural candidate would be performance based bonuses since ex-
ceptional rewards are not likely to be awarded over two consecutive years. However,
bonuses being added to baseline earnings, they cannot account for the low persis-
tence of large negative shocks.
     Our analysis demonstrates that oscillating effort provides a unified explanation
for both negative and positive shocks. Hence one may wonder whether canonical
models of human capital accumulation are able to generate effort paths that are ob-
servationally equivalent to reputation cycles. We now explain why this is not the case
by isolating the two unique features of our model:
     (i) effort is below its output-maximizing level so that higher effort today raises
current earnings and utility,
   (ii) higher effort today does not raise future output.
Properties (i) and (ii) combine to generate the movements in the effective discount
factor that are needed to sustain cyclical effort paths. By contrast, models of human
capital investment do not feature oscillating solutions because they include at most
one, but not both of these features.

    Ben-Porath type of human capital investment.--Reputation, as we have modeled
it, differs from traditional models of the Ben-Porath (1967) type in which a worker
sacrifices current income in return for higher future earnings. In contrast to (i) and
(ii) such human capital investment lowers current earnings via a compensating dif-
ferential contrary to property (i), and it raises future earnings contrary to property
(ii).

   Learning by doing investment.--Although it does not have property (ii) ; LBD is
the closest-related line of research because it potentially shares with our model prop-
erty (i), namely the feature that higher learning today raises an agent's income today.
That does not mean, however, that it also raises today's utility. Here is a version of
LBD that compares closely to our model. Let k denote the stock of human capital


                                          29
and a the investment in human capital. Assume that

                           ct = kt + at and,                                                    (23)
                           kt = (1           )kt   1   + at 1 ; with      2 (0; 1):             (24)

Property (i) does not hold because agents set at beyond the point where today's util-
ity U (ct g (at )) is maximized.29 Hence increasing at reduces current utility instead of
raising it. Property (ii) does not hold either because, according to (24), higher effort
raises k 0 , and so increases tomorrow's output. Thus the discount factor is decreasing
in at at the rest point, and LBD exerts a stabilizing force which prevents the emer-
gence of cycles.
    When combined with technological choice as in Parente (1994) and Jovanovic and
Nyarko (1996), the LBD model can generate cycles resembling the asymmetric cycles
displayed in Fig. 9. It only generates large transitory negative shocks to earnings
growth, but not the corresponding positive ones that the evidence in Fig. 7 shows.


6.2    Extensions

1. Non-stationary learning and life-cycle profiles.--We now describe four extensions.
                                                                  2
As a first check, we let the precision of the starting prior ;0     differ from its long-run
         2
level      . We typically expect the precision of beliefs to increase over time, as is always
the case when types are constant since then 2 , and thus 2 , are both infinite. The
returns to effort are decreasing in posterior precision because it lowers the weight
that the market puts on recent observations. Hence the action path is also decreasing
over time as in Holmström's model with risk-neutral agents. The negative correlation
between average earnings and labor market experience explains why we did not use
our model to analyze life-cycle profiles but instead focused on earnings changes.
   Adding risk-aversion allows us to construct another equilibrium sequence which
oscillates around the regularly decreasing path, as shown in Fig. 8. This alternative
solution eventually coincides with the two-period cycles described in the previous
  29
   Current output is maximized when a = g 1 (1). Thus the observation that effort exceeds its output-
maximizing level directly follows from the first-order condition
                                              1
                                              X               0
                                                       s tU   (cs   g (as )) @ks
                           g 0 (at ) = 1 +                                       > 1:            (25)
                                             s=t+1
                                                          U 0 (ct   g (at )) @at



                                                         30
                       1


                     0.9


                     0.8


                     0.7


                     0.6


                     0.5


                           1   2     3      4      5      6      7          8      9   10




Figure 8: N ON -S TATIONARY L EARNING G ENERATING                EVEN       W IDER TAILS    AT   Y OUNGER
AGES THROUGH C YCLING E FFORT.
Notes: g (a) = a2 =2; = :75; = 3; " = :1;  = :05;                    ;0   = :18:

section because the precision converges to its stationary level 2 . Moreover, the de-
creasing amplitude of the oscillations is consistent with empirical evidence about the
negative relationship between income volatility and worker age. Even along the regu-
larly decreasing "Holmström" path shown by the solid curve in Fig. 8, income volatil-
ity is decreasing with the worker age. Cycling at paths thus reinforce this decline by
subtracting mass from the tails of the growth rates' distributions as the worker ages.

    2. Asymmetric cycles and income-growth persistence.--Although we have focused
on cycles of period 2, the model can generate more complex patterns. For example,
it is possible to use the model with linear costs to generate cycles with more than
two states. As an illustration, Fig. 9 describes incentive-compatible cycles of peri-
od 3 where investment grows for two successive periods and then drops back to its
initial level. This is the simplest instance of asymmetric cycles featuring protracted
booms and sudden busts. A tendency for a time series to show large negative growth
rates followed by several smaller positive growth rates is known as "steep asymme-
try." Moreover, the long-run frequency distribution of at places equal weight on the
points 0; 0:71, and 1, and thus has longer left tail. A tendency for a detrended time
series to have negative skew is known as "deep".30
    The longer period of growth is sustainable because investment costs are low, i.e.,
 30
      See Fig. 4 in Jovanovic (2006) for a graphical distinction between the two types of asymmetry.




                                                   31
                      1



                     0.8



                     0.6
                                                                                        E[a]
                at
                     0.4



                     0.2



                      0
                           2          4          6          8         10         12
                                                     Time

Figure 9: A SYMMETRIC C YCLES WITH CARA U TILITY AND L INEAR C OSTS .
Notes: " =.1, =.2, =.8, =4, =.75, A=[0,1].


  < (1     )=(r 1    ).31 As explained in Section 4, when this inequality holds, the rest
point is efficient because the agent always finds it profitable to raise her investment.
But now she is discouraged from doing so in the two low states by the fact that the
marginal utility of consumption will decrease in the following period. We show in
Appendix A.3 that this feature gives rise to asymmetric cycles similar to the one de-
picted in Fig. 9 whenever: (i) a is high enough, and (ii) 2 ( ; (1       )=(r 1    )) for
some > 0. The logic of the proof can be extended to cycles with more than 3 states.

    3. Finite horizon does not eliminate cycles.--In contrasting our model to Holm-
ström's benchmark, we have stressed that equilibrium uniqueness is not anymore
guaranteed. But one may argue that this distinction is not fundamental because it
stems from our focus on deterministic equilibria. Although this requirement is im-
plicitly assumed in much, if not all, of the career concerns literature, there can be oth-
er solutions if one allows for strategies that are history-dependent. However, whenev-
er the agent has a finite horizon, backward induction bites and the equilibrium under
risk neutrality is unique and deterministic. By contrast, multiple equilibria and rep-
utation cycles continue to arise in finite-horizon models with risk averse agents.32
  31
     By contrast, asymmetric cycles with protracted slumps and sudden booms can be constructed
when the steady-state is inefficient, so that > (1      )=(r 1       ).
  32
     This is particularly simple to check when disutility is linear. Let T denote the agent's lifetime and
assume that, as in Proposition 4, 2 r 1 1 ; 1 . Then at = 0 for all t 2 f1; 2; :::; T g is a deterministic
equilibrium. But it is not always unique. For example, a1 = a and at = 0 for all t 2 f2; :::; T g is also a
deterministic equilibrium if the horizon T and the upper bound a of the action set are large enough.


                                                     32
    4. CRRA utility function.--We have restricted our attention to CARA utility func-
tions because they do not display any wealth effect. As shown in the proof of Propo-
sition 1, this property implies that optimal effort does not depend on the agent's rep-
utation, which enables us to demonstrate that the necessary condition (11) is also
sufficient. Establishing sufficiency is notoriously complicated in models with persis-
tent private information such as ours. Given that any deviation drives a long-lasting
wedge between the agent's and the market's beliefs, a strategy that is not attractive on
the equilibrium path might nonetheless be profitable off path. In other words, rul-
ing out one-shot deviations is not sufficient since it leaves open the possibility that
multiple deviations are profitable. Cisternas (2018) addresses this issue by deriving
necessary and sufficient conditions that hold across a broad class of nonlinear utili-
ty functions. Using these conditions, Cisternas establishes the existence of equilibria
where the agent's equilibrium actions only depend on the market's belief. A promis-
ing direction for further research would be to combine Cisternas' approach with ours,
and assess the existence of equilibria where the agent's actions depend not only on
the market's belief but also, as in our model, on an exogenous signal.
    The CARA restriction has therefore been imposed for technical reasons and is
not instrumental in generating endogenous fluctuations. If anything, introducing
a wealth effect would render agents more willing to take risks when their action and
consumption are high, thus reinforcing self-sustaining fluctuations in effort. This
was illustrated in the previous version of our paper (Jovanovic and Prat, 2016) where
the model was embedded into a general equilibrium setting. There we explained how
one recovers the same incentive structure if firms operate the technology described
in (1) and if risk-averse households fully diversify their purchases of goods over firms.
There are two fundamental differences between the partial and general equilibrium
settings. First, in the latter, cycles are in aggregate consumption. Hence the require-
ment that agents cannot smooth them becomes equivalent to the assumption that
the economy is closed with no access to outside finance. Second, agents being mem-
ber of a large representative household, they are insured against idiosyncratic shocks
to their wealth, which neutralizes the wealth effect for utility functions outside of the
CARA family. We show in Jovanovic and Prat (2016) that a calibrated version of the
macro model with CRRA utility produces realistic fluctuations in terms of peak-to-
trough movements in consumption and of the spacing of time between recessions,
thus illustrating that reputation cycles do not hinge on the CARA specification.



                                           33
7    Conclusion
We have shown that investment in reputation is not always discouraged by finan-
cial constraints. Cyclical paths are sustainable only if the agent cannot borrow or
lend, and they may entail higher earnings because average effort can be higher. This
contrasts sharply with the findings reported in a host of papers that financial con-
straints inhibit tangible investment. It is therefore possible, that when facing such
constraints, agents may substitute away from investing in physical capital and to-
wards reputation capital. The conditions under which cycles can emerge are stated
in Propositions 3 and 6, and the calibrated parameter values satisfy them comfort-
ably.
    We have also shown that cyclical effort paths generate unusual shocks to earnings
and can help explain the evidence on their dynamics. By inducing a large switch in
effort, tail events in earnings growth emerge. As documented in the data, these large
shocks are less persistent than the smaller shocks to earnings growth. Given the styl-
ized design of our model and the indirect nature of the evidence, we do not claim
that the actual mechanism is the exact reputational mechanism that our model gen-
erates. Yet we have shown that the main alternative, learning by doing, is unlikely to
be helpful in this regard. Other candidates such as technological upgrading produce
large transitory negative shocks to income growth, but not large positive ones.
    Further research should therefore strive to advance and evaluate competing ex-
planations. In this respect, embedding reputational concerns into a standard model
of income dynamics appears to be a promising avenue of research. As documented
in GKOS, such a richer model would include a mixture of autoregressive processes
with different degrees of persistence, along with transitory shocks and abrupt tran-
sitions capturing the risk of non-employment. A convincing test for this extended
framework would be to assess whether it matches the systematic differences in kur-
tosis and persistence of earnings growth across income and age groups that cannot
be captured by our stylized model. In particular, since the assumption that workers
are hand-to-mouth is more likely to hold at the bottom of the earnings distribution,
future research should particularly focus on the earnings dynamics of low-income
workers.
    Finally, the model also offers a new perspective on changes in the volatility of in-
come, namely that a rise in income volatility could be the result of a rise in reputa-
tional concerns that, in turn could be called by a reduction in the noise accompany-

                                          34
ing the relation between effort and output. Agency theory suggests that a reduction
in noise raises the incentives to provide effort, and we have shown that this can also
help explain the rise in the volatility of earnings.


References
 [1] Arellano, Manuel, Richard Blundell and Stéphane Bonhomme. "Earnings and
     Consumption Dynamics: A Nonlinear Panel Data Framework." Econometrica,
     vol. 85(3) (2017): 693-734.

 [2] Bar-Isaac, Heski, and Johannes Hörner. "Specialized Careers." Journal of Eco-
     nomics and Management Strategy, vol. 23(3) (2014): 601-627.

 [3] Ben-Porath, Yoram. "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
     Earnings." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 75(4) (1967): 352-365.

 [4] Board, Simon, and Moritz Meyer-ter-Vehn. "Reputation for Quality." Economet-
     rica, vol. 81(6) (2013): 2381-2462.

 [5] Bouvard, Matthieu, and Raphaël Levy. "Horizontal reputation and strategic au-
     dience management." Forthcoming in the Journal of the European Economic As-
     sociation (2019).

 [6] Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. "Wage differentials, employer size,
     and unemployment." International Economic Review (1998): 257-273.

 [7] Cisternas, Gonzalo. "Two-Sided Learning and the Ratchet Principle." Review of
     Economic Studies, vol. 85(1) (2018): 307-351.

 [8] Dahl, Molly, Thomas DeLeire and Jonathan Schwabish. "Estimates of Year-to-
     Year Volatility in Earnings and in Household Incomes from Administrative, Sur-
     vey, and Matched Data." The Journal of Human Resources, vol. 46(4) (2011): 750-
     774.

 [9] Fazzari, Steven, Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen. "Financing Constraints and
     Corporate Investment." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 19 (1988):
     141-206.



                                         35
[10] Green, Edward, and Robert Porter. "Noncooperative collusion under imperfect
     price information." Econometrica, vol. 52(1) (1984): 87-100.

[11] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. "Investment,
     capacity utilization, and the real business cycle." American Economic Review
     (1988): 402-417.

[12] Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan and Jae Song. "What Do Data on
     Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Dynamics?" NBER
     Working Papers No. 20913 (2015).

[13] Holmström, Bengt. "Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective."
     Review of Economic Studies, vol. 66 (1999): 169-182.

[14] Hubmer, Joachim. "The Job Ladder and its Implications for Earnings Risk." Re-
     view of Economic Dynamics, vol. 29 (2018): 172-194.

[15] Jovanovic, Boyan. "Asymmetric Cycles." The Review of Economic Studies, vol.
     73(1) (2006): 145-162.

[16] Jovanovic, Boyan, and Yaw Nyarko. "Learning by doing and the choice of tech-
     nology." Econometrica, vol. 64(6) (1996): 1299-1310.

[17] Jovanovic, Boyan, and Julien Prat. "Reputation Cycles." NBER Working Paper No.
     22703 (2016).

[18] Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii. "Rising Occupational and Industry
     Mobility in the United States: 1968-1997." International Economic Review, vol.
     49(1) (2008): 41-79.

[19] Kaplan, Greg, Giovanni L. Violante, and Justin Weidner. "The Wealthy Hand-to-
     mouth." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 45(1) (2014): 77-153.

[20] Kohlberg, Elon, and Jean-Francois Mertens. "On the Strategic Stability of Equi-
     libria." Econometrica, vol. 54(5) (1986): 1003-1037.

[21] Lange, Fabian. "The Speed of Employer Learning." Journal of Labor Economics,
     vol. 25(1) (2007): 1-35.

[22] Mailath, George J., and Larry Samuelson. Repeated Games and Reputations. Ox-
     ford University Press, 2006.

                                        36
[23] Parente, Stephen. "Technology Adoption, Learning-by-Doing, and Economic
     Growth." Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 63(2) (1994): 346-369.

[24] Shimer, Rob. "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge." American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 1(1) (2009): 280-97.

[25] Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom and Till von Wachter.
     "Firming Up Inequality." NBER Working Papers No. 21199 (2015).

[26] Ziliak, James, Bradley Hardy and Christopher Bollinger. "Earnings Volatility in
     America: Evidence from Matched CPS." Labour Economics, vol. 18 (2011): 742­
     754.




                                        37
A     Appendix

A.1    Proof of Proposition 1
We prove that, given the unique consumption function that satisfies the no-profit re-
quirement, the optimality of a conjectured deterministic profile can be established
by a first-order condition. In Holmström (1999) sufficiency of the necessary condi-
tion immediately followed from the linear impact of actions on payoffs. With concave
payoffs, we have to characterize the agent's problem both on and off the equilibrium
path. Hence we consider arbitrary strategies and let t     at at denote the devia-
tion from conjectured effort at each date. We wish to relate the agent's and market's
posteriors about , which we denote ma and m, respectively. Bayes rule implies that

                                       1         X
                                                 t
                                                                                       1          X
                                                                                                  t
                                                         t s                                              t s
              ma
               t+1       mt+1 =                                (xa
                                                                 s     xs ) =                                    s;   (26)
                                                   s=0                                            s=0


where xa
       t    yt      at . Let   t   denote the following weighted mean of past deviations

                                   t   =       t 1   + (1        )   t 1   with        0   = 0:                       (27)

It follows from (26) that ma  t = mt       t : We can use this relationship to specify the

agent's expectations about the law of motion of beliefs. First notice that yt ma       t =

 t
        a                         a
      mt + at + "t . Since t mt is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 2 ,
the innovation process from the agent's standpoint is a normally distributed variable,
u N (0; 2 + 2                        a
                " ), such that yt = mt + at + ut . Reinserting this decomposition into the
law of motion of market's beliefs, we find that

                    mt+1 = mt + (1                    )xt = mt + (1               )[   t          t   + ut ]:

The normality of ut implies that the distribution of the posterior P (mt+1 ) satisfies

                                                         mt+1         [mt + (1 )( t                       t )]
                 P ( mt+1 j mt ;       t; t)   =                                                                 ;
                                                                     (1    )( + " )

where ( ) is the standard normal CDF. Given the per-period utility function U (m; a ; ) =
 exp( [m + a        g (a + )]), the agent's value function on and off the equilibrium



                                                            38
path is given by the fixed point of the following functional equation
                                                 Z
          Vt (m; ) = max U (m; at ; ) +               Vt+1 (m0 ;   0
                                                                       ) dP ( m0 j m; ; ) ;   (28)

            s:t: m0 = m + (1        )[        + u];
                  0
                      =     + (1     ) :

Lemma 1 Assume that the per-period utility function is CARA:

              U(c; a) = U (c       g (a)) =    exp(      (c   g (a))); with      > 0:         (29)

Given a deterministic profile fat g1t=0 , optimal strategies on and off the equilibrium
path are deterministic functions of time and of the stock of past deviations t =    t 1+

(1    )(at at ), where 0 = 0. In particular, they do not depend on the agent's reputa-
tion mt nor on her output history.

Proof. The lemma follows from the fact that the value function is of the form

                              Vt (m; ) = exp(          m)Vt (0; ) :                           (30)

To verify the conjecture, we change the variable of integration of the Bellman equa-
tion
                     8                                                        9
                     < exp( [m + a         g (a   +   )])                     =
                                       t        t
     Vt (m; ) = max       R
                     :+     Vt+1 (m + (1     )[         + u]; 0 ) d       u   ;
                                                                          +
                               8                                                9
                               < exp( [a          g (a    +  )])                =
                                              t        t
              = exp( m) max          R
                               :+      Vt+1 ((1     )[         + u]; 0 ) d  u   ;
                                                                                        +

             = exp(       m)Vt (0; ) :

The second equality follows reinserting our guess (30) and using the fact that at is de-
terministic and thus independent of m, while the third equality follows directly from
the Bellman equation (28) defining V . Since the functional equation is a contraction
mapping, the value function is unique and its policy function ( ; t) identical across
all market's beliefs m. Hence, the agent chooses a sequence of deterministic actions
that only depend on the cumulative stock of past deviations and potentially on t.
In other words, optimal policies are deterministic on and off the equilibrium path.

                                               39
    We are now in a position to prove Proposition 1. According to Lemma 1, there
is no loss of generality in focusing on sequences of deterministic actions. Let a
fa0 ; a1 ; :::g denote a sequence of actions from date 0 onwards. Given that effort in
each period belongs to the feasibility set A R+ , sequences are element of the infi-
nite Cartesian product A1 = f(at )1  t=0 jat 2 A for all t = 0; 1; :::g. The market belief can
be computed using the Bayesian map

                                                       1        X
                                                                t
                                            t                              t s
                      mt+1 (a; xa jm0 ) =       m0 +                             ( xa
                                                                                    s      as + as ) ;               (31)
                                                                    s=0


where xa fxt g1  t=0 . We use these notations to define the agent's utility as a functional
in the space of action sequences
                                                  "                                                          #
                                                       X
                                                       1
                                                                t
          V0 (0; 0) = max
                        1
                          U (a) = max
                                    1
                                      E                             exp(         [mt (a) + at        g (at )]) ;
                        a2A           a2A
                                                       t=0


where mt (a) is a shorthand version of mt (a; xa jm0 ) introduced in (31).33 Sufficiency of
the necessary condition will follow if we can prove that U (a) is a concave functional.
We establish an even stronger requirement as concavity holds in all periods. To see
why, let pt (a)    ct (a) g (at ) denote returns in period t, i.e., consumption net of the
disutility of effort. We have

       pt ( a1 + (1       )a2 ) = mt ( a1 + (1             )a2 ) + at        g ( a1
                                                                                  t + (1             )a2
                                                                                                       t)

                                     mt (a1 ) + at          g (a1
                                                                t ) + (1                ) mt (a2 ) + at     g (a2
                                                                                                                t)

                               = pt (a1 ) + (1             )pt (a2 );

for any 2 (0; 1) and all pair of sequences a1 ; a2 2 A1 . The first equality uses the fact
that the market conjecture at is deterministic. The second inequality holds because
the disutility g is convex in a, while the Bayesian map for mt is linear in a, so that
mt ( a1 +(1     )a2 ) = mt (a1 )+(1   )mt (a2 ). Per-period utility is given by Ut (a) = (U
pt )(a), and since the composition of concave continuous functions is itself concave,
the strict concavity of U along with the convexity of A imply that

                          Ut ( a1 + (1      )a2 ) > Ut (a1 ) + (1                       )Ut (a2 );
  33
    Since the innovation process xa and the prior m0 cannot be influenced by the agent, they can be
treated as exogenous when studying her optimal control problem.


                                                       40
for any 2 (0; 1) and all pair of sequences a1 6= a2 2 A1 . We have therefore proven
that per-period utility is strictly concave in a, which ensures that
                                                  "                                                #
                                                      X
                                                      1
                                                              t
           U ( a1 + (1            )a2 ) = E                       Ut      a1 + (1            )a2
                                                      t=0
                                                      "                      #                        "                    #
                                                        X
                                                        1                                                 X
                                                                                                          1
                                                                  t                                             t
                                         > E                          Ut (a1 ) + (1              )E                 Ut (a2 )
                                                        t=0                                               t=0
                                                       1                           2
                                         = U (a ) + (1                      )U (a ):

Note that the inequality holds because the only source of randomness is the inno-
vation process xa defined from the agent's standpoint so that its realizations are by
definition independent of a: We can therefore conclude that U is a strictly concave
functional in the space of action sequences. Thus any local maximum of U is also
a global maximum. A necessary condition for U to have a maximum at a is that its
Gateaux derivative dU (a ; h) = 0 for all h 2 A1 . The existence of the Gateaux deriva-
tive being guaranteed by the convexity of A1 , this requirement yields the necessary
FOC (11) which, by strict concavity of the objective, is also sufficient.



A.2    Proofs of Propositions 2 to 7
Proof. Proposition 2: We wish to show that the necessary conditions (10) and (11)
are equivalent when the agent's utility is CARA. Reinserting (9) into (10), we find that
(10) is satisfied when

                 1     X
                       1
                                                      U 0 (cs          g (as ))
   g 0 (at ) =                (     )s   t
                                             Et
                      s=t+1
                                                      U 0 (ct          g (at ))
                 1     X1
           =                  (     )s   t
                                             Et [exp (mt + at                     g ( at )       (ms + as            g (as )))] :   (32)
                      s=t+1


The posterior m cancels out from the expectation because

                     mt+1 = mt + (1                    )xt = mt + (1                   )(    t     m t + "t ) ;




                                                                  41
so that
                                                          "                                                                               !#
                                                                                                  X
                                                                                                  s 1
          Et [exp ( (mt              ms ))] = Et exp                             (1           )          (       t+i      mt+i + "t+i )
                                                                                                  i=0
                                                                  2
                                                                      (1          )2 (    2
                                                                                          "   +      2
                                                                                                         ) (s           t)
                                                    = exp                                                                     :                     (33)
                                                                                          2

The first equality holds because mt is a martingale, while the second equality holds
because (i) t N (mt ; 2 ), and (ii) "t is a normally distributed noise with variance 2 ".
                                                                    2
The expression above can be simplified using the definition of        in (6) and the fact
that = 2 = ( 2 " +
                    2
                      ), hence
                                                                                         q       2
                                                                                                       2
                                                              4                       4   1 + 4 2" 1
                                                                                          4
                                                                                          "
                    (1    )2 (   2
                                 "   +      2
                                                )=        2       2
                                                                       =                  q                                        1
                                                              +                                    2
                                                          "                      2
                                                                                 "    1+2   1 + 4 2" 1
                                                                                          2
                                                                                      4   "                                       2
                                                    = q                     2
                                                                                              q                   2
                                                                                                                              =       :
                                                                       4                                     4
                                                       1+                  2
                                                                            "
                                                                                     1            1+             2
                                                                                                                  "
                                                                                                                      +1

Simplifying the expectation in (33) and replacing the resulting expression into (32),
we finally obtain

                1        X
                         1
                                                          U 0 (cs          g (as ))
    0
   g ( at ) =                    (     )s       t
                                                    Et
                         s=t+1
                                                          U 0 ( ct         g (at ))
                1         X1                                  2 2
                                                                      (s         t)
           =                     (     )s       t
                                                    exp                                   exp ( [at                    g ( at )   (as     g (as ))]) ;
                         s=t+1
                                                                      2

                                                                           s t                2 2
which is indeed equivalent to (11) since                                         exp (              (s            t) =2) = rs t .

Proof. Propositions 3 and 4: Since Proposition 3 is a subcase of Proposition 4, we
directly focus on the general problem where " > 0, so that output is noisy. We are
interested in 2-period cycles where at = a when t is even, and at = 0 when t is odd.
Using the notation
                               S (a) exp ( (1    ) a) ;                         (34)

and taking into account the feasibility constraint a 2 [0; a], we find that the Kuhn-




                                                                       42
Tucker conditions resulting from the incentive compatibility constraint (10) are
               0                                                           1
        1             X
                      1                                  X
                                                         1
               @                   (r )i S (a) +                    (r )i A if t is even so that at = a;      (35)
                   i2f1;3;5;:::g                    i2f2;4;6;:::g


and
              0                                                              1
        1             X
                      1                                    X
                                                           1
              @                   (r )i S (a)   1
                                                    +                   (r )i A if t is odd so that at = 0:   (36)
                  i2f1;3;5;:::g                         i2f2;4;6;:::g


These two conditions can be re-written as
                                                                                  "             #
               1                                                                      1 (r )2
                        f ( ; r; )        S (a), where f ( ; r; )                                   r :       (37)
             S ( a)                                                                   r(1   )
                                               p
Let r1      = [ + (1       ) (1    )] and r0      = [ (1      (1    ))] > r1 , so that f ( ; r1 ; ) =
1 and f ( ; r0 ; ) = 0: Since f ( ; r; ) is strictly decreasing in r with limr!0 f ( ; r; ) =
+1, there exists a unique r < r1 such that f ( ; r; ) = S (a) > 1: The strict monotonic-
ity of f ( ; r; ) with respect to r also implies that there exists a unique r 2 (r1 ; r0 ) such
that f ( ; r; ) = 1=S (a): It is easily verified that the two inequalities in (37) are satis-
fied, and thus cycles are sustainable, whenever r 2 (r; r) :
    Cycles are welfare improving when the rest point a         ^ = 0. To show that this is the
case when r 2 (r; r1 ), set as = a  ^ for all s t in (11). The resulting incentive constraint
reads = r (1           + ), a requirement that cannot be satisfied since r < r1 implies
that > r(1          )=(1 r ). Hence any a      ^ > 0 cannot be incentive compatible as the
agent would like to deviate by investing less than a       ^, as shown in Fig. 10. However,
such deviations are not feasible when at = 0 for all t, and so a      ^ = 0 is indeed the only
rest point.
    Finally, we consider the limit cases where " = 0. Then is also equal to 0 and
so r1 = . Moreover since f ( ; r; 0) = =r, we have r = exp (                  (1    ) a) and r =
  exp ( (1       ) a), as stated in Proposition 3.


Proof. Proposition 5: We first prove that cycles can emerge solely if " does not ex-
ceed a certain threshold. The first step consists in rewriting the necessary condition




                                                             43
   Figure 10: P HASE P ORTRAITS FOR TWO D IFFERENT VALUES OF                                                  WHEN   g (a) = a.

(35) as follows
                  0                                                                      1
            1            X
                         1                                          X
                                                                    1
                                                                                                     r (1 )   S ( a) 1
                  @                   (r )i S (a) +                             (r )i A =                              +1 :
                                                                                                      1 r      1+r
                      i2f1;3;5;:::g                             i2f2;4;6;:::g


The expression on the right-hand side is decreasing in and converges to 0 as goes
to 1. Hence there exists a 2 (0; 1) such that the necessary condition (35) is not
satisfied whenever > : Given that is strictly increasing in " , and that it goes
from 0 to 1 as " goes from 0 to infinity,34 two-period cycles cannot be sustainable
whenever " is greater than a certain value, which we denote by " .
(i) Let's now first consider cases where        r. If = (r       )=[r(1    )], the definition
of f in (37) implies that f ( ; r; ) = 1. Given that S (a) is greater than 1, condition (37)
is necessarily satisfied and so > (r          )=[r(1     )]. Moreover, it follows from the
continuity of f and the proof of Proposition 4 that there exists a         (r     )=[r(1    )]
such that the necessary condition is sufficient and satisfied for all 2 ; . Given
the relationship between " and , defines a unique " such that two-period cycles
are sustainable for all " 2 [ " ; " ].
(ii) We now consider cases where > r. The necessary condition is satisfied when
                                               2
                                                                    q           2
                                                                                             1
  34
       Remember that     =1            2
                                           "
                                           +           2   =1   2    1+4        "
                                                                                2   +1           .
                                                   "




                                                                      44
   = 0 if and only if f ( ; r; 0)   S (a), i.e., when a    log ( =r) =[ (1 )]. Then we
also know from the first step of the proof that there exists a such that the necessary
condition will be satisfied for all 2 0; . Moreover, we have shown in Step 3 of
the proof of Proposition 4 that the necessary condition is also sufficient whenever
the rest point is inefficient, a property that is verified because > r. Finally, using
once again the relationship between " and , we conclude that two-period cycles
are sustainable if and only if " 2 [0; " ].

Proof. Proposition 6: We want to characterize deterministic dynamics near the rest
point a
      ^. Let at = ' (at+1 ) denote the implicit map so that l (' (a)) = h (a), where
l (a)   g 0 (a) U 0 (a g (a)) and h (a)   rU 0 (a g (a)) [1   + g 0 (a)]. Differentiating
the incentive constraint (13) at the rest point, we find that

                                             g 0 (^
                                                  a)
           0        dat                  1   + g 0 (^
                                                       A
                                                     a) g
                                                             a)
                                                            (^        a
                                                                  AU (^       a)) [1
                                                                           g (^         g 0 (^
                                                                                             a)]
          ' (^
             a)                      =                                                             ;   (38)
                   dat+1         a
                           at+1 =^            Ag (^
                                                  a)             a
                                                             AU (^       a)) [1
                                                                      g (^        g 0 (^
                                                                                       a)]

where AU (x) = U 00 (x)=U 0 (x) and Ag (a) = g 00 (a) =g 0 (a).
                   ^ is locally unstable if j'0 (^
    The rest point a                             a) j > 1. Since the denominator in (38)
is always higher than the numerator, the instability condition can be satisfied sole-
ly if the numerator is negative. Let us focus first on cases where the denominator is
positive while the numerator is negative. Then it is easy to verify that '0 (^ a) < 1
whenever (19) is satisfied. The other possibility is that both numerator and denomi-
nator are negative, so that

                    Ag (^        a
                        a) < AU (^           g (^
                                                a))(1        g 0 (^
                                                                  a)) , '0 (^
                                                                            a) > 1;                    (39)

a condition that is always fulfilled when requirement (19) in Proposition 6 is satisfied.


   Proposition 7 can be proved in a similar way to Proposition 4. Thus we first use a
direct approach by changing variable and defining a new fixed point problem.

Lemma 2 Let
                                              r (1  )
                                     a (s)            ( r + s) ;
                                              1 (r )2




                                                    45
2-period cycles are sustainable when the fixed point problem

                                                   U 0 (c(a(1=s))              g (a(1=s)))
                                  s = (s)                                                                            (40)
                                                      U 0 (c(a(s))             g (a(s)))

admits a solution s 6= 1.

Proof. Lemma 2: We focus on 2-period cycles and denote this period action by a, next
period by a0 ; the period after by a, and so on. In other words, we have the discount
factors from today til tomorrow and from tomorrow til the day after, respectively,

                                  s    U 0 (c(a0 )        g (a0 ))=U 0 (c(a)             g (a));                     (41)
                                 s0    1=s (a; a0 ) :                                                                (42)

Therefore, if we start at t = 0, so that a is the action at t = 0; 2; 4; 6::: and a0 the action
for t = 1; 3; 5; 7; :::; then the incentive constraint (10) is satisfied when (a; a0 ) solve the
following two equations
                                                                     !                                       !
          1         X
                    1                           X
                                                1
                                                                              1              r s    (r )2
    a=                           (r )t s +                   (r )t        =                       +              ;
                 t=1,3,5,7,...               t=2,4,6,8,...
                                                                                           1 (r )2 1 (r )2
                                                                      !                                       !
          1         X
                    1                            X
                                                 1
                                                                               1             r s0    (r )2
   a0 =                          (r )t s0 +                   (r )t       =                        +              :
                 t=1,3,5,7,...                t=2,4,6,8,...
                                                                                            1 (r )2 1 (r )2

These simplify to

                                                      1
                                         a=                        r (r + s) ;                                       (43)
                                                  1       (r )2
                                                      1
                                        a0 =                    2 r (r        + s0 ) :                               (44)
                                                  1       (r )

Thus there are 4 equations (41), (42), (43), and (44), and 4 unknowns, (a; a0 ; s; s0 ) : One
solution is (^  ^; 1; 1) where a
             a; a              ^ = (1   )=(r 1     ), which is a version of Holmström's
(1999) Proposition 1. Now let's treat s as a parameter to begin with. The action a as a
function of s is given by (43) and (44). Thus our problem is equivalent to looking for
a fixed point in s of the function (s) defined in (40).

Proof. Proposition 7: Since U (c) = exp( c), it follows from the definition in (40)
                                (r )2
of ( ) that (1) = 1: Let s 2 1r(1   )
                                      r ; since c (s) = 0 and c (1=s) 2 (0; 1), we have

                                                              46
 (s) < 1. By continuity of the mapping                          ( ), there will be a fixed point s 2 (1; s) if
 0
  (1) > 1: Differentiating ( ), we obtain

 0                            1       a(1=s)       r (1  )                              a(s)2                          a(1=s)2
     (s) =       1   a(s) +                                exp                 a( s )                  a(1=s)                     ;
                                      s2           1 (r )2                                2                               2

and so
                                  0                                      r (1  )
                                      (1) > 1 , 2 [1            a(1)]            > 1:
                                                                         1 (r )2
                                                                                        1
This expression can be simplified as a(1) = a
                                            ^ = (1                               )=(r              ) so that

                                               r (1  )    a(1)
                                                     2 =       :                                                           (45)
                                               1 (r )    1+r

Reinserting this equality into the previous equation we get

                                  0
                                      (1) > 1 , 2 [1            a(1)] a(1) > 1 + r ;

which implies in turn that

                                            r
                                           a(1)
                                                        (1        a(1))
                                             1                               >1:
                                           a(1)
                                                        (1        a(1))

This allows us to conclude that the rest point is unstable since equation (38) with
quadratic costs and CARA utility reads
                                                        1
                     dat                           1
                                                        +a(1)
                                                                        (1     a(1))         r
                                                                                                       (1      a(1))
             0                                                                              a(1)
         ' (a(1)) =                            =        1                               =     1                        ;
                    dat+1         at+1 =a(1)           a(1)
                                                                   (1        a(1))          a(1)
                                                                                                       (1      a(1))

                                                                                                                           1
where the last equality follows from expression of the rest-point a(1) = (1                                        )=(r
 ).



A.3      Asymmetric cycles.
Proposition 8 derives conditions under which cycles of period 3 can be constructed
using the partial equilibrium model with linear costs described in Subsection 4. It
focuses on asymmetric cycles with protracted booms and sudden busts. The logic
of the proof can be applied to study reverse cases and to show that cycles with pro-

                                                             47
tracted slumps and sudden booms can be sustained when > (1              )=(r 1    ).
Furthermore, it is cumbersome but relatively straightforward to extend the proof so
as to construct cycles with more than 3 states.

Proposition 8 Consider the partial equilibrium model with CARA utility and linear
costs, i.e., g (a) = a. Assume that satisfies the compatible conditions

                     1                     r(1   ) r2 (1              +        )
                         1
                                 >     >                                           + (r )2 :              (46)
                 r                         1 (r )3

Then there exists a unique amin > 0 such that deterministic cycles of period three, where
                                 8
                                 >
                                 > a when t = f0; 3; 6; :::g
                                 >
                                 <
                             at = 0 when t = f1; 4; 7; :::g
                                 >
                                 >
                                 >
                                 :a~ 2 (0; a) when t = f2; 5; 8; :::g;

are sustainable whenever a             amin .

Proof. Proposition 8: We propose a constructive proof. We study each action in turn
and prove their incentive compatibility

  1. at = a: Since we are focusing on cases where                     < r(1           )=(1     r ), we have

                             1          X
                                        1
                                                             1      X
                                                   (r )i <                     (r )i S (a    at+i ):      (47)
                                     i=f1;2;:::g                 i=f1;2;:::g



     The last inequality follows from the definition of S ( ) in (34) because a     at+i
     for all i, and so S (a at+i )  1, with strict inequality for some i. Since the last
     expression in (47) measures the discounted returns from effort at date t, the
     feasibility constraint binds and at = a is indeed incentive compatible.

  2. at = 0: At the lower-bound of the feasibility set, costs must exceed returns so




                                                        48
  that

                     1      X
                            1
                                      (r )i S        at+i
                          i=1;2;:::
                              0                 2                                                      31
                                              1                 X
                  ~ ) r @1
              =S( a                       + 4                              (r )i    1
                                                                                        S (~
                                                                                           a       at+i )5A
                                                             i=f2;3;:::g

              =S( a
                  ~) r (1                +      ):

  The last equality follows from the fact that the incentive constraint must hold
  with equality in the next period because at+1 = a   ~ 2 (0; a). The condition is
  satisfied whenever
                                       log r(1 + )
                          a
                          ~ a ~min                     > 0:                   (48)
                                           (1    )


3. at = a~ 2 (0; a): First, we assume that condition (48) holds as an equality and we
   show that there exists a unique value of a which renders a  ~min incentive compat-
   ible. Since a
               ~ is interior, the incentive constraint has to hold exactly, i.e.,

                 1        X
                          1
             =                       (r )i S a
                                             ~        at+i                                                     (49)
                         i=1;2;:::
                                0                2                                                      31
                                                 1               X
             = S (~
                  a       a) r @ 1           + 4                            (r )i       1
                                                                                            S (a    at+i )5A
                                                              i=f2;3;:::g

             > S (~
                  a       a) r (1         +      ) > S (~
                                                        a         a) :

  The first inequality follows from step 1 above, while the second one holds be-
  cause < r(1        )=(1 r ). It shows that S (~     a a) has to be below one, thus
  requiring that a be strictly larger than a  ~. Keeping a
                                                         ~ constant and differentiating
  (49) with respect to a, we find that returns are strictly decreasing in a. Further-
  more, if
                          1        (r )2 r (1      + ) = + ( r )3
                       >                                            ;              (50)
                                                1 (r )3
  there exists a unique value, which we denote amin , such that a ~min and (49) is
                                                                ~=a




                                                     49
      satisfied. To verify that (50) is consistent with r(1            )=(1      r ) > , notice that

      r(1  )   1          (r )2 r (1      + ) = + (r )3                          r (1    +    )
             >                                          ,1>r                                       1 :
       1 r                              1 (r )3

      This inequality is equivalent to > r2 (1      )= [1 + r  (r )2 ], which yields a
      lower-bound that is less than the term on the right-hand side of (46) as well as
      to r(1   )=(1 r ). Hence the two conditions in (46) are compatible since they
      define a non-empty interval. As with period-2 cycles, low levels of effort can
      never be incentive compatible when costs are too small.

    We still have to prove that our cycles are sustainable when a > amin . Differenti-
ating (49) with respect to both a and a    ~, one finds that @ a
                                                               ~=@ a 2 (0; 1). The derivative
being positive, a ~>a ~min if a > amin , and the condition (48) for incentive compatibility
of at = 0 is satisfied. Furthermore, the derivative being smaller than one ensures that
~ remains within the interior of the feasible set as a increases.
a


A.4    Stochastic cycles.
Proposition 9 : Let the effort pair (a (s) ; a (s)) be defined as follows

                                       r      + s + (1   ) (1 r (1         )) =
            a (s) = r (1       )                               2        2          ;              (51)
                                               (1 r (1      ))     (r )
                                       r      + s 1 + (1    ) (1 r (1         )) =
            a (s) = r (1       )                                 2        2          :            (52)
                                                (1 r (1       ))    (r )

If the fixed point problem
                                        U 0 (c(a (s))   g (a (s)))
                                   s=                                                             (53)
                                        U 0 (c(a (s))   g (a (s)))
admits a solution s 6= 1, stochastic cycles where effort switches with probability                  2
(0; 1) from a (s) to a (s), or from a (s) to a (s), are sustainable

Proof. Proposition 9: Let s = U 0 (c(a) g (a))=U 0 (c(a) g (a)) denote the discount
factor when effort switches from a to a. Then the recursive incentive constraint (13)
is satisfied when the effort pair (a; a) solves the following system of equations

                   a = r [(1        ) (1        + a) + s (1            + a)] ;
                                                              1
                   a = r (1            ) (1      + a) + s         (1     + a) :

                                                  50
Combining the two equations above yields (51) and (52). As expected, when   = 1,
we recover the expressions (43) and (44) in Lemma 2.




                                      51
