                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BREXIT UNCERTAINTY AND ITS (DIS)SERVICE EFFECTS

                                        Saad Ahmad
                                        Nuno Limão
                                         Sarah Oliver
                                        Serge Shikher

                                     Working Paper 28053
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28053


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




The views expressed in this paper are strictly those of the authors and do not represent the
opinions of the U.S. International Trade Commission, of any of its Commissioners, or of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Saad Ahmad, Nuno Limão, Sarah Oliver, and Serge Shikher. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Brexit Uncertainty and its (Dis)Service Effects
Saad Ahmad, Nuno Limão, Sarah Oliver, and Serge Shikher
NBER Working Paper No. 28053
November 2020
JEL No. F02,F13,F14,L8

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of increased policy uncertainty from Brexit on UK trade in services. We
apply an uncertainty-augmented gravity equation to UK services trade with the European Union
at the industry level from 2016Q1 to 2018Q4. By exploiting the variation in the probability of
Brexit from prediction markets interacted with a new trade policy risk measure across service
industries we identify a significant negative impact of the threat of Brexit on trade values and
participation. The increased probability of Brexit in this period lowered services exports by at
least 20 log points.

Saad Ahmad                                     Sarah Oliver
USITC                                          USITC
500 E Street, SW                               500 E Street, SW
Washington, DC 20436                           Washington, DC 20436
Saad.Ahmad@usitc.gov                           sarah.oliver@usitc.gov

Nuno Limão                                     Serge Shikher
Department of Economics                        USITC
University of Maryland                         500 E Street SW
3105 Tydings Hall                              Washington, DC 20436
College Park, MD 20742                         serge.shikher@usitc.gov
and NBER
limao@econ.umd.edu
1         Introduction

Brexit represents the most important economic reform in recent UK history. It will change
long-standing policies affecting firms, and thus their investment, location, and trading de-
cisions. Uncertainty surrounding the magnitude and timing of policy changes implies that
Brexit has been affecting firms since the May 2015 election when the "Leave" referendum
became a real possibility and certainly after Brexit passed in June 2016.1 Measuring policy
uncertainty is challenging, but has been done in certain areas. Specifically, recent research
finds that Brexit-induced trade policy uncertainty (TPU) reduced UK-EU trade in goods.
Services trade is increasingly important-- about 40% of UK exports (Borchert et al., 2020)
and a source of improved economic performance (Francois and Hoekman, 2010)--so we ex-
amine how it is affected by TPU from Brexit.
        Deep agreements, such as the EU, aim to provide low and stable trade restrictions. These
agreements can lower TPU by encouraging goods' export investments when countries acede
(Handley and Limão, 2015) and discourage them when countries vote to exit them (Crowley,
Han and Exton, 2018). Export reductions due to TPU can also occur in services due to
lower investments from clients (USITC, 2020) or in products to be sold cross-border.2 Since
TPU can affect trade in goods and services via a similar mechanism we build on Graziano,
Handley and Limão (Forthcoming)--who estimate the impact of Brexit on goods trade--and
adapt it to services.
        To estimate the impact of ongoing TPU associated with Brexit we must measure the
probability of Brexit and the policy outcomes that it will implement. Under a no-deal
Brexit the UK and EU would revert to the multilateral trade restrictions agreed under
    1
     Bloom et al. (2018) report that 40% of UK firms in a large survey considered Brexit one of the top three
uncertainties for two years after the referendum; this was higher for those in trade-related industries and
included uncertainty about the timing of exit and whether it would be "disorderly".
   2
     For example, in 2019 Tata Consultancy Services chief executive Rajesh Gopinathan noted a lack of ap-
petite for renewing contracts with foreign services firms to provide cross-border IT services due to uncertainty
surrounding Brexit. "Indian IT boss says Brexit makes planning Impossible" (Financial Times 8/12/19).
UK insurance firms have also started to react to uncertainty, in their case about the validity of insurance
policies sold cross-border to EU clients, by setting up affiliates in EU markets. "Brexit uncertainty drives
insurers to waste time and money" (Financial Times 3/3/19).


                                                       1
the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995. These WTO restrictions are more costly
than the preferential ones imposed by the UK and EU on each other's goods pre-Brexit.
Thus one measure of Brexit policy risk for goods' exporters is the potential increase from
preferential to WTO import tariffs. An innovation of this paper is to construct a measure of
Brexit policy risk for services using a novel Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (STRI) that
reflects EU and UK WTO policies and a comparable measure of their pre-Brexit preferential
restrictions. We exploit the variation in this risk across service industries and countries
interacted with Brexit probabilities from prediction markets. We find that this interaction
term has a significant impact on bilateral services trade between the first quarter of 2016 and
the last quarter of 2018. Increases in the probability of Brexit within this period reduced
export values and participation where there was any risk of increased protection. Export
values were reduced by at least 20 log points (the OLS baseline) and up to 49 log points
(using an IV approach).
       We contribute to different strands of research. First, there is extensive evidence that
preferential trade agreements (PTAs) increase trade in goods but much less evidence for
services.3 This is in large part due to the dearth of data for flows and restrictions in services--
which are difficult to measure.4 This is rapidly changing with the construction of new
services' trade datasets and STRIs.5 These STRIs have been used as determinants of trade
(Van der Marel and Shepherd, 2013; Nordås and Rouzet, 2017) and to derive tariff ad valorem
equivalents--ranging from 50% to 250% (Benz and Jaax, 2020)--and can be affected by
   3
     Limão (2016) reviews the effects of preferential agreements on trade in goods, Egger and Wamser (2013)
find these agreements also increase aggregate services trade. Freund and Weinhold (2002) examine the
impact of the internet in reducing costs and thus increasing services trade. Anderson et al. (2018) estimate
a structural gravity model and find elasticities of services trade with respect to various bilateral trade costs
comparable to those found for goods' trade; but the actual trade costs in services tend to be higher than in
manufacturing (Anderson, Milot and Yotov, 2014; Gervais and Jensen, 2019).
   4
     In WTO (2019) several of these difficulties are outlined. First, trade in services is intangible and can be
conducted via multiple modes of supply. Second, service trade barriers include behind-the-border policies
that can affect both domestic and foreign firms, so their discriminatory impact on trade is harder to establish,
and they can be more opaque.
   5
     These indices include those by the Australian Productivity Commission and Australian National Uni-
versity (Findlay and Warren, 2000), the World Bank (Borchert, Gootiiz and Mattoo, 2012) and the OECD
(Benz, Ferencz and Nordås, 2020).



                                                       2
provisions in PTAs (USITC, 2019). Our estimates capture the risk of losing preferential
access, so as the probability of Brexit goes to one they provide the impact of exiting a PTA
on services' trade.
      We contribute to the analysis of TPU by focusing on services. The expanding literature
that estimates negative effects of TPU on exports focuses on goods, where policy risk is easier
to measure. That measurement typically uses some gap between two similarly measured
ad valorem tariffs in a product: the current tariff and the one in a counterfactual state.6
By employing new STRI measures comparable across states we can similarly measure risk;
moreover we address potential measurement error via an instrumental variables approach.7
To our knowledge, we are the first to use this approach along with high frequency industry-
level data to analyze the impact of TPU on services. The methodology is applicable to other
PTAs that address services and face a risk of exit or renegotiation.
      We also complement the research on the trade impacts of Brexit. Dhingra et al. (2018)
compute a 3 percent welfare loss for the UK after a no-deal Brexit largely driven by lower
trade with the EU. Gravity estimates in Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017) suggest that
the reversal of EU integration reduces goods trade up to 30% after no-deal. Steinberg
(2019) obtains reductions in trade and welfare with a calibrated, dynamic model where
uncertainty plays only a small role. In contrast, empirical work using product-level risk and
the pre-Brexit period finds significant negative effects of TPU on exports between the UK
and EU (Crowley, Han and Exton, 2018; Graziano, Handley and Limão, Forthcoming). No
comparable analysis exists for services. Douch, Edwards and Soegaard (2018) find lower
aggregate service exports to the EU after the referendum relative to a synthetic control
group (based on pre-referendum data). Our approach and detailed industry-bilateral data
allows us to control for all bilateral shocks as well as identify and quantify a specific policy
  6
     For example, Handley (2014) uses the gap between applied and bound multilateral tariffs, Handley
and Limão (2015) focus on the gap of preferential and multilateral tariffs, Handley and Limão (2017) use
multilateral and column 2 tariffs in the U.S.
   7
     Both Lamprecht and Miroudot (2020) and Ciuriak, Dadkhah and Lysenko (2019) construct their own
STRI to capture GATS commitments and use its difference relative to the OECD STRI as a measure of risk
and find it lowers services trade.


                                                   3
mechanism through which Brexit uncertainty lowers services trade. Services restrictions can
affect other industries, e.g. by raising input costs and lowering manufacturing productivity
(Beverelli, Fiorini and Hoekman, 2017); thus our approach may be a useful first stage in
identifying Brexit uncertainty effects on broader economic outcomes.



2     Conceptual and Empirical Frameworks

2.1    Firm Decisions

We adapt the framework of Graziano, Handley and Limão (Forthcoming), hereafter GHL,
and thus provide only its key elements and implications. Providing a service to a new export
market requires investments to learn about and meet local regulations, and in some cases
establish relationships with local providers. These investments are often sunk and thus
delayed (or not incurred) if TPU is sufficiently high.
    We consider a demand with constant elasticity of substitution  over varieties v  V in
market i at time t:
                                                q    -
                                  qivt = DiV t (iV t)  p- 
                                                        ivt ,                             (1)

                                               q
where DiV t is an exogenous demand shifter and iV t  1 is the ad valorem equivalent tax

imposed on v , which reduces demand; both are specific to industry V . The firm observes all
relevant information before producing and pricing in a monopolistically competitive market
each period. This leads to a constant mark-up pricing rule over marginal costs and yields a
factory-gate price pivt = cv [/( - 1)]. Evaluating demand in (1) at this price results in a
standard expression for export revenue pivt qivt and the following operating profit:


                                                     -
                                      ivt = aiV t c1
                                                   v   ~,                                 (2)


where ~ is a constant function of  . The business conditions term, aiV t = DiV t /iV t , is
decreasing in iV t  1, which captures any demand taxes or regulations that affect either sales

                                              4
or profits.8 The firm believes that a new ai is drawn with probability i from a distribution
¯ i (a), independent of the current a.9
H
       Exporting to i requires a sunk cost investment, Ki , to be incurred if the firm either did
not export in the previous period or did export, but its export capital fully depreciated,
which occurs with probability  . The sunk costs and uncertainty imply that the firm faces
a dynamic decision. GHL show that the optimal export entry decision satisfies a cutoff rule
requiring the expected value of exporting net of the sunk costs to exceed the value of waiting
to enter in a later period. Only firms with cost below the following threshold value enter:


                                             cU       D
                                              iV t = ciV t × UiV t ,                                 (3)


where cD
       iV t is the deterministic cutoff (reflecting the present discounted value of investment)

and UiV t  (0, 1] is an uncertainty factor. These are given by

                                                                    1
                                                     aiV t ~        -1
                                        cD
                                         iV t   =                                                    (4)
                                                  (1 -  )Ki
                                                                          1
                                                  i (¯iV t - 1)           -1
                                 and UiV t   = 1+                              ,                     (5)
                                                  1 -  (1 - i )

where
                                     ¯ i (aiV t )   aiV t - E(aiV  aiV t )
                       ¯ iV t - 1 = -H
                                                                            (-1, 0]
                                                             aiV t

measures profit tail risk. It is the product of the probability of worsening conditions and
the expected proportion of profits lost in that event. The uncertainty factor UiV t implies a
stricter entry cutoff whenever future conditions are expected to change and there is some
tail risk (¯ iV t - 1 < 0).
       This framework had been extended to firm sunk investments to lower marginal export
   8                      q                          q                      
     Specifically, iV t  (iV t ) / (1 - iV t ) where  is defined in (1) and   0 a profit ad valorem tax
rate. The services data does not allow us to distinguish these.
   9
     This encompasses: no uncertainty (i = 0); i.i.d demand (i = 1); or otherwise imperfectly anticipated
shocks of uncertain magnitude (  (0, 1)).




                                                        5
costs by Handley and Limão (2017). Thus the export effects we estimate can also reflect
intensive margin effects.


2.2       Policy Risks

GHL relate tail risk to Brexit by assuming that Brexit changes the probability of drawing
policies from a riskier distribution, mt , so ¯ iV t can be written as a weighted average of the
risk if Brexit occurs and the risk if the UK remains in the EU:


                                                BR            EU
                                    ¯ iV t = mt iV + (1 - mt )iV .                                       (6)


We measure shocks to exporter beliefs about Brexit, mt , by changes in prediction markets
about the leave referendum and invoking Article 50, as described below. Assuming exporters
                                                                                    EU
did not expect a deterioration in business conditions in the EU scenario we can use ixV =
                      BR 10
1 and need only model ixV . We assume that countries revert to their MFN service
regulations with probability  and leave them unchanged otherwise, so the associated tail
risk is
                                ¯ iV t - 1 = mt ×  aM
                                                       FN  EU
                                                    iV t /aiV t - 1 ,                                    (7)

where the term in parenthesis is the percent reduction in operating profits if Brexit occurs
and leads to MFN. Using our model this is captured by the percent difference in services
                              EU  MF N
taxes or regulations measure: iV /iV t - 1.
       In the model, Brexit is defined as a policy shock that is realized with new policies imposed
by i drawn from H BR . This occurs with probability i mt and we capture variation in mt
over time by unanticipated shocks to the probability of a majority vote in the referendum
and of invoking Article 50, both of which were necessary conditions for Brexit.
  10
   The EU scenario could include the possibility of a renegotiation with reduced service barriers, but in the
model this does not change the tail risk and thus leaves current export decisions unchanged.




                                                     6
2.3       Exports

2.3.1      Export Values

We aggregate firm behavior to the industry, denoted by V , in order to match the available
quarterly data. Firms v  V draw their marginal cost from a distribution, GV (c), and
face similar trade barriers in i. Thus the key determinants of an industry's exports to i
are the business conditions aitV and tail risk. GHL show that in periods when all exporters
have costs below the current export entry cutoff bilateral industry exports are obtained by
aggregating over the sales of all v  V to i at t:

                                                                 cU
                                                                  itV
                                                           -1              -
                           R   aitV , cU
                                       itV   = aitV NV                  c1
                                                                         v   dGV (c),                     (8)
                                                                cmin



where NV is simply the mass of potential exporters and cmin the lowest cost firm.
       Using a generalization of this expression to other periods, GHL decompose the export
equation into shocks to uncertainty, demand, and supply factors and provide an approach to
control for the latter two. To be clear about the level of variation of each variable we include
x subscripts to denote the export country. The resulting first-order decomposition around
the deterministic equilibrium and focusing on the uncertainty shocks is


                            ln RixV t = kc¯
                                          bh             r     r
                                           i ln UixV t + ixV + ixt + oixV t ,                             (9)


where kc  0 is the export elasticity to the cutoff around the deterministic equilibrium, and
¯
bh                                                     11
 i  (0, 1] reflects previous conditions in the market.    Applied services restrictions vary
bilaterally and over industries but not over time in this period; so they are captured by the
fixed effect ixV , which also controls for any heterogeneity in bilateral-industry flows. The
bilateral-time effect ixt controls for any aggregate bilateral shocks to income, price index,
  11
    Specifically, ¯
                  bh       T
                   i = 1 -  if conditions have worsened in i for T periods before t or equal to one otherwise.
Moreover, under a standard Pareto productivity distribution with dispersion k , we have kc   ln       R(a,c)
                                                                                                      ln c   =
k - ( - 1) and oixV t = 0.



                                                      7
productivity, trade costs, etc.


2.3.2   Export Participation

We observe zeros and changes in participation even at the industry level. Therefore we also
describe how we relate export participation to the uncertainty cutoff. First, consider an
exporter-industry where in period t - 1 no firm v  V has surviving capital to export to i,
so KixV,t-1 = 0. The probability of industry exports in this case is simply the fraction of
firms in xV with costs below the threshold, if any: Pr (RixV t > 0|KixV,t-1 = 0) = G cU
                                                                                      ixtV .

Alternatively, there is export capital in the previous period and at least one firm survives--
with some probability ¯--so we observe exports at t, otherwise we are back to the first case,

so now Pr (RixV t > 0|KixV,t-1 = 0) = ¯+ 1-¯ G cU . We note two basic implications
                                                ixtV

for the estimation. First, current participation depends on current uncertainty via the cutoff
even if we don't condition on prior export capital (which is unobservable to us) or its proxy
(the export history). Second, this relationship is attenuated if export capital depreciates
very slowly: if exports in ixV at t simply reflects entry prior to our sample period and it
persists throughout all t then there would be no relationship for that flow. The latter is not
an issue for our estimates because we include bilateral-industry effects so the identification
for participation relies on switchers.


2.4     Empirical Methodology

We relate exports to observable industry policy risk and time variation in Brexit beliefs by
focusing on their interaction. This is obtained from a second order approximation of ln UixV t
            BR
around both ixV = 1 and ln m0 , i.e. around the EU scenario prior to the possibility of a
referendum, which yields

                                 ~i
                                                 mt   BR        U
                   ln UixV t =           m0 ln        ixV - 1 + ixV + eU
                                                                       ixV t             (10)
                                 -1              m0



                                                  8
where ~i         i
                           represents the expected duration of an export spell to i under future
               1- (1-i )

conditions.


2.4.1      Export Values

Replacing equation (10) in (9), and using our proxies for the time varying probability, denoted
                                                                        MF N   EU
by ln Bt , and percent increase in the service restrictiveness factor, ~ixV  /~ixV - 1, we obtain
our estimating equation:


                                           MF N   EU
                 ln RixV t = Wi × ln Bt × ~ixV  /~ixV -1            + ixV + ixt + eixV t .               (11)


                                                                                 ~
       The key parameter of interest is the cross-elasticity Wi  kc¯
                                                                   bh   i         b
                                                                    i ×  -1 × m0 r ×  × , which

is predicted to be negative. It reflects the elasticity of exports to U , kc¯
                                                                            bh
                                                                             i ; the elasticity of
                            ~i
U with respect to ¯,        -1
                               ;   the elasticity of ¯ with respect to both our probability measure
given an initial value, m0 rb , and to the increase of the STRI factor to MFN, which occurs
with probability  . Increases in the STRI factor reduce profits by a factor  < 0 and this
is the only negative term.12 Our baseline assumes Wi is similar across importers and in the
robustness we test if there is heterogeneity.


2.4.2      Export Participation

As we note in section 2.3.2, participation also depends on uncertainty via the cutoff. So
we use an approach similar to equation (11) using an indicator function 1 (RixV t ) = 1 if
RixV t > 0 and zero otherwise. Given the high dimension of fixed effects we implement a
linear probability model (LPM) and note that about 78% of the sample are ones.
  12                ln 
     We define      ln ~s |     EU < 0 if the measured STRI factor, 
                           ~s =~                                    ~  1, reduces operating profits. Moreover,
if prediction probabilities of Brexit are positively correlated with firm beliefs then rb   ln mt
                                                                                            ln Bt |m0 > 0.




                                                      9
3          Data

3.1         Trade Data

We employ a newly developed dataset from the UK Office of National Statistics. It provides
quarterly bilateral values of UK imports and exports by service industry starting in 2016Q1
and covering 67 countries.13 The distinguishing feature of this new data is the quarterly
availability and detailed industry breakdown, both of which are essential for the identifica-
tion. This is achieved by aggregating quarterly surveys of 2,200 firms.14 Below we describe
key features of the subsample that matches the trade data and is used in the regression
analysis.


3.2         STRI Data

We use the OECD Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (STRI) to measure the policy barriers
that the UK and EU would impose on each other in the case of Brexit without a trade deal.
         The STRI catalogues country-specific laws and regulations and assigns individual weights
to each measure. It aggregates these measures to create an index of services trade restrictions
at the country-industry level that ranges from 0 to 1 (from completely open to closed), and
applies to all exporters to that market.15 . The index has limited variation over time in the
period we consider; we use the 2016 data for the UK, the EU countries that are OECD
members (no data is available for Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Malta, Romania), and other
OECD countries when constructing instruments, as described in the results section.
    13
     The data is part of the UK balance of payments statistics publications since October 2019 (Gibbs,
2019). It is available from www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/internationaltrade/datasets/
uktradeinservicesallcountriesnonseasonallyadjusted
  14
     Some flows that do not meet the disclosure rules described in Richard (2018) are suppressed to preserve
confidentiality. For this small share of the observations there is positive trade, so we can include them in the
participation estimation, but we do not observe the exact value, so we exclude them from the baseline value
estimation.
  15
     Information on the OECD STRI by industry and detailed policy measure is available at: https:
//www.oecd.org/trade/topics/services-trade/, and data at https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?
DataSetCode=STRI




                                                      10
       Certain regulations in the overall STRI discriminate against international trade whereas
others also affect domestic firms, e.g. regulatory transparency. We focus on differential risk
faced by foreign firms and thus use the STRI subindex "restrictions to foreign entry". This
index includes foreign equity and management limits, required commercial presence in the
country where the service is consumed, and cross-border data flow restrictions. In Table A8
we show that 91 percent of the measures in this subindex can be classified as discriminatory,
whereas that fraction is zero for the regulatory transparency index.16
       If before Brexit there were no services barriers between the UK and the EU then we could
simply use the STRI as our risk measure. However, that is not the case and thus we require a
pre-Brexit measure that is closely comparable to the STRI and takes into account preferential
trade relationships. Such a measure became available in 2019: the OECD's Europe-specific
STRI, which applies the same methodology to measure barriers between European Economic
Area members, as described in Benz and Gonzales (2019). The two indexes share a common
weighting scheme and measures so we can use them to compute the risk measure required
by the model.


3.3       Matched Trade Data Features

Matching the STRI and trade data yields 12 services industries, which include transportation,
professional, financial and information services and others. Table A7 shows the correspon-
dence between the subset of the 22 industries in the STRI and the 32 in the trade data with
                           17
common descriptions.            The matched data represents 49 percent of total UK cross-border
services trade in 2016; in Table A1 we show the ones with the largest shares are commer-
cial banking, air transport, and legal, accounting, and management consulting services. In
  16
     Two other subindices also include discriminatory measures: restrictions of movement of persons and
other discriminatory measures. We test and find evidence that our results are robust to controlling for these
other regulations and that the main source of risk is captured by the restrictions to foreign entry subindex.
  17
     The match has fewer industries than its components due to different levels of aggregation in the trade and
STRI data and missing coverage in the latter for certain industries. The missing industries and associated
share in total UK trade in 2016 are travel services (20%), charges for IP use (5%), R&D services (3%),
personal, cultural and recreational services (2%).



                                                      11
our baseline specification, we exclude air transportation due to incomplete barriers in the
STRI.18
       There is variation in risk across industries and countries that is essential for our iden-
tification strategy. In figure 1 we plot UK service restrictions in 2016 for each industry
in the sample from lowest to highest risk. The risk is computed as the growth from the
"Preferential" TRI factor, faced by EU countries in this period, to the threat or MFN TRI,
captured by the STRI faced by non-EEA countries. There is considerable variation ranging
from negligible risk in industries such as Architecture, Engineering and Scientific services to
around 5 percent for Legal, accounting and consulting and even higher for other industries
including financial, sea and air transportation.19
       All EU exporters face similar restrictions in any given industry in the UK. However,
the UK faces different barriers across EU countries, which provides an additional source of
variation for identification for services that is not present for goods.20 In figure 2 we plot
the mean risk faced by UK exporters across EU countries in each industry. The bottom and
top six industries in terms of mean risk coincide with the UK with minor variations in their
ranking. For the top six industries the UK faces risk above 6 percent on average and we
can see there is considerable variation across countries as shown by the standard deviation
bars. The air transportation measures in this TRI and risk are about twice as large as the
next largest industry, but our baseline regression results exclude it because they do not fully
reflect those faced by the trade mode in our data.
       In sum, the overall mean services risk in 2016 in our regression sample is around 5 percent
and the standard deviation is 3.3 (Table 1). The variation arises from differences in applied
  18
     Our cross-border data covers transportation from one country to another via air (mode 1 trade) along
with services auxiliary to air transport, such as sales and marketing. However, the STRI for air transportation
only covers barriers to trade for foreign providers of air transport services within a single country (mode 3
trade), which does not appear in our data. See appendix A for more information on services trade by mode
of supply
  19
     Only three industries have no intra-EU restrictions so for all others the variation in risk is driven by
both MFN and preferential restrictions.
  20
     GHL use EU MFN tariffs to construct a risk for goods and these are common in the UK and all countries
in the EU.



                                                      12
and threat restrictions both across industries and importing countries.
       Bilateral trade flows also exhibit variation over industries and time. In Table 1 we pro-
vide summary statistics for continuously traded industry-bilateral observations in 2016Q1-
2018Q4: its coefficient of variation is 0.45. This reflects both firm intensive and extensive
margin decisions.21 Importantly for our identification we require variation within low and
within high risk industries over time. To illustrate this variation we construct the log growth
of RixV t relative to 2016Q1 for any ixV continuously traded. In figure 3 we plot a smoothed
local polynomial over two groups of industries according to their policy risk. The line la-
belled "Low" includes the industries with the risk below the country's median: nominal
values in this category rise on average over the full period. However, the values for the high
risk industries start declining after the referendum and the triggering of Article 50. By the
second half of 2017 after these two key Brexit events had been realized, both groups start
to comove closely. By 2018Q1 the cumulative growth in the high risk group was about 25
log points lower than in the low risk. The regression analysis estimates how this varies with
the probability measures that we now describe.


3.4       Probability of Brexit Measures

We explore the variation over time in the probability of Brexit between 2016Q1 (the earliest
quarter of detailed trade data) and 2018Q4. During this period there was ongoing uncertainty
about whether and when Brexit would occur. Two necessary events for Brexit were a "Yes"
vote in the June 2016 referendum and the UK government triggering of Article 50 to formally
notify the European Commission that it would leave the EU, which eventually occurred by
the end of March 2017. We use prediction market data for each of these events to construct
our proxy for exporter beliefs of the probability of Brexit.
       For the referendum we use the average daily price of a contract traded in PredictIt.org
  21
    We also summarize participation, measured by an indicator 1 (RixV t ). There is positive trade in 78%
of all potential flows on average with variation over time (from 75% to 81%), industries (39% in Other
Transportation to 96% in Telecommunications) and importers (from 30% for Estonia to 100% for four
countries); the UK average is 74%.

                                                   13
that pays $1 if a majority voted for voted for Brexit in a referendum held by December 2016,
and zero otherwise. The daily price reflects the beliefs of traders about the probability of the
event, which was about 0.25 in January 2016 and increased after the referendum date was
set and further in the month leading up to the vote. The price never exceeded 0.46 before
June 23rd (and converged to 1 soon after) so the outcome was unexpected when measured
by this variable (as it was in polls).22 A measure of continued Brexit uncertainty after the
referendum was the probability of eventually triggering of Art. 50. Using prediction market
contracts from Predictwise the probability of this event occurring between January and June
2017 was around 0.4 in July 2016. This probability increases over time in most but not all
months, e.g. the average probability in November 2016, while the Supreme court ruled on
it, was about 16 percentage points lower than in October.
       We combine both contract price measures into a single measure of uncertainty, which
is averaged within each quarter to match the trade data. Before July 2016, the combined
probability is the product of the probability of the referendum and the probability of Article
50 in July, 0.4, so all variation in this period is from the referendum prediction. From July
2016 onwards we employ the probability of Article 50 alone. Figure 3 shows the quarterly
combined probability of these two sources of uncertainty during the sample period. The
quarterly average shows the resulting proxy, which we log and use for exporter beliefs in the
regressions. It increases slightly before the referendum, jumps in the third quarter reflecting
the vote and increases steadily with an additional jump after Article 50 is invoked on March
29, 2017. In the robustness section we also examine a backward moving average, which has
a similar trend.
  22
    GHL provide evidence that this measure is strongly positively correlated with political events and polling
changes favoring Brexit and thus reflects salient information.




                                                     14
4         Results

We present the results of our baseline specification and robustness checks, and quantify the
effect of Brexit on UK services trade with the EU.


4.1         Baseline

In Table 2 we present OLS estimates for the cross-elasticity of interest from equation (11).
The estimates are negative and significant as predicted by the model. All specifications
include bilateral fixed effects both by industry category (ixV ) and by quarter (ixt) and
cluster the standard errors by itV , which is the level of variation of the uncertainty variable.
         When we use log exports for the continuously traded sample ending in 2018Q4 we obtain
W = -1.77 (column 2). So increases in the probability of Brexit reduced export values in
services where there was any risk of protection. We provide a quantification below.
         The LPM estimates use export indicators for each possible flow in an ixV triplet, but
given that we include fixed effects at that level, the identification relies on switchers over
time. We find that increases in the probability of Brexit reduced the probability of exporting
in services where there was risk of protection. In column 4 the parameter estimate is -0.44,
which implies a cross-elasticity of participation of -0.57 after we divide by the mean of the
dependent variable.23
         In Table 3 we extend the trade value sample to include zeros and estimate the uncer-
tainty effect using PPML. We continue to use the same set of fixed effects and clustering.
The estimated elasticity for the sample ending in 2018Q4 is -1.24 (column 4). The results
are qualitatively similar but smaller in magnitude if we focus on the non-confidential sub-
    23
    The LPM estimates reflect change in participation by firms and thus provide direct evidence for the
model's mechanism. However, at this level of aggregation there is also substantial firm entry and exit in the
continuously traded flows. So we do not attempt to categorize the uncertainty effects into firm intensive and
extensive margin.




                                                     15
sample (column 2).24 In each of the specifications, the PPML elasticity is between those in
the corresponding specifications for value and participation--as we expect since the PPML
reflects both of these.


4.2       Robustness

We provide robustness tests for the baseline specifications, which we choose to be those for
values and participation in Table 2 (columns 2 and 4) and their combined effect in Table 3
(column 4).

Timing

       Shortening the sample period to 2017Q4 does not change the baseline results. This
provides some information about the most relevant events shaping Brexit probabilities. The
uncertainty variable assumes the Brexit probability remains constant in the extra periods of
the longer sample. This assumption is clearly a simplification since certain events in 2018Q1-
2018Q4 could have changed exporter beliefs about the likelihood of Brexit. The fact that
the estimates and standard errors are similar across samples in Table 2 suggests that our
assumption of a constant probability in that period does not introduce measurement error
that would induce attenuation.
       The baseline probability is a simple average within all the days in the quarter. How-
ever, investments of firms exporting in the first two months of the quarter could have used
information from prior month(s) before that quarter. Thus we construct an alternative: a
moving average for each month m that includes m as well as the previous two months and
then averages the months in the quarter. The results in Table A2 are identical for each of
the baseline specifications.

Additional Service Regulations
  24
    The "Non-confidential" sample excludes positive traded omitted from the data due to confidentiality rea-
sons. The "All" sample includes the confidential observations by imputing any such omitted flow for exporter-
UK-service-quarter with the min(UK-service-quarter) over all EU exporters and UK-importer-service-quarter
with the min(UK-service-quarter) over all EU importers.

                                                     16
       Our risk measure reflects service regulations in category 1: "restrictions on foreign own-
ership and other market entry conditions", which is arguably the most relevant for exports
in our data, for two reasons. First, category 1 is mostly composed of measures that ex-
plicitly discriminate against foreign services providers (91% of all category 1 measures are
discriminatory across the industries in our sample). Second, category 1 includes policies that
directly impact the ability of services firms to trade cross-border, such as whether a local
commercial presence is required for cross-border trade, and restrictions on cross-border data
transfers. The underlying restrictiveness in this category is correlated with that in other cat-
egories in certain countries. To examine if our baseline captures the relevant risk or simply
a correlation we construct a "risk aggregate" that includes category 1 and all other in the
OECD data. In Table A3 we replicate the baseline for values (column 1) for comparison.
The extended specification including aggregate risk (column 2) shows that the aggregate
risk has no significant effect and that the baseline measure has a negative and significantly
different impact from this aggregate. The elasticity for category 1 is given by the sum of
the two coefficients, -1.7 nearly identical to the baseline. For participation (column 4) and
PPML (column 6) we also find the elasticity of category 1 is statistically different from the
aggregate measure and quantitatively similar to the baseline. This evidence suggests the
                                                          25
baseline measure is capturing the intended effect.


Additional Unobserved Heterogeneity


       Our risk measure interacts a time shock that is common for all countries with potential
risk, which is positively correlated across importers for any given industry. To account for this
correlation in the explanatory variable we also cluster standard errors by industry-quarter
in Table A4. Doing so raises the standard errors only marginally (columns 1,3,5).
       A potential concern with the baseline is that it captures omitted unobserved industry
trends. More specifically, the probability of Brexit rose on average in this period and if
  25
    In Appendix A.3 we provide additional evidence of the relevance of the STRI-1 using a standard gravity
estimation in a sample without the UK-EU.


                                                   17
industries with higher initial risk had a negative trend due to some unrelated reason then
our estimates may simply reflect this trend. To test if the results are robust to this issue we
include a set of linear trends for each industry. Doing so reduces the estimated elasticities,
but they remain negative and significant for value and PPML (columns 2 and 6). It is
important to note that the trends may themselves be picking up some of the Brexit effect
due to the mechanism in the model and the risk coefficients then reflect any extra deviation
from that trend.

Industry Exclusion

       In the data section we describe how the merge of trade and policy variables yields twelve
industries. We used all except air transportation since the OECD STRI does not collect
information on barriers for one of its main modes of supply (mode 1). This type of mea-
surement error leads to attenuation bias and that likely explains the attenuated elasticities
in Table A5 when we include observations for this industry in the baseline.
       Given the small number of industries and correlation in their risk across countries we test
and find that the baseline is robust to excluding other industries one at a time (results for
the 33 regressions are available on request). For example, the coefficient in each of these 11
regressions for values is negative, significant and the median value is -1.7, as in the baseline.

Heterogeneous Effects for UK and EU

       The baseline assumes importers have similar elasticity, Wi , and we now examine if the
elasticity is significant for UK and EU importers separately and if there is any differential.
We do so by adding an EU-exporter interaction with the baseline risk. So the first row of
Table A6 now captures the average elasticity when the UK exports to any of the EU countries
and it remains negative, significant and qualitatively similar to the baseline. The interaction
captures any additional effect faced by EU exporters in the UK, which is significant for values
(but not participation).26
  26
    GHL identify a similar differential (for both values and participation) and provide additional evidence
suggesting it reflects additional risk perceived by EU exporters uncertain about future UK policies.

                                                    18
4.3      Measurement Error

We address two potential sources of measurement error with the baseline risk using an IV
approach.
      One source of measurement error is the fact that the available measures of service re-
strictions are only a proxy for the ad valorem equivalent of service regulations on operating
profits. The other conceptual source of measurement error is that the tail risk that exporters
incorporated in their decisions may differ from the measure we use. Either of these imply
an attenuation of the estimated elasticities and can be partially addressed by instrumenting
baseline risk with an alternative measure.
      The instrument that we use is the median STRI that other developed countries set in
each industry. As long as any error in these is orthogonal to that in the baseline risk, this
IV addresses the first source of the measurement issue. To the extent that exporters believe
that the UK STRI towards the EU (or the EU's towards the UK) will be some combination
of the current level and what other developed countries do then this measure should help
address the second source. The simple correlation of this measure with the baseline risk is
over 0.7 which generates a strong first stage; moreover the measure is not UK or EU-specific
and is conceptually excludable from the second stage.27
      We compare the results in Table 4, produced with this IV approach, to the baseline
specifications of Table 2. We continue to find negative and significant effects of uncertainty.
The elasticities are now 2-3 times larger, which suggests considerable attenuation in the OLS
estimates, similar to what GHL find. Therefore the subsequent quantification will consider
both approaches.


4.4      Impact of Brexit Uncertainty

We use the permanent cross-elasticity W to quantify the uncertainty impacts of the events
that increased Brexit probability evaluated at the average risk. Using the values specification
 27
      We use Australia, Canada, Japan and the USA.


                                                     19
in (11) we obtain

                              RixV (Bt )         MF N   EU                         Bt
                       E ln                = W× ~ixV  /~ixV -1              × ln      ,
                              RixV (B0 )                                           B0

where the mean risk in the sample in 0.052 (Table 1). We define the uncertainty elasticity at
the mean risk as the term in brackets and we see in Table 5 that it is -0.23 = -4.4 × 0.052
using the IV specification.28
         In Table 5 we use this elasticity to compute the average impact of the referendum and
adoption of Article 50. We compute the referendum effect as the impact of the growth in the
measured probability in our data between t =2016Q3 and 2016Q1, which is ln Bt /B0 = 1.3.
All else equal, we estimate this shock reduced service exports between 12 and 30 log points
(using the OLS and IV estimates respectively). This combined with the passage of Article
50 increased the probability relative to 2016Q1 to ln Bt /B0 = 2.14 implying an average
reduction over the full period in export values between 20-49 log points.
         Using a similar approach we find a reduction in average export participation at the
industry level relative to 2016Q1 of 6 to 16 log points.
         In Appendix A.3 we provide external validation that these STRI export value impacts
are reasonable using a novel dataset in a sample without UK-EU flows.29



5         Conclusion

Services constitute a large share of the UK economy and its trade, so stable and open market
access is of vital importance for both the UK and EU economies. This access was threatened
    28
     This elasticity is very similar to what GHL obtain using a similar approach for goods with monthly
pre-referendum probabilities, -0.19. The similarity suggests the approach captures deep parameters that
reflect common exporter beliefs about trade risk across goods and services as well as before and after the
referendum.
  29
     Briefly, we apply a standard gravity OLS estimation to a novel bilateral services trade and production
dataset to estimate the STRI effect on international services trade. We find that an STRI increase of 0.07
implies a reduction in bilateral services trade of around 42 log points. Thus increases in the STRI of the
magnitude expected if a no-deal Brexit occurs with probability one are consistent with trade reductions that
are larger than our OLS TPU estimates.


                                                    20
when Brexit became a possibility and particularly after the leave referendum, which made
Brexit one of the top sources of uncertainty for firms (Bloom et al., 2018). This uncertainty
will have lasted at least five years until any policy change actually occurs, so it is essential
to model, measure and quantify its impacts.
   We build on and extend research on TPU to examine services. We employ novel and rich
data on services' trade and its restrictions between the EU and UK: both current restrictions
and those they would face under a no-deal Brexit. This risk varies across industries and
countries, and its interaction with Brexit probabilities--from prediction markets--has a
significant impact on bilateral trade between 2016Q1-2018Q4. Increases in the probability
of Brexit lowered export values--between 20-49 log points--and participation--between 6
to 16 log points. These results are robust to controlling for additional trade restrictiveness
measures and unobserved heterogeneity, as well as to dropping industries. Our baseline OLS
specification provides the low end of the range of estimates while the IV approach that we
use to address the potential risk measurement error provides the high end.
   Our results and methodology have implications and applications beyond services' trade
and Brexit. First, the TPU effects on services can affect other industries, e.g. by raising
input costs, and our methodology can be a useful first stage in identifying Brexit impacts on
other outcomes. Second, the results show that PTAs can increase services' trade and, when
they do so, threats to renegotiate or exit them are costly even if they do not materialize.




                                              21
References
Anderson, James, Catherine Milot, and Yoto Yotov. 2014. "How Much does Ge-
 ography Deflect Services Trade? Canadian Answers." International Economic Review,
 55(3): 791­818.

Anderson, James, Ingo Borchert, Aaditya Mattoo, and Yoto Yotov. 2018. "Dark
 Costs, Missing Data: Shedding some Light on Services Trade." European Economic Review,
 105: 193­214.

Benz, Sebastian. 2017. "Services Trade costs: Tariff equivalents of services trade restric-
 tions using gravity estimation." Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation
 OECD Trade Policy Papers 200, Paris.

Benz, Sebastian, and Alexander Jaax. 2020. "The Costs of Regulatory Barriers to Trade
 in Services: New Estimates of Ad Valorem Tariff Equivalents." Organisation for Economic
 Development and Cooperation OECD Trade Policy Papers 238, Paris.

Benz, Sebastian, and Frederic Gonzales. 2019. "Intra-EEA STRI Database: Methodol-
 ogy and Results." Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation OECD Trade
 Policy Papers 229, Paris.

Benz, Sebastian, Janos Ferencz, and Hildegunn Nordås. 2020. "Regulatory barriers
 to trade in services: A new database and composite indices." The World Economy, Early
 View.

Beverelli, Cosimo, Matteo Fiorini, and Bernard Hoekman. 2017. "Services Trade
 Policy and Manufacturing Productivity: The Role of Institutions." Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, 104: 166 ­ 182.

Bloom, Nicholas, Philip Bunn, Scarlet Chen, Paul Mizen, Pawel Smietanka, and
  Greg Thwaites. 2018. "Brexit and Uncertainty: Insights from the Decision Maker Panel."
  Fiscal Studies, 39(4): 555 ­ 580.

Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2012. "Guide to the Ser-
 vices Trade Restrictions Database." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6108,
 Washington, DC.

Borchert, Ingo, Mario Larch, Serge Shikher, and Yoto Yotov. 2020. "The Inter-
 national Trade and Production Database for Estimation (ITPD-E)." International Eco-
 nomics, forthcoming.

Ciuriak, Dan, Ali Dadkhah, and Dmitry Lysenko. 2019. "The Effect of Binding Com-
  mitments on Services Trade." World Trade Review, 1­14.

Crowley, Meredith, Lu Han, and Oliver Exton. 2018. "Renegotiation of Trade Agree-
 ments and Firm Exporting Decisions: Evidence from the Impact of Brexit on UK Exports."
 SSRN Electronic Journal.


                                            22
Dhingra, Swati, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Veronica Rappoport, Thomas Sampson,
 and Catherine Thomas. 2018. "UK trade and FDI: A post-Brexit perspective." Papers
 in Regional Science, 97(1): 9­24.

Douch, Mustapha, T. Huw Edwards, and Christian Soegaard. 2018. "UK Services
 Exports in the Aftermath of the Brexit Announcement Shock." Warwick Economics War-
 wick Economics Research Paper 1182.

Egger, Peter, and Georg Wamser. 2013. "Multiple faces of preferential market access:
 their causes and consequences." Economic Policy, 28(73): 143 ­ 187.

Findlay, Christopher, and Tony Warren. 2000. Impediments to Trade in Services. Lon-
  don:Routledge.

Francois, Joseph, and Bernard Hoekman. 2010. "Services Trade and Policy." Journal
  of Economic Literature, 48(3): 642 ­ 692.

Freund, Caroline, and Diana Weinhold. 2002. "The Internet and International Trade
  in Services." The American Economic Review, 92(2): 236­240.

Gervais, Antoine, and J. Bradford Jensen. 2019. "The Tradeability of Services: Geo-
 graphic Concentration and Trade Costs." Journal of International Economics, 118: 331­
 350.

Gibbs, Chloe. 2019. "UK trade in services by partner country: April to June 2019." UK
 Office for National Statistics Statistical Bulletin, London.

Graziano, Alejandro, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão. Forthcoming. "Brexit Uncer-
 tainty and Trade Disintegration." Economic Journal.

Gurevich, Tamara, and Peter Herman. 2018. "The Dynamic Gravity Dataset: 1948-
 2016." United States International Trade Commission USITC Office of Economics Working
 Paper 2018-02-A, Washington, DC.

Handley, Kyle. 2014. "Exporting under trade policy uncertainty: Theory and evidence."
 Journal of International Economics, 94(1): 50­66.

Handley, Kyle, and Nuno Limão. 2015. "Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty:
 Theory and Firm Evidence." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4): 189 ­
 222.

Handley, Kyle, and Nuno Limão. 2017. "Policy uncertainty, trade, and welfare: Theory
 and evidence for China and the United States." American Economic Review, 107(9): 2731­
 2783.

Lamprecht, Philipp, and Sebastien Miroudot. 2020. "The Value of Market Access and
  National Treatment Commitments in Services Trade Agreements." The World Economy,
  Early View.


                                          23
Limão, Nuno. 2016. "Preferential Trade Agreements." Handbook of Commercial Policy.
  Volume 1B, 279 ­ 367. Elsevier, North-Holland.

Mann, Michael, and Daniel P. H. Cheung. 2019. "Measuring trade in services by modes
 of supply: 2019 Edition." Publications Office of the European Union Eurostat Statistical
 Working Papers, Luxembourg.

Mulabdic, Alen, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta. 2017. "Deep integration and
 UK-EU trade relations." The Economics of UK-EU Relations. Palgrave Macmillan.

Nordås, Hildegunn, and Dorothee Rouzet. 2017. "The Impact of Services Trade Re-
 strictiveness on Trade Flows." The World Economy, 40(6): 1155­1183.

Richard, Melanie. 2018. "Annual Business Survey Technical Report: August 2018." UK
 Office for National Statistics, London.

Steinberg, Joseph B. 2019. "Brexit and the Macroeconomic Impact of Trade Policy Un-
  certainty." Journal of International Economics, 117: 175 ­ 195.

USITC. 2019. "U.S.-Mexico-Canada Trade Agreement: Likely Impact on the U.S. Econ-
 omy and on Specific Industry Sectors." United States International Trade Commission
 Investigation Number: TPA 105-003 publication 4889, Washington, DC.

USITC. 2020. "Recent Trends in U.S. Services Trade: 2020 Annual Report." United States
 International Trade Commission Investigation Number: 332-345 publication 5094, Wash-
 ington, DC.

Van der Marel, Erik, and Ben Shepherd. 2013. "Services Trade, Regulation and Re-
 gional Integration: Evidence from Sectoral Data." The World Economy, 36(11): 1393­1405.

WTO. 2019. "World Trade Report 2019: The Future of Services Trade." World Trade Or-
 ganization, Geneva.




                                           24
         Figure 1: UK Foreign Entry STRI: MFN, Preferential and Risk Measures


                                                                        Risk
          Architecture, engineering, scien
                                                                        MFN TRI
                  Audiovisual and related                               Preferential TRI
                       Computer services

                             Construction

                       Postal and courier

                     Other transportation

            Legal, accounting, consulting

                    Telecommunications

                   Insurance and Pension

                                Financial

                       Sea transportation

                        Air transportation


                                             0   .05        .1    .15            .2


Notes: The MFN and Preferential measures correspond to the OECD's STRI and EEA TRI for category 1
in the UK in 2016 and Risk is defined as (STRI-EEA)/(1+EEA).




                                                       25
                           Figure 2: EU Foreign Entry STRI: Risk Measures


          Architecture, engineering, scien
                                                                  Risk Mean
                                                                  Risk Standard Deviation
                  Audiovisual and related

                       Computer services

                             Construction

                     Other transportation

                       Postal and courier

                                Financial

                    Telecommunications

                   Insurance and Pension

            Legal, accounting, consulting

                       Sea transportation

                        Air transportation


                                             0   .05        .1          .15             .2


Notes: Risk is defined as (MFN-EEA)/(1+EEA) for each industry and EU country in the sample; the mean
and standard deviation are over those countries.




                                                       26
 Figure 3: Brexit Probability and Export Growth of High vs. Low Risk: 2016Q1-2018Q4




                                                                                                            .5
              1

                                     Referendum           Article 50                             Low




                                                                                                            .4
              .8




                                                                                                            Growth relative to 2016Q1
                                                                                                                                  .3
         Probability
               .6




                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                High




                                                                                                              .1
              .4




                                                                                                            0
              .2




                                                                                                            -.1
                       16Q1   16Q2   16Q3   16Q4   17Q1   17Q2    17Q3   17Q4   18Q1   18Q2   18Q3   18Q4



Notes: Right hand side measures log difference of bilateral exports at t relative to its 2016Q1 value. Low
represents exports in industries with risk below that country's median and high the remaining industries.
The dashed and solid lines are first order polynomials over all observations in each of these risk categories
with shaded 95% CI. The probability of Brexit (thin line) is the average of contract prices in the quarter
from prediction markets described in the text.




                                                                 27
                        Table 1: Regression Data Summary Statistics
                         Bilateral-Industry in Quarters 2016Q1-2018Q4

                      Export Values: Continuously Traded Sample
                                 Mean       SD        Min      Max                            N
     Exports (ln)                    3.366          1.526          0.00         7.10        2616
     STRI category 1                 0.081          0.062          0.01         0.31        2616
     EEA STRI category 1             0.012          0.014          0.00         0.07        2616
     Pr(Brexit) (ln) x Risk          -0.024         0.050         -0.50         0.00        2616
     Pr(Brexit) (ln)                 -0.464         0.765         -2.14         0.00        2616
     Risk                            0.052          0.033          0.00         0.24        2616


                                      Export Participation
                                      Mean       SD        Min                 Max            N
     Exported                         0.780         0.414           0            1          5748
     STRI category 1                 0.058          0.036         0.01          0.31        5748
     EEA STRI category 1             0.009          0.012           0           0.07        5748
     Pr(Brexit) x Risk               -0.023         0.047         -0.50         0.00        5748
     Notes: ln(exports) defined at the exporter-importer-industry-quarter level for UK and EU
     (2015 membership).industries defined by Ebops classification, air transportation excluded
     as described in text. Pr(Brexit) defined as the probability of a leave referendum and Article
     50 invoked. Measured before the referendum as the leave in referendum prediction market
     contract price averaged within the quarter times the Article 50 probability in July 2016.
     Measured after the referendum as the probability of Article 50 invoked by end of March
     2017 from July 2016 to the end of the sample (averaged over the quarter). We use the ln
     of this variable. Risk defined as (STRI EEA)/(1+EEA) in 2016.




                          Table 2: Services Risk and EU-UK (OLS)

                                                     (1)        (2)              (3)         (4)
                        Dependent Variable             Value (ln)              Participation (0/1)
                              End Quarter          2017Q4 2018Q4               2017Q4 2018Q4

Pr(Brexit) x Risk                                 -1.666       -1.766          -0.392       -0.444
                                                    (0.33)       (0.36)          (0.10)       (0.11)

N                                                   1,744        2,616           3,832        5,748
R2                                                   0.96         0.95            0.86         0.83
Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. Value sample is for importer-exporter-service flows traded
in all quarters in the sample period. All specifications include exporter-importer-industry, exporter-
importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-industry-quarter level
in parenthesis.



                                                  28
                          Table 3: Services Risk and EU-UK (PPML)

                                                 (1)       (2)                 (3)            (4)
                                Sample          Non-confidential                       All
                            End Quarter        2017Q4 2018Q4                2017Q4           2018Q4

     Pr(Brexit)×Risk                          -0.610        -0.875          -0.563       -1.240
                                                (0.21)        (0.29)          (0.21)       (0.33)

     N                                          2,869         4,466           3,216          4,980
     Pseudo R2                                  0.95           0.94           0.94            0.94
     Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-importer-industry,
     exporter-importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-
     industry-quarter level in parenthesis. "Non-confidential" sample excludes positive traded
     omitted from data due to confidentiality reasons. "All" sample includes the confidential
     observations by imputing any such omitted flow for exporter-UK-service-quarter with the
     min(UK-service-quarter) over all EU exporters and UK-importer-service-quarter with the
     min(UK-service-quarter) over all EU importers. PPML drops singletons so sample is smaller
     than participation.




                            Table 4: Services Risk and EU-UK (IV)

                                                      (1)        (2)               (3)         (4)
                         Dependent Variable             Value (ln)               Participation (0/1)
                               End Quarter          2017Q4 2018Q4                2017Q4 2018Q4

Pr(Brexit) x Risk                                  -4.656        -4.360          -0.995         -1.163
                                                     (1.06)        (1.14)          (0.35)         (0.36)

N                                                     1,744        2,616             3,832          5,748
First Stage F-Stat                                     24.0        22.0              42.3           38.8
Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-importer-industry, exporter-
importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-industry-quarter level
in parenthesis. IV instruments the risk variable with the median STRI in each service industry in 2016
across USA, Japan, Australia and Canada. The first stage F-stat is the Kleibergen-Paap Rk Wald F
statistic and high values reject the weak instrument correlation null.




                                                   29
             Table 5: Brexit Uncertainty Impacts at Average Risk

                                                    Export              Participation
                                                   OLS   IV             OLS      IV

Uncertainty Elasticity                  -0.093 -0.23                    -0.028   -0.073
Referendum Effect (log points)           -12.1 -29.8                     -3.6      -9.5
Referendum + Art 50 Effect (log points) -19.8 -48.8                      -5.9     -15.6
Notes: OLS and IV use the long sample specifications in Tables 2 and 4. We com-
pute changes in probabilities relative to 2016Q1 using 2016Q3 (referendum effect) or post
2017Q2 (referendum + Art. 50). The mean risk used to calculate the elasticities is the
one listed in the respective samples in Table 1. For participation the elasticity divides
the coefficient by the mean of the dependent variable.




                                           30
A     Appendix
A.1    Supplementary Tables

                   Table A1: Risk by Industry-UK and EU Services Trade

                                                         Fraction of Trade               Risk
                      industry
                                                             (2016Q1)           Mean      SD       CV
Air transportation                                              0.173           0.191    0.011   0.056
Architectural, engineering, scientific and other                0.029           0.016    0.023   1.494
Audiovisual and related                                         0.008           0.030    0.013   0.422
Computer                                                        0.080           0.033    0.013   0.381
Construction                                                    0.021           0.034    0.013   0.374
Financial                                                       0.283           0.069    0.019   0.273
Insurance and Pension                                           0.055           0.066    0.025   0.377
Legal, accounting, management consulting, PR                    0.174           0.067    0.048   0.720
Other modes of transportation                                   0.023           0.039    0.014   0.360
Postal and courier                                              0.016           0.039    0.018   0.472
Sea transportation                                              0.061           0.088    0.028   0.313
Telecommunications                                              0.077           0.060    0.023   0.381
Notes: Trade shares reflect the aggregate of all non-confidential values in 2016Q1 between UK and all EU
in sample. The risk measure applies to the same sample, which differs from the participation sample due
to any confidential values.




                                                  31
        Table A2: Services Risk and UK-EU Robustness Timing (Moving Average)


                                       1                           2                   3
                Dependent variable Value (ln)             Participation (0/1)        Value
                       Estimation    OLS                         OLS                 PPML

              Pr(Brexit MA)×Risk              -1.753              -0.436              -1.272
                                             (0.347)             (0.105)             (0.331)

              N                              2,616                5,748              4,980
              R2                             0.952                0.833              0.938
              Notes: Pr(Brexit MA) uses the ln of a centered 3 month moving average of
              probabilities described in Table 1. All other variables defined in Table 1. All
              specifications include exporter-importer-industry, exporter-importer-quarter
              fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-industry-
              quarter level in parenthesis.PPML drops singletons so sample is smaller than
              participation. PPML sample includes imputed confidential data as described
              in Table 3 (results similar if we drop imputed values).




            Table A3: Services Risk and UK-EU Robustness to Other Barriers


                                       1        2              3           4                    5           6
         Dependent variable            Value (ln)            Participation (0/1)                    Value
                Estimation               OLS                        OLS                             PPML

Pr(Brexit)×Risk                     -1.766     -1.999         -0.444        -0.408         -1.240       -2.510
                                   (0.363)    (0.420)        (0.109)       (0.126)        (0.333)      (0.416)

Pr(Brexit)×Risk Aggregate                      0.315                        -0.043                      1.044
                                              (0.283)                      (0.088)                     (0.181)

N                                   2,616       2,616         5,748        5,748           4,980        4,980
R2                                  0.952       0.952         0.833        0.833           0.938        0.938
Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-importer-industry, exporter-
importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-industry-quarter level in
parenthesis.PPML drops singletons so sample is smaller than participation. PPML sample includes imputed
confidential data as described in Table 3 (results qualitatively similar if we drop imputed values).




                                                    32
Table A4: UK and EU Risk - Robustness to Unobserved Industry Trends and Correlation


                                                  1        2            3           4               5           6
                    Dependent variable            Value (ln)          Participation (0/1)               Value
                           Estimation               OLS                      OLS                        PPML

Pr(Brexit)×Risk                                -1.766       -0.870     -0.444      -0.175          -1.240    -0.705
                                              (0.403)      (0.347)    (0.163)     (0.116)         (0.361)   (0.303)
Additional industry-Quarter Cluster               x                      x                          x
Additional industry-Time Trend FE                            x                        x                         x
N                                              2,616       2,616       5,748       5,748           4,980    4,980
R2                                             0.952       0.958       0.833       0.845           0.938    0.940
Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-importer-industry, exporter-importer-
quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the importer-industry-quarter level in parenthe-
sis.PPML drops singletons so sample is smaller than participation. PPML sample includes imputed confidential
data as described in Table 3 (results qualitatively similar if we drop imputed values).




        Table A5: Services Risk and UK-EU Robustness industry (Air Transport)


                                             1                      2                       3
            Dependent variable           Value (ln)        Participation (0/1)            Value
                   Estimation              OLS                    OLS                     PPML

            Pr(Brexit)×Risk                -0.566                   -0.231              -0.364
                                          (0.185)                  (0.048)             (0.119)

            N                               2,952                    6,276                5,448
            R2                              0.956                    0.841                0.941
            Notes: All variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-
            importer-industry, exporter-importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard er-
            rors clustered at the importer-industry-quarter level in parenthesis.PPML drops
            singletons so sample is smaller than participation. PPML sample includes im-
            puted confidential data as described in Table 3 (results qualitatively similar if we
            drop imputed values).




                                                      33
             Table A6: Services Risk and UK-EU Heterogeneity


                                     1                         2                 3
              Dependent variable Value (ln)           Participation (0/1)      Value
                     Estimation    OLS                       OLS               PPML

Pr(Brexit)×Risk                           -0.899              -0.435            -0.927
                                         (0.367)             (0.128)           (0.334)
Pr(Brexit)×Risk×EU Exporter               -2.685              -0.025            -1.790
                                         (0.660)             (0.239)           (0.935)

N                                         2,616               5,748             4,980
R2                                        0.952               0.833             0.938
Notes: All other variables defined in Table 1. All specifications include exporter-
importer-industry, exporter-importer-quarter fixed effects. Robust standard errors clus-
tered at the importer-industry-quarter level in parenthesis. PPML drops singletons so
sample is smaller than participation. PPML sample includes imputed confidential data
as described in Table 3 (results qualitatively similar if we drop imputed values).




                                          34
A.2        Data construction
This Appendix provides additional detail on services trade data, the STRI and the construc-
tion of our data set. First, as defined in the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS), there are four modes of services trade, which are defined based on the location of
the supplier and consumer:

       · Mode 1: cross-border supply (typically via the internet). The service is traded from
         supplier to consumer without either party physically moving across borders. For ex-
         ample, an architect in one country emails a digital version of their plans to a foreign
         client. Mode 1 trade also includes the transportation of goods from one country to
         another (excluding the value of the goods).

       · Mode 2: consumption abroad. A consumer from one country travels to another
         country to consume services, such as a tourist staying at hotels and purchasing food
         while on vacation in a foreign country.

       · Mode 3: commercial presence. A services provider sets up a local affiliate to sell
         services in a foreign country.

       · Mode 4: temporary presence of natural persons. A services provider temporarily sends
         a representative to another market to perform a service. For example, an engineering
         firm could temporarily send engineers to another country to advise local staff on a
         construction project.

    Typically, cross-border data collected through balance of payments statistics, including
the ONS data we use in this paper, covers trade in modes 1, 2, and 4. Since this data is
survey-based, it is often difficult to break cross-border services data into the three modes
it comprises. Recently, Mann and Cheung (2019) report on efforts to estimate cross-border
trade by mode of supply using survey data in the US and UK. Among the industries covered
in our data, the UK Office of National Statistics estimates show that mode 1 trade makes
up the majority of cross-border trade for every services industry except construction.30
    While the quarterly cross-border UK services trade data covers 32 extended balance of
payments service categories, the OECD STRI industry coverage is more limited. Table
A7 shows the correspondence between OECD STRI industries and EBOPS codes used in
this paper. The STRI industries are based on International Standard Industrial Classifi-
cation (ISIC) categories, while the trade data is based on Extended Balance of Payments
services (EBOPS) codes. We concorded these by matching the descriptions in each of the
classifications. For example, the commercial banking STRI corresponds to ISIC codes 6419-
Other (non-central bank) monetary intermediation, 6492-Other credit granting, and 6491-
Financial leasing. When matching to EBOPS we looked for trade flows that similarly, did
not cover non-loan based financial services, such as hedge funds. Thus, commercial bank-
ing was matched to EBOPS 7.1, rather than EBOPS 7. In some cases, such as legal and
accounting services, the STRI is more disaggregated than the trade data. In these cases,
  30
    See USITC (2020) for a more detailed discussion of services trade data and various efforts to measure
services trade by mode of supply


                                                   35
Table A7: Correspondence between extended balance of payments (EBOPS) industry codes
and STRI industries

 EBOPS Description                       EBOPS Code      Corresponding STRI Industries
 Sea transportation                      3.1             Maritime transport
 Air transportation                      3.2             Air transport
 Other modes of transportation           3.3             Road transport; rail transport;
                                                         logistics services
 Postal and courier services            3.4              Courier
 Construction                           5                Construction
 Insurance and Pension                  6                Insurance and pension services
 Explicitly charged and                 7.1              Commercial banking
 other financial services
 Telecommunications services            9.1              Telecommunications; broadcasting
 Computer services                      9.2              Computer services
 Legal, accounting, management          10.2.1           Legal services; accounting services
 consulting and public relations
 Architectural, engineering, scientific 10.3.1           Architectural services; engineering
                                                         services
 and other technical services
 Audiovisual and related services        11.1            Motion pictures; sound recording


we average the STRI value across all sub-industries in the category. The match is further
restricted by unavailability of the STRI for the following industries: travel services, charges
for the use of intellectual property, research and development services, or personal, cultural,
and recreational services.




                                                36
              Table A8: Discriminatory measures by STRI category (percent)

                                 Restrict.     Restrict movt.   Other disc.    Barriers to    Regulatory
                               foreign entry     of people       measures     competition    transparency
 Air transport                     100                100           92            20              0
 Architecture, engineering         80                 84            83            45              0
 Commercial banking                 77                100           57            10              0
 Computer                          100                100           75            40              0
 Construction                      100                 93           80            40              0
 Insurance                         86                 100           67            11              0
 Legal, account., consulting       79                  95           83            50              0
 Other transport                   93                 100           84            13              0
 Postal and courier                82                 100           75            10              0
 Sea transport                     100                100           95            22              0
 Telecommunications                100                100           67             8              0
 Average                           91                 97            78            24              0
   Note: Data unavailable for audiovisual services. Counts of discriminatory measures by STRI category were
   compiled from industry-specific STRI construction methodology papers, available at www.oecd.org/trade/
   topics/services-trade/.


    One of the challenges of using the OECD STRI is that it includes measures that explicitly
discriminate against foreign firms (such as foreign equity restrictions) along with measures
that affect all firms in the market (such as total cost to register a company). While the
MFN STRI does provide a breakout of the STRI by discriminatory and non-discriminatory
measures, that data is not available for the EEA STRI. In order to account for this, we used
industry-specific documentation for the MFN STRI to calculate the share of barriers by
category that are considered discriminatory by the OECD. These barrier shares are reported
in appendix table A2. Overall, discriminatory measures are concentrated in the first two
categories: restrictions to foreign entry and restrictions to movement of people. On average,
91 percent of the measures catalogued in restrictions to foreign entry are discriminatory,
while 97 percent of the barriers to movement of people are discriminatory. Based on these
classifications, in our main specification, we focus on restrictions to foreign entry.




                                                 37
A.3      Discriminatory Effects of STRI in a Standard Gravity
In this section, we use a standard gravity framework to determine how services trade vary
with STRI in a sample that excludes EU-UK flows. We have two goals. First, to show that
category 1 of the STRI is relevant and generates discriminatory effects even conditional on
other STRI (as we show in the baseline for the EU-UK). Second, to provide an estimate that
allows us to gauge how reasonable our uncertainty impacts are. Specifically, whether changes
in the STRI that would occur under a no-deal Brexit can generate large enough changes in
trade. Our model predicts that the uncertainty elasticity is lower than that of a deterministic
change in the STRI; so if the STRI in this sample, which is MFN, is less uncertain than the
preferential STRI between the UK and EU, the estimates in this appendix can provide an
upper bound on possible uncertainty effects.
    We utilize the newly released International Trade and Production Database for Esti-
mation (ITPD-E) (Borchert et al., 2020), which provides bilateral international trade and
domestic trade data for service industries from 2000 to 2016.31 A concordance is performed
between the ITPD-E, which follows the ISIC rev. 4 classification, and the data from the
UK's Office of National Statistics--classified under a Balance of Payments system. This en-
sures that we use the same service categories here and in the uncertainty-augmented gravity
in the text. We start the analysis in 2014: the first year the STRI is available.
    In order to use only MFN STRIs we must go beyond cross-border trade data and explore
internal trade. The reason is that MFN STRIs are importer-specific and preclude controlling
for unobserved importer heterogeneity, which is essential in standard gravity estimation. By
adding information on intra-national trade we can identify the differential impact of MFN
STRIs on international trade even after conditioning on importer and exporter fixed effects.
Benz (2017) applies this approach to show that increases in the STRI are associated with
lower trade between OECD countries. We rely on a similar gravity equation for our analysis:

 RixV t = exp(1 ST RIiV t × Brdrix + 2 Brdrix + 3 F T Aixt + ix + iV t + xV t ) × µixV t (A.1)

where RixV t is the value of country x exports to country i in industry V and year t, F T Aixt
is a preferential trade agreement dummy, xV t and iV t are the exporter-sector-year and
importer-sector-year fixed effects to capture multilateral resistance terms and ix is a linear
function of common bilateral determinants of trade.32 Lastly µixV t is the multiplicative error
term.
    The coefficient of interest is 1 and it is identified using the interaction of the STRI score
of country i in V at t with a dummy equal to one if the flow is international. Table A9
reports the estimates for (A.1) using annual services data between 2014-16. To match the
empirical exercise in section 4, we estimate the model using OLS. In order to avoid any of
our estimates being impacted by Brexit uncertainy, we exclude all intra-EEA flows.
    Column (1) uses only cross-border flows and thus can only identify bilateral determinants,
not the STRI. We use it to verify that distance, contiguity, common official language, colonial
relationships and trade agreements all have the expected sign and significance for services in
  31
   The data is publicly available at https://usitc.gov/data/gravity/index.htm
  32
   These are distance, contiguity, common official language and colonial relationships; these and the F T A
dummy are from the USITC's Dynamic Gravity Dataset (Gurevich and Herman, 2018).



                                                    38
this sample.
    In column (2), we add intra-national flows and estimate the STRI-1 effects. First, we find
that international trade is about 500 lp lower than intra-national trade, even after controlling
for distance. Second, this international penalty is magnified by policy restrictions. An
increase in the STRI-1 from zero to one (moving from an open to a closed economy) lowers
international trade by an additional 600 lp.
    What does the estimate in column (2) imply for more reasonable increases in the STRI?
An increase from 0.012 (the average STRI-1 in our EU-UK sample) to 0.081 (their average
MFN STRI-1 value) implies a 42 log point reduction in services trade. Thus even modest
changes in the STRI, such as those under a no-deal Brexit, lead to large trade reductions,
which indicates that our uncertainty estimates are plausible.
    Column (3) examines the robustness to controlling for additional STRI components as
we did in the text. Specifically, we add the interaction of the STRI that includes all five
categories and find it does not have a significant effect. The STRI-1 coefficient now represents
the differential impact and it is negative and significant. Moreover, the overall magnitude
of the STRI-1 effect (from adding the coefficients) is similar to the one in column (2). Both
findings support our focus on the STRI-1 measure.




                                              39
       Table A9: Gravity estimates with STRI (2014-16)



                          (1)            (2)              (3)

Distance              -0.986       -0.935              -0.934
                        (0.05)       (0.07)              (0.07)

Contiguity              0.137        0.138              0.139
                        (0.15)       (0.15)             (0.15)

Language               0.327        0.344              0.342
                        (0.07)       (0.08)             (0.08)

Colony                 0.536        0.544              0.548
                        (0.15)       (0.15)             (0.15)

FTA                    0.681        0.533              0.534
                        (0.11)       (0.12)             (0.12)

Border                             -5.017              -5.296
                                     (0.50)              (0.66)

Border × STRI1                      -6.078              -9.633
                                     (3.35)              (5.79)

Border × STRI                                           2.408
                                                        (3.55)
N                       16443        17054              17054
Imp-Sec-Year FE          Yes          Yes                Yes
Exp-Sec-Year FE          Yes          Yes                Yes
Intra-trade flows        No           Yes                Yes
Standard errors clustered at importer and exporter level in parentheses.

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                    40
