                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           LOCAL PUBLIC FINANCE DYNAMICS AND HURRICANE SHOCKS

                                      Rhiannon Jerch
                                      Matthew E. Kahn
                                        Gary C. Lin

                                     Working Paper 28050
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28050


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Rebecca Taylor, Mac McComas, seminar participants at Binghamton University, the
Wharton Risk Center, and the UEA 2020 meetings for extremely helpful comments. We also
thank Marc Joffe and Natalie Cohen for their generous insights on municipal bond markets. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rhiannon Jerch, Matthew E. Kahn, and Gary C. Lin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Public Finance Dynamics and Hurricane Shocks
Rhiannon Jerch, Matthew E. Kahn, and Gary C. Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 28050
November 2020
JEL No. H72,H74

                                          ABSTRACT

Since 1980, over 2,000 local governments in US Atlantic and Gulf states have been hit by a
hurricane. Such natural disasters can exert severe budgetary pressure on local governments'
ability to provide critical infrastructure, goods, and services. We study local government revenue,
expenditure, and borrowing dynamics in the aftermath of hurricanes. These shocks impact, both,
current local public resources through reducing tax revenues and expenditures, as well as future
local public resources through increasing the cost of debt. Major hurricanes have much larger
effects than minor hurricanes: major storms cause local revenues to fall by 6 to 7%. These losses
persist at least ten years after a hurricane strike, leading to a 6% decline in expenditures on
important public goods and services and a significant increase in the risk of default on municipal
debt. Our results reveal how hurricanes can create a "vicious cycle" for local governments by
increasing the cost of debt at critical moments after a hurricane strike, when localities are in
greatest need of funding sources. Cities deemed riskier by ratings agencies face higher borrowing
costs and thereby face constraints to invest in climate change adaptation. Municipalities with a
racial minority composition above their state median suffer expenditure losses 9% greater and
debt default risk 8 times larger than white communities in the decade following a hurricane strike.
These results suggest that climate change can exacerbate environmental justice challenges.

Rhiannon Jerch                                   Gary C. Lin
Temple University                                Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          Johns Hopkins University
1301 Cecil B. Moore Ave                          3100 Wyman Park Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19122                           Baltimore, MD 21211
rhiannon.jerch@temple.edu                        clin126@jhu.edu

Matthew E. Kahn
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3100 Wyman Park Drive
Baltimore, MD 21211
and NBER
mkahn10@jhu.edu
1       Introduction
Local governments are essential providers of public goods and services utilized by Americans
every day. Sanitation, policing, parks and recreation, public transit, and street maintenance
are a subset of the wide array of services primarily provided at the local level. In 2017,
local government expenditures comprised 35% of the combined $15,541 spent by all levels of
government per person on public goods and services (see Figure 1). To fund their operations,
local governments rely on local tax revenues and debt, both of which depend heavily on
the existence of a stable tax base. This paper will examine how extreme weather events
threaten the stability of these local revenue sources and the ability of municipalities to provide
essential goods and services. While recent research has highlighted the substantial social
costs that natural disasters impose through federal welfare programs (Deryugina, 2017),
little is known about how extreme weather events impact municipal budgets. This gap in our
understanding has important distributional consequences because local public services, such
as transportation and public hospitals, are essential for lower income households (Glaeser
et al., 2008) and because (as we document in this paper) local governments with large
racial minority populations are more likely to be exposed to extreme weather events. Taken
together, these facts highlight the important environmental justice implications associated
with understanding who bears the cost of climatic natural disasters (Banzhaf et al., 2019).

           We provide new evidence that exposure to hurricane events creates lasting declines
in local provision of public goods. While prior research has shown that hurricanes lead to
declines in personal income (Strobl, 2010; Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang, 2013), employment
(Belasen and Polachek, 2009) and property values,1 it is unclear whether such effects will
lead to municipal budgetary losses. First, hurricanes may stimulate economic activity that
can offset immediate fiscal shocks and even improve fiscal outcomes in the long term for
local governments. For instance, prior work shows that natural disasters can promote adop-
tion of new capital stock (Skidmore and Toya, 2002), as well as increased demand for labor
(Belasen and Polachek, 2009; Groen et al., 2016; Deryugina et al., 2018). Second, local gov-
ernments can generally rely on state reserve funds (Urahn and Irwin, 2020; Gregory, 2013)
1
    For instance, Hallstrom and Smith (2005), Davlasheridze et al. (2017), Ortega and Tas
                                                                                        . pinar (2018), Muller
    and Hopkins (2019), and Boustan et al. (2020).


                                                       1
and federally-backed insurance like FEMA to pay for damages to physical property in the
aftermath of a hurricane (Garrett and Sobel, 2003; del Valle et al., 2019; Masiero and San-
tarossa, 2020). The availability of federally-backed flood insurance to home owners through
the National Flood Insurance Program could also offset negative impacts on house prices or
even increase property tax revenues if hurricane disasters stimulate housing re-development
(Gaul, 2019; Liao and Kousky, 2020). Third, municipalities can leverage debt instruments
in absence of tax-based revenue sources to fund capital investments and infrastructure. Our
analysis indicates that such levers do not, on average, offset the negative effects of hurri-
cane exposure on municipal budgets in the long run. We document that hurricanes can
create a "vicious cycle" by increasing the cost of debt at critical moments after a hurricane
strike, when localities are in greatest need of funding sources. In other words, we docu-
ment that hurricane-induced declines in current financial resources translate in lower future
investments, leading to further fiscal declines.

       We use novel data on municipal bond default risk to show that higher borrowing costs
and declines in outstanding debt are an important reason local governments are unable to
recover pre-hurricane levels of service provision in the 10 years following hurricane exposure.
Previous work shows that severe natural disasters cause sustained out-migration (Vigdor,
2008; Strobl, 2010; Deryugina et al., 2018; Billings et al., 2019; Boustan et al., 2020). Our
research provides new evidence that adverse shocks to municipal finances explain part of the
reason populations do not return to areas affected by major hurricanes in their immediate
aftermath. These findings, thus, highlight how natural disasters not only generate direct
costs on local governments through necessitating reconstruction and assistance payments,
but indirect costs by disrupting local revenue sources and increasing the cost of public debt.

       Using the universe of Atlantic Basin hurricanes that made landfall in the United
States between 1972 and 2017, we estimate how a municipality's budget, tax base, and
debt financing evolve in the decade following exposure to hurricanes. We develop a gran-
ular hurricane exposure measure based on maximum wind speed at the level of the census
tract in order to capture variation in treatment at the municipality level. In a panel fixed
effects framework, we compare municipalities exposed to hurricanes against those--within


                                               2
the same state--that are not exposed to estimate how hurricanes affect municipal budgets.
The impacts of hurricanes can vary widely across space, thus a localized exposure measure
combined with municipal-level outcomes can accurately capture economic costs of hurri-
canes where more coarse geographic exposure measures generally underestimate such costs
(Bertinelli and Strobl, 2013).

          Our empirical approach exploits the random timing of hurricanes at the municipal
government level. We compare municipalities within the same state that are demographically
and geographically similar, but differ in hurricane exposure by chance. Because municipali-
ties and credit rating agencies cannot accurately predict within a year's time when and where
future hurricanes will strike, we are able to interpret post-hurricane changes in finances as
a causal result of hurricane exposure. Our approach removes variation across municipalities
with differing geographic risk, for instance coastal versus inland locations, and instead relies
on the fact that local officials cannot precisely predict if a hurricane will strike before fiscal
decisions for the next year are made.

          Our analysis provides two key findings. First, local governments experience significant
declines in revenues, expenditures, and debt in the 10 years after a hurricane strike. These
declines are initially offset by intergovernmental transfers in the immediate aftermath of a
hurricane but ramp up significantly after 6­10 years post hurricane. Local revenue sources,
including taxes and fees, fall up to 2% in the 6­10 years after exposure. The effects from
major hurricanes are over twice as large as that of the average storm: we find major hurri-
canes reduce local revenues by 7.2% in the decade following a hurricane. The magnitude of
this effect is economically large, matching the average amount taxpayers spend annually on
state & local government employee payroll (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2014).2 Local revenue
declines cause subsequent declines in local public goods provision: expenditures on public
works including water, sewer, trash, and public transit, decline by 3.4% in the 6-10 years
after exposure. Major hurricanes cause significantly more service disruption: local public
works expenditures decline 13% after exposure to a hurricane with a maximum wind speed
2
    Novy-Marx and Rauh (2014) find that annual expenditures on payroll for state and local public sector
    employees amounts to $5,450 per household, on average (Table 1). Our estimates translate to a decline of
    $5,161 per household (based on total own revenues and population counts as of 1982 among municipalities
    ever hit by a hurricane between 1972 and 2017 and assuming three people per household).


                                                      3
exceeding 96 knots. The fact that expenditures decline nearly in tandem with revenues is
consistent with prior work on local budgetary responses to local tax revenue shocks.3

        A local government's debt level and its ability to borrow are key determinants of its
ability to adapt to new shocks (Adelino et al., 2017). We explore how debt financing and
default risk change after a major shock. We find that total debt falls by 19.2 to 25.9% in the
10 years following a major hurricane. Unlike tax-based revenue sources, the availability of
debt declines immediately after hurricane exposure, and persists up to a decade thereafter.
We find that part of the decline in municipal debt is caused by responses of ratings agencies.
On average, Moody's Analytics--one of the three largest ratings agencies in the world--
downgrades bond ratings in the aftermath of a hurricane. These downgrades translate into
a 17% increase in the risk of default relative to the sample standard deviation in each of 10
years after a hurricane strike. Using a "near-miss" analysis that compares hurricane exposed
municipalities to neighboring municipalities that nearly miss exposure to the same disaster,
we find evidence that Moody's downgrades municipal debt following hurricane strikes due
to declines in local economic conditions rather than climate risk. Our analysis on municipal
debt fits into a growing body of literature that explores how natural disasters affect financial
markets (for example, Lamb (1995), Ouattara and Strobl (2013), Krueger et al. (2020),
Painter (2020))4 . Our paper is the first, to our knowledge, to combine granular hurricane
exposure measures with local-level public finance outcomes. This exercise produces notably
different conclusions from prior work because we show that local-level governments suffer
losses following hurricane exposure. We show that aggregated county or state-level analyses
mask these local negative impacts.

        The second key finding is that we find greater losses of revenues and public goods ex-
penditures among local governments that are, on average, poorer, less educated, and contain
a higher population share of racial minorities. The magnitude implies that a one percent-
age point increase in the share of non-white population (measured as of 1970) exacerbates
own-source revenue declines by 7.1% in the decade after a hurricane. Importantly, we find
3
  For instance, see Lutz (2008), Skidmore and Scorsone (2011), Lutz et al. (2011), Alm et al. (2011), Cromwell
  et al. (2015), Feler and Senses (2017), Melnik (2017), and Shoag et al. (2019).
4
  We discuss this literature in greater detail in Section 5.3



                                                      4
treatment effect heterogeneity across municipalities using only within-state variation, imply-
ing that regional demographic differences across municipalities in our sample cannot explain
the disproportionate losses suffered by local governments that are majority non-white or
low-income households. Prior studies have found limited heterogeneity across demographic
groups in the impacts of hurricanes on personal welfare outcomes (Deryugina et al., 2018;
Deryugina and Molitor, 2018; Groen et al., 2020).5 No prior study, however, has explored de-
mographic heterogeneity with respect to the impacts of hurricanes on local public resources.
We find that declines in public goods provision comprise a channel by which climate change
damages are regressive. The disproportionate impact on municipalities with a higher pro-
portion of low-income and minority residents is particularly concerning because these groups
tend to be more reliant on public services (Betts and Fairlie, 2001; Glaeser et al., 2008) and
thus more likely to be harmed by weakened municipal finances.

           Our results illuminate how disruptions in local provision of goods and services are an
additional, yet heretofore undocumented, economic cost for those with the least ability to
cope with natural disaster risk. Our analysis of the recent past is relevant for considering
future risks likely to be posed by climate change as we show that fiscal costs are dispropor-
tionately borne by minority and lower-income communities.

           This article proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the principle theoretic predic-
tions that motivate our empirical approach. In Section 3, we discuss the construction of our
data set including our localized measurement of hurricane exposure. Section 4 explains our
empirical approach. We present our main results on local revenues, expenditures, default
risk, and debt in Section 5. Here, we consider mechanisms driving ratings agencies to adjust
bond ratings, and distinguish between mechanical destruction to local economic conditions
and updates to agency risk algorithms that account for climate change risk. In Section
6, we show how the affects of hurricanes vary by socio-economic conditions across munic-
ipalities, suggesting that the local fiscal costs of hurricanes have important distributional
consequences. This section also explores how population outflows and adjustments to the
default risk for public debt play a role in local fiscal declines. Section 7 shows the results of
5
    In contrast, Billings et al. (2019) find that credit delinquency rates are higher after hurricane strikes among
    residents that are less likely to own homes relative to home owners.


                                                          5
several robustness checks, including specification checks, pre-trend analyses, and sampling
restrictions. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2    The Municipality's Budget Constraint & Resource Allocation
     Problem
Our empirical work examines how local public finances evolve in the aftermath of major
natural disasters. A straightforward examination of income effects and substitution effects
offers several insights about the empirical patterns we document below.

       At any point in time, a stylized version of a local government's intertemporal budget
constraint (with time subscripts omitted) can be written as
                                    E + rB = R + G + B                                        (1)
where E, r, B, R, G, and B are total expenditures (including current expenses and capital
outlay), interest rate, government debt (bonds), own-source revenues, intergovernmental
transfers, and new bond issuance. Changes in total expenditures are determined by how
hurricanes affect each component of governments' budgets. Total differentiating Equation 1
with respect to an exogeneous shock x and collecting terms yields


                         dE   dR dG dB         dB  dr
                            =    +    +    - r    + B .                                       (2)
                         dx   dx   dx   dx     dx  dx

       First, the impact on own-sourced revenues are determined by how hurricanes affect
the tax base and the tax instruments that cities use to raise revenues. Holding tax rates
constant, a city's revenues will fall if the tax base shrinks due to outmigration (loss of human
capital) or destruction of physical capital. In this case, hurricane-hit cities experience a pure
negative income shock: dR/dx < 0. When cities can adjust local tax rates, the sign of dR/dx
depends on the revenue elasticity with respect to the tax instruments used.

       Second, when natural disasters are sufficiently severe, the negative fiscal effects of hur-
ricanes can be offset by an increase in intergovernmental transfers: dG/dx > 0. For example,
when major natural disasters that trigger Presidential Disaster Declarations mobilize federal
programs, such as FEMA's Public Assistance program, state and local governments can be


                                                6
reimbursed by the federal government anywhere between 75 to 100% of the costs of approved
projects. While these grant distributions can be discretionary, motivated by political con-
nections or popular press coverage (Garrett and Sobel, 2003; Eisensee and Str¨
                                                                             omberg, 2007),
federal appropriations for disaster relief have grown by a factor of eight since the Stafford
Act of 1988 from $1 billion to over $8 billion today (Stein and Van Dam, 2019).

       Third, severe natural disasters can influence local government debt through three key
channels. The first channel is the effect of natural disasters on new debt issuance (dB/dx).
The second channel is how hurricanes impact total debt outstanding through debt retirement
and defaults (dB/dx). The third channel through which natural disasters can impact debt
is capital market's assessment of municipal bond default risk, which is reflected in a city's
bond ratings (dr/dx). Low bond ratings and high interest rates can deter local governments
from engaging in debt financing. We show evidence of this in Figure 2 where we plot the
relationship between municipal debt and municipal bond ratings. For a one "notch" increase
in bond rating rank (a higher risk bond) at time t, debt outstanding per capita falls by
$717 and debt issued per capita falls by $120 at time t + 5, five years in the future. If
a city's default rate increases as a result of a shock, the city experiences a "substitution
effect" in addition to an income effect as higher capital prices hinder their ability to make
key infrastructure investments.

       Together, the income and substitution effects of natural disasters can lead to a "vicious
cycle" in which cities' current shrinking budgets translate into lower future investments and
public good provisions, leading to further fiscal declines and delayed capital investment. All
three of the channels discussed above--debt issuance, debt retirement and debt outstanding,
and the default risk associated with new debt--are important for governments that need to
rebuild infrastructure harmed by natural disasters or invest in new mitigation technologies
like pumps or levies. These capital investments at a current period can ultimately affect
the relative attractiveness of a city to a marginal mover in a future period and the city's
ability to return to it's pre-hurricane economic growth path (Haughwout, 2002; Albouy and
Farahani, 2017; Jerch, 2020).

       As municipal budgets adjust to natural disasters, local officials must decide how to


                                               7
allocate scarce funds (dE/dx). Such decisions are complicated by differential public good
utilization across the tax base and incentives of local officials. For instance, Figure 3 shows
that among local governments within Atlantic states, a higher share of non-white residents,
a higher share of residents with earnings below the poverty line, and a higher share of
population with less than high school education are all associated with higher expenditures
shares in important public services such as local health, housing, welfare assistance, and
transportation. These correlations are consistent with prior work showing that minority and
low-income households are more likely to attend public school (Betts and Fairlie, 2001) and
utilize public transit (Glaeser et al., 2008).

           On the one hand, cities could raise taxes to repair and replace damaged physical
capital and risk the loss of human capital as high-income residents relocate to avoid tax
increases. On the other hand, cities could cut back on public goods and services, such as
reducing the number of bus routes or scale back public education spending. Such actions
would increase the incidence of hurricanes' fiscal effects on low-income households, who have
a relatively low migration rate and are highly reliant on local public goods (Notowidigdo,
2020; Molloy et al., 2011).

           Besides fiscal considerations and distributional concerns, political incentives can in-
fluence how local governments re-optimize spending with respect to budget changes. For
example, at the local level, city officials who seek reelection have incentives to allocate funds
towards projects that have a short time horizon, high visibility among voters, and high po-
litical returns (Healy and Malhotra, 2009). At the federal level, disaster relief payments
may also be politically motivated. For instance, Garrett and Sobel (2003) provide suggestive
evidence that federal transfers are linked to the strength of the political affiliation between
the president and a state's representation in Congress.6 The broad menu of potential re-
sponses by local leaders highlights the theoretical ambiguity in hurricanes' fiscal impacts on
local governments and the importance of testing for heterogeneous effects across spending
categories and local resident attributes. We will discipline our exploration of such differential
effects by focusing on how low-income, minority cities respond to disasters.
6
    In all our analysis, we exploit within-state variation to identify hurricanes' fiscal impacts so any biases
    resulting from this type of political process should be small.


                                                        8
           In studying the local consequences of hurricane exposure over a decade, we recognize
that there are several interdependent mechanisms at work. Hurricane shocks can have a
direct effect on injuring the tax base as owners of destroyed homes and businesses choose
to move away. Hurricane shocks can also have an indirect effect on injuring the tax base:
exposed populations may move away or marginal movers may choose less risky locations
because they expect that prior hurricane shocks will have persistent negative effects on local
public goods provision. This logic suggests that it is very difficult to tease out the direct
effects separately from the indirect effects using our observational data. While we cannot
conclude that declines to the local tax base cause declines in local economic conditions
documented in prior literature, our findings underscore that these two outcomes are closely
linked and that hurricane effects on municipal borrowing costs hamper local recovery efforts,
particularly in minority and poor communities.


3       Data Description
We construct a balanced panel of public finance outcomes and hurricane exposure from
1982 through 2017 for 6,144 municipal governments. We choose this time window to strike
a balance between having enough power to identify both short and long-term hurricane
effects across several local governments, while including controls for pre-existing growth
trends. Our "treatment unit" is the municipal government. By conducting the analysis at the
municipality level, we allow for potential heterogeneous fiscal impacts across municipalities
within the same county. We focus on municipal governments in the 21 states along the
coasts of the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico because the geography of these "hurricane
states" make them prone to tropical storms and hurricane-strength winds from the Atlantic
Basin.7 Non-coastal states face limited hurricane exposure and do not constitute a good
comparison group. Our municipal-level analysis requires three main types of data: data on
local government finances, demographics, and hurricane exposure.
7
    The list of states includes Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland,
    Massachusetts, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode
    Island, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, and West Virginia. While Hawaii and California have
    experienced Pacific hurricanes, we exclude municipalities from these states because of significant regional
    and economic differences relative to Atlantic states.




                                                        9
3.1   Local Government Finance Data
First, we utilize the Census of Governments dataset as our source for annual local govern-
ment revenues, expenditures, and debt. The survey is collected every five years, on years
ending in "2" or "7" starting with 1967. The Census of Governments dataset is ideally suited
for our purposes, as it contains the most comprehensive information on local public finances
and employment across time and space. While this dataset includes both general-purpose
governments (county, municipal, and township governments) and special-purpose govern-
ments (special-district and school-district governments), we focus on municipal governments
because they perform relatively similar functions, even across states (e.g., providing public
transportation to local residents). We report the results for the other local government types
in the Appendix.

       In the Census of Governments dataset, local government revenues come from two
main sources: locally-generated revenues and intergovernmental transfers. Locally-generated
revenues generally come from taxes, with property taxes making up the largest category.8
Additional own-source revenues ("other revenues" hereinafter) come from miscellaneous rev-
enues and user charges and sources such as liquor stores and utilities. Intergovernmental
transfers include funds from other governments, such as the federal, state, and other local
governments. Public funds are allocated among a number of expenditure categories. We
group the various expenditures into six categories.9 We focus on the four largest expendi-
ture shares: public works (48%), public safety (18%), miscellaneous expenditures (15%), and
government administration (15%)10 .

       We drop municipal government-year observations if any of the following outcomes are
missing: revenues from all sources, total expenditures, and municipality population. Between
1982 and 2017, the sample includes 49,152 total observations, or 6,144 municipalities each
observed in 8 years. As a robustness check, we adjust for municipality size by dividing public
finance outcomes of interest by the municipality population. One caveat of using population-
adjusted public finance outcomes is that these estimates are more prone to measurement error
8
 Other tax categories include sales taxes, income taxes, license taxes, and other miscellaneous taxes.
9
 The complete list of government expenditures can be found in Appendix A.
10
   We study the remaining two categories, public assistance (2%) and public education (2%) in the Appendix



                                                   10
because municipality population estimates are not updated frequently between decennial
censuses. Because a single hurricane can impact several local governments simultaneously,
in some specifications we aggregate local public finance outcomes to the county-government
type level. This aggregation ensures that our estimates of the impact of hurricanes on local
public finances account for any intergovernmental transfers between local governments that
perform similar functions within county jurisdictions.

3.2       Demographic and Economic Data
Second, we collect data related to demographic and economic outcomes from several sources.
To adjust for pre-hurricane differences in local characteristics, we collect data on municipali-
ties' 1970 attributes from the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS).
Because 1970 is the first year that municipality-level census data is available from NHGIS, we
select 1982 as the first year to observe financial outcomes from the Census of Governments
because this allows us to include "baseline" demographic and economic controls that are
observed at least a decade prior to our financial outcomes of interest. The NHGIS municipal
characteristics include (log) population, (log) land area, (log) distance to the nearest coast,
share of population who are non-white, share of population that are 25 years and older and
have less than a high school education, and poverty rate. Because these covariates are not
available for many municipalities in 1970 (around 37% of the sample), we interpolate 1970
values using the 1980--2010 decennial Census data from NHGIS. The non-interpolated 1970
values are highly correlated with the 1980 values, with correlation coefficients at least 0.87
and often much higher (between 0.94 and 0.98).11 We also collect annual data on county
population and employment from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and home value
index for single-family homes from Zillow to conduct event study analyses.

3.3       Hurricane Data & Construction of Hurricane Exposure Index
Third, we construct a dataset of city-level hurricane exposure using the Best Track Data from
the Atlantic Hurricane Database (Atlantic HURDAT2). Our sample covers all storm events
that reached hurricane-strength winds (at least 64 knots) between 1972 and 2017. The data
11
     As a robustness check, we also re-estimate using a balanced panel of municipalities with non-interpolated
     1970 controls. We show that our conclusions are not affected by using the smaller sample.



                                                       11
set contains the location (latitude and longitude) and wind speeds of storm events at six-
hour intervals. We create hurricane tracks at 15-minute intervals by interpolating hurricane
location and wind speeds between consecutive observations using a third-order polynomial.12
Figure 4 uses the path of Hurricane Harvey in 2017 as an example to illustrate the relationship
between a hurricane's track and the wind speed observed across exposed counties.

        Using the interpolated hurricane tracks, we construct a hurricane exposure measure
based on wind speed. The hurricane exposure measure captures two key aspects of the wind
speed-property damage relationship: only wind speeds above a certain threshold produce
physical damage, and extremely high wind speeds result in catastrophic damages Emanuel
(2011). We assume that physical damage is a non-linear function of cubed maximum wind
speed and no damage is caused by wind speeds below the 50 kt threshold. Appendix A
contains the details of the measurement of hurricane exposure.13 We prefer this continuous
measure to alternative measures, such as a binary indicator for whether cities are struck by
any hurricane, because the measure captures more variation in local exposure to hurricanes.
We employ alternative measures of hurricane exposure as robustness checks, such as linear
and non-linear functions of wind speed, squared wind speed, and cubed wind speed. Our
preferred exposure measure abstracts from weighting by population exposed because using
2000 population weights can generate downward bias in the estimates as populations adjust
to climate shocks over time.

3.4    Geographic & Demographic Variation in Hurricane Exposure
We plot the geographic distribution of aggregate hurricane exposure between 1972 and 2017
in Figure 5. Panel A shows that counties in coastal Louisiana, North Carolina, and Florida
experienced the highest frequency of hurricane strikes over the sample period. Panel B plots
the distribution of maximum wind speeds between 1972 and 2017 by county. Most counties
along the Gulf Coast and along the Atlantic Coast south of Virginia experienced at least
one major hurricane with wind speeds over 96 knots at some point over this 45 year period.
12
   Emanuel (2005) notes that the power dissipation of hurricanes, which is a measure of storms' energy and
   potential physical impact, rises at roughly the cube of the maximum observed wind speed.
13
   Similar methods of measuring tropical cyclones' economic impacts have been used in the literature (Elliott
   et al., 2015; Mahajan and Yang, 2020).



                                                     12
           Table 1 compares mean characteristics across municipalities exposed to any hurri-
cane between 1972 and 2017 with those not exposed to a hurricane over this time period.
We observe significant differences. Compared with non-hurricane municipalities, hurricane
municipalities have larger revenues, larger expenditures on all service categories, and larger
debt loads. Hurricane municipalities also have, historically, larger populations that are more
educated with lower poverty rates and a higher share of non-white residents. Noteably, areas
with an historically higher composition of non-white residents are more likely to experience
hurricanes, both, at a national level and at a regional level.14 Thus, the racial difference in
hurricane versus non-hurricane exposed municipalities is not solely explained by the higher
share of non-white population in the Southeast. Hurricane municipalities have slightly lower
default rates (higher average bond ratings), possibly due to their larger tax revenues and
population size. These cross-sectional differences in municipal characteristics underscore
potential differences in trends, which we discuss and address in the next section.


4       Estimating the Local Fiscal Effects of Hurricanes
We estimate a panel fixed effects econometric model that relates outcomes of interest to local
hurricane exposure. Our baseline econometric model is the following:
                                    1-5      6-10
                          yist = 1 Hit  + 2 Hit   + i + st +  (Xi t ) + ist ,                                (3)
where yist is an outcome in municipal government i in state s and year t.
                                  1-5      6-10
           The treatment effects Hit  and Hit   measure hurricane exposure in municipality i
over years t - 1 to t - 5 and over years t - 6 to t - 10, respectively. For ease of interpretation,
we normalize the hurricane exposure measures by their standard deviation. The parameters
of interest, 1 and 2 , capture the effect of a one standard deviation increase in hurricane-
strength wind speed experienced in the past t - 1 to t - 5 and t - 6 to t - 10 years,
respectively, on municipality i's outcome y observed in year t. Following prior literature
(Deryugina, 2017), these coefficients distinguish between hurricanes' short-term effects (1
14
     Based on the authors' analysis comparing average exposure to hurricane events from 1982-2017 among
     municipalities that differ based on their 1970 demographic composition. Specifically, we measure yist =
      N W NWis1970 + s + ist weighted by 1970 population, where yist is a binary variable equal to 1 if
     municipality i experiences a hurricane in year t; NWis1970 is the share of the population in location i that
     are non-white as of 1970, and s is a state fixed effect. We find  N W = 0.35, or municipalities with 10
     percentage point greater composition of non-white residents experience approximately 3.5 percentage point
     increase in the risk of hurricane exposure.

                                                        13
to 5 years after exposure) from their long-term effects (6 to 10 years after exposure) by
measuring the maximum wind speed experienced by a municipality over the course of each
period. In some specifications, we control for potential persistence of a hurricane's effects by
including an indicator for the occurrence of hurricane-strength winds in the previous decade,
from t - 11 to t - 20.

       In Equation 3, we control for time-invariant municipal government unobservables and
state-specific shocks by including municipal government fixed effects (i ) and state-by-year
fixed effects (st ), respectively. Municipality-specific fixed effects (i ) account for the fact
that localities more prone to hurricanes may have pre-existing disaster mitigation programs
that reduce the effect of a hurricane. State-by-year fixed effects (st ) account for time-
varying state-level factors that impact a municipality's budget, like state fiscal shocks, state
balanced budget rules, or state representation in US Congress. We allow municipalities to
exhibit differential trends according to a vector of initial characteristics measured as of 1970.
These include geographic and topographic features, such as land area and distance to the
nearest coast, as well as the set of social and economic covariates discussed in the previous
section (share of non-white population, share of population over the age of 25 without a
high school degree, poverty rate, and log population). Regressions are weighted by the 1970
population, and standard errors are clustered at the county level.

       Our measure of hurricane exposure is plausibly exogenous to local economic con-
founders for several reasons. First, our measure is based on meteorological data (wind
speeds), which makes it less likely to suffer from changes in local economic activity com-
pared to exposure measures based on physical or economic damages. Second, unless local
governments or ratings agencies can accurately and consistently predict when a hurricane
will make landfall and the amount of damage the landfall will inflict, it is unlikely that
changes in local public finance outcomes or debt ratings following a natural disaster are due
to local growth or fiscal decisions prior to the natural disaster. In Section 7, we support this
assumption by showing that changes over time in local economic conditions and debt ratings
do not predict future hurricane exposure.

       In addition to estimating the average impact of hurricane exposure, we also test for


                                               14
heterogeneous effects by hurricane severity. We follow the literature (e.g., Deryugina, 2017)
in using the maximum wind speed experienced between t - 1 and t - 5 and between t - 6
and t - 10 to separate hurricanes into "minor hurricanes" (Category 1­2 hurricanes with
winds at least 64 kts and below 96 kts) and "major hurricanes" (Category 3­5 hurricanes
with winds 96 kts or above). Specifically, we estimate:
                   -5           -10         1-5         6-10
    yist = 1 M in1
                 it   + 2 M in6
                              it    + 1 M ajit  + 2 M ajit   + t (Xi t ) + i + st + ist     (4)

        M in and M aj are indicators equal to 1 if the maximum wind speed experienced by
a municipality in the five-year intervals t1 to t - 5 and t - 6 to t - 10 is a minor or major
hurricane, respectively. Thus the  and  parameters provide non-parametric estimates of
the impact of any type of hurricane that falls into either of these two categories. All controls
and fixed effects of Equation 4 mimic those in Equation 3. Standard errors are clustered at
the county level, and all regressions are weighted by the local government's 1970 population.


5     Results
Our empirical tasks are threefold: first, we identify the magnitude of direct fiscal costs to
the average municipality by examining changes in revenue and expenditure items following
hurricane exposure. We calculate hurricane exposure at time t using the maximum hurricane-
strength wind speed experienced by a municipality in the prior decade. Second, we test
how hurricanes impact future capital investment capabilities by estimating differences in
debt levels and bond default risk following exposure, and find evidence that both outcomes
fall significantly in the decade following major storms. We supplement these findings with
an exploration of the mechanisms that drive ratings agencies to alter municipal default
risk. Our approach uses a "near-miss" design, where we utilize municipalities that barely
miss exposure to major hurricanes as a comparison group. Our results suggest that ratings
agencies downgrade bond ratings due to the negative economic shock caused by hurricanes;
as opposed to re-assessment of the climate risk faced by local governments. Lastly, we
document how these direct fiscal costs and long-term investment costs from hurricanes are
substantially greater for minority and low income municipalities relative to the average US
municipality.

        We present results in terms of standard deviation units of hurricane-strength wind

                                              15
speed for estimates of i in Equation 3--which is about 0.02 units of hurricane exposure--as
well as heterogeneous treatment effects for major versus minor storms for estimates of i and
i in Equation 4. To provide some intuition on the magnitude of a 0.02 increase in our index,
we plot a histogram of the index in Figure 6 and label significant storms that differ by 0.02
on our index measure. For example, Hurricane Gloria struck NYC as a Category 1 storm
in 1985 with wind speeds of 78.6 kts. Within NYC and Long-Island, the storm caused $686
mn in damage. Relative to this storm, Hurricane Andrew's exposure on Lafayette, LA in
1992 comprises a standard deviation increase on the hurricane index. Lafayette experienced
93.6 kn winds due to Andrew, making it a Category 2 hurricane at that point on its path.
Andrew caused $1.56 billion in damage for the entire state of Louisiana.

5.1    Effect of Hurricanes on Local Public Revenues
In our stylized model of a local government's intertemporal budget constraint in Equation
                                     dR
2, the change in local revenues,     dx
                                        ,   is a key parameter for predicting changes in local expen-
                                                                         dR
ditures following a hurricane strike. We begin by estimating             dx
                                                                              in Table 2. All outcomes
are in natural logarithms so that the coefficients represent percent changes.15 In Panel A,
the estimates in Columns 1 through 4 show that municipal government revenues decline
after exposure, with the effects concentrated in the 6­10 years after initial impact. Own-
source revenues, which include all locally-generated revenues and exclude transfers, decline
by around 2% for a 1 standard deviation increase in hurricane wind speed in the 6-10 years
following a hurricane strike. Given the average annual own-source revenues of municipalities
in our sample, this estimate implies that own-source revenues fall by $593,520 per munici-
pality after a hurricane. These declines are driven primarily by the shortfalls in local tax
revenues.16 Other revenues (Column 3) are not significantly affected by hurricane exposure.
Panel B shows that major hurricanes induce significantly larger declines in revenues com-
pared to minor hurricanes. The impact of a major hurricane is over four times that of a
minor hurricane on total revenues (Column 1) and over twice that of a minor hurricane on
15
   Because there are zeroes in the revenue and expenditure subcategories, we retain those municipal gov-
   ernment observations by approximating the    natural logarithm function with the inverse hyperbolic sine
   function: for an outcome x, ln(x)  ln(x + 1 + x2 ) if x sufficiently larger than 1.
16
   Appendix Table B.1 Columns 1 and 2 show the effects of hurricane exposure on municipal property taxes
   versus sales, income, license and other taxes not-elsewhere-classified. The estimates for these tax sub-
   categories are also negative, though less precisely estimated.


                                                     16
own-source revenues (Column 2) in the 6-10 years after exposure.
                     dG
       We estimate   dx
                          from Equation 2 in Column 5 of Panel A. Noticeably, hurricane ex-
posure significantly increased intergovernmental transfers in the short term. This initial
influx of aid appears to offset the immediate negative impacts on revenues. Most of these
effects appear to be driven by federal transfers, though the effects are imprecisely estimated.
Total intergovernmental transfers increase by 2.3% for a 1 SD increase in hurricane wind
speed within 5 years following a hurricane strike, or about $234,563 on average. In contrast,
transfers decline after the first 5 years. In Panel B, we find government transfers are ap-
proximately twice as large for major relative to minor hurricanes, although the effects are
imprecisely estimated (Column 5). While data limitations preclude us from identifying the
exact source of intergovernmental transfers, these findings suggest that institutions allow-
ing for budget stabilization, like state rainy day funds (Knight and Levinson, 1999), are
important for mitigating local fiscal distress.

       These findings are consistent with the FEMA disaster aid response structure in the
United States. Under the current system, the federal government provides crucial monetary
relief shortly after a natural disaster such as debris removal, social insurance, and hazard
mitigation investments. Our results mirror recent findings by del Valle et al. (2019), which
finds that federal aid to municipalities exposed to major storms helps significantly to offset
disruptions to local economic activity at least a year following exposure. Similar, our results
reveal the potentially important role of the governmental transfers in smoothing municipal
government spending in the aftermath of a natural disaster.

5.2   Effect of Hurricanes on Local Public Expenditures
Because hurricanes have countervailing effects on local governments' revenue streams, the
impact of hurricanes on local spending is theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, we
may expect some local expenditures to fall with the shortfall in locally-generated revenues.
On the other hand, we may expect local expenditures to rise as local governments use the
                                                                                            dE
increased federal funds to repair and replace destroyed capital. Table 3 estimates how      dx

from Equation 2 is affected by these countervailing effects.

       We find that hurricanes had overall negative impacts on total expenditures. Column

                                                  17
1 of Panel A shows that a one standard deviation increase in hurricane wind speed reduces
total expenditures by 1% in the 6­10 years after the initial impact, equivalent to approxi-
mately $400,142 per municipal government per year. The expenditure decline is smaller in
magnitude relative to the change in total revenues found in Table 2. The difference in the
magnitudes is consistent with the inflow of short-term intergovernmental funds offsetting
some of hurricanes' immediate negative fiscal impacts.

      Most of this decline is concentrated in public works. Column 2 of Panel A shows that
spending on public works significantly declined in the 6­10 years after exposure by 3.4%,
or $435,880 per local government per year. Declines in public safety and miscellaneous
spending (which includes expenditures on worker compensation, insurance trusts, and inter-
est on debt) are comparatively smaller in magnitude and imprecisely estimated. Notably,
public works consists of local public goods and services that are essential for low-income
households, including public transportation, parks and recreation, and water and sewer ser-
vices. These results suggest that hurricane exposure may be particularly damaging for lower
income households reliant on these public services. As in the case of revenues, Panel B
shows that major hurricanes generate significantly greater declines in expenditures relative
to minor hurricanes. Column (1) suggests that the average major hurricane reduces local
government expenditures by 5.9% and public works expenditures by 13.7% in the 6-10 years
after exposure.

      In contrast to public works, government administration expenditures markedly in-
creased between 2.5% and 1.2% in first and second half of the post-hurricane decade, respec-
tively (Column 5). These changes cannot be explained by increases in local employment or
pay roll because we find these outcomes decline following hurricane exposure in Appendix
Table B.1 (Columns 5 through 7). Rather, it is most likely that these administrative spend-
ing increases are a result of increased spending on local disaster relief and use of "rainy
day" funds. Because government administration makes up a relatively small share of total
expenditures (less than 5%), the magnitudes of these effects are economically small, at about
$45,902 per government per year.




                                             18
5.3   Local Debt Financing & the "Vicious Cycle" of Hurricanes
The prior sections established that hurricanes decrease current local government resources
available to its residents. However, local governments generally rely on debt to finance the
capital costs of long-term investments such as infrastructure, whereas tax revenues and fees
pay for current operational costs. In this section, we show that hurricanes also hamper local
governments' ability to finance future investments, leading to a vicious cycle.

       We estimate the last three terms of Equation 2 to test how hurricanes affect a local
government's debt issuance ( ddx
                                B
                                  ), debt outstanding ( dB
                                                        dx
                                                                                    dr
                                                           ), and risk of default ( dx ). Whether
exposure to hurricanes leads to increased cost of capital is an empirical question that depends
                                                                                              dr
on how financial markets respond to updates about natural disaster risk. To estimate          dx
                                                                                                 ,
we focus on the response of ratings agencies to climate shocks in order to understand how
hurricane exposure impacts perceived default risk in the primary market for municipal debt.
We end this section with a discussion of potential mechanisms driving the observed decline
in local capital financing.

       Our analysis on municipal debt dynamics fits into a body of literature that demon-
strates how natural disasters affect financial markets. Much of this prior work focuses on
private sector market responses (Lamb, 1995; Cagle, 1996; Worthington and Valadkhani,
2004; Krueger et al., 2020). A growing, but relatively small body of work explores how nat-
ural disasters and climate risk affect finance in the public sector. For instance, Ouazad and
Kahn (2019) shows that commercial banks offload risky mortgage assets onto government-
backed banks following hurricanes. Prior work on the implications of natural disasters for
public finance focus on federal-level aggregates (Lis and Nickel, 2010; Noy and Nualsri,
2011; Melecky and Raddatz, 2011). Of these studies, Ouattara and Strobl (2013) provide
the closest parallel to our study, as they explore how hurricanes impact federal government
spending, debt, and tax revenues within the Caribbean. Our study also relates to recent work
by Painter (2020) and Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019). These papers utilize information
shocks to show that municipal bond markets capitalize risk from anticipated sea level rise.
The authors focus on the price of municipal debt in the "secondary market", e.g., the price
of debt faced by end-of-market investors like individuals and investment funds. Our study


                                               19
complements this prior work in two ways. First, the Moody's data affords unique insight into
how the supply-side, or the "primary market", of fixed income securities responds to climatic
shocks. By combining the Moody's data with data on local public finances, we show that
climate shocks reduce debt utilization through ratings agencies like Moody's. This channel
is important to document because municipalities generally require debt to finance capital-
intensive projects. Second, our approach relies on a panel fixed effect framework to compare
outcomes before versus after hurricane strikes, thus informs the reaction of municipal bond
markets to natural disaster shocks as opposed to anticipated sea level rise.

        We, first, assess how hurricanes impact local government borrowing costs by focusing
on municipal bond ratings. We use a novel dataset on bond ratings from Moody's Analytics.
These data provide an indication of the rater's assessment of risk on over 600,000 municipal
debt instruments dating back to the 1930s, though data prior to 1970 are sparse. Moody's
data cover issuance activities for approximately 29% of all municipal issuers in the US.17
Bond ratings are an important signal of an issuer's borrowing costs; the cost of issuing
debt increases as the risk of default increases, and bond ratings measure this risk (Capeci,
1991).18 We translate Moody's bond ratings into probabilities of default using Standard &
Poor's Global Ratings US Public Finance Default Study (Witte and Gurwitz, 2018).

        Default risk, along with the risk-free rate, liquidity risk, and maturity risk are all
components of an issuer's borrowing cost, or their bond yield (Brigham and Daves, 2015).
Among these four components of the bond yield, bond ratings specifically measure the prob-
ability of default. While we are unable to observe bond yields directly, we include controls
for bond attributes that influence the liquidity risk and maturity risk, including: the coupon
rate, the share of bonds sold at public auction, the share of bonds that are general obligation
vs revenue-backed, years to maturity, the size of the bond, and the baseline population size
17
   Moody's provides rating services for 14,438 municipal issuers from 1972 through 2017, whereas approxi-
   mately 50,000 such entities exist in the United States (MSRB 2019). Standard & Poor's and Fitch dominate
   the other two-thirds of the bond rating market.
18
   Hubler et al. (2019) discusses how variation in agencies' risk assessments have significant impacts on borrow-
   ing rates for corporations as well as municipalities. While credit rating agencies faced substantial scrutiny
   in the early 21st century for biased and subjective rating practices, particularly for mortgage-backed se-
   curities, ratings agencies like Moody's remain an integral role in financial markets because creditors rely
   on their publicly-available ratings in order to make investment decisions (Hubler et al., 2019; Cornaggia
   et al., 2018).


                                                       20
of the issuer. Year fixed effects account for variation in the risk free rate. We include these
controls in all specifications in order to create an "apples to apples" comparison across debt
instruments, as well as to absorb all variation in the effective bond yield aside from the bond
rating, itself.

           The first four columns of Table 4 show the evolution of credit risk in the 10 years
following hurricane exposure. We focus on four measures of municipal governments' credit
risk: the 10-year municipal bond default risk, and the share of municipal bonds that are low
risk (above "Baa"), medium risk (rated "Baa"), and high risk (ratings lower than "Baa").
Our results suggest that hurricane exposure significantly increases municipal bond default
risk. A one standard deviation increase in hurricane wind speed raises the 10-year default risk
by 0.1 percentage points (Panel A, Column 1), equivalent to a 13% increase in the five years
after hurricane exposure based on our sample standard deviation of the 10-year default risk
(0.76 percentage points).19 This effect persists in the 6-10 years after a hurricane. When
considering the magnitude of this change in default risk, it is important to consider that
municipal bond ratings change minimally on average. Approximately 90% of municipal bond
ratings remain unchanged over a two-year period (Holian and Joffe, 2013). Furthermore,
ratings agencies assess bond risk only for municipalities that pay them to do so. In their
literature review on the determinants of municipal bond default, Holian and Joffe (2013) find
that cities that choose to be rated are more likely to have a lower default risk that cities that
do not choose to be rated. This implies that hurricanes likely increase the 10-year default
risk of un-rated municipal debt more than 0.1 percentage points documented here.

           The hurricane-induced change in municipal default risk changes the overall compo-
sition of risk for a municipality's bond portfolio. Table 4, shows that the share of medium
and high risk bonds (those rated "Baa" and below, respectively) increases significantly in
the decade following a hurricane. A one standard deviation increase in hurricane wind speed
increases the share of bonds that are medium risk by 5 percentage points (Panel A, Column
3), equivalent to a 1.4% increase based on the sample standard deviation of the outcome.
19
     In our sample, the mean 10-year default risk is about 0.3%, whereas the median is about three times
     smaller, or 0.1%. Given that distribution of bond defaults is highly skewed, using sample mean as the base
     for comparison can overstate the estimated impacts.



                                                       21
Similarly, the share of bonds that are high risk increases by 1.4 to 1.6 percentage points
(Panel A, Column 4), which is translates to 10­12% increases in the share of high risk bonds
relative to the sample standard deviation. Panel B decomposes the average effects of the
hurricane exposure index into indicators for whether a local government ever experiences a
major (wind speed exceeds 96 knots) or minor hurricane (wind speed is between 64 and 96
knots). Major hurricanes appear to drive most of the increase in default risk of a municipal-
ity's bond portfolio.

       We take advantage of the bond data frequency to estimate default risk dynamics in
the years leading up to and following hurricane exposure. Figure 7 presents the dynamic
effect results. In particular, we estimate
                                  10
                        yist =           k Hit+k + i + st +  (Xi t ) + ist ,              (5)
                                 k=-10
where Hit+k is an index for hurricane exposure for municipality i in k years since year t when
we observe outcome y . For example, if t = 2007 and k = 2, then the coefficient on His2009
measures how an outcome in 2007 (yis2007 ) is associated with hurricane exposure from 2009.
Conversely, if t = 2007 and k = -2, then the coefficient on His2005 relates an outcome in
2007 to hurricane exposure from two years prior in 2005. In the absence of omitted trends or
confounding shocks, current municipal debt outcomes are unlikely to predict future hurricane
exposure. Therefore, this exercise serves as both a robustness check on potential spurious
spatial correlations between hurricane exposure and municipal debt ratings (Kelly, 2019) and
allows for easy visualization of hurricane exposure's effects over time. To increase power,
we create 2-year bins (with the exception of k = 0) so that, for example, Hit+2 measures
impacts in year t of exposure from 1 and 2 years prior to year t. Because hurricane data
are only available up to 2019, our analysis of municipal bond dynamics cover years between
1982 and 2009, or up to 10 years prior to the last year of hurricane exposure in our sample.

       Figure 7 corroborates our average effect findings: hurricane exposure increases mu-
nicipal default risk as perceived by ratings agencies, leading to a shift in the average risk
profile of a municipality's debt portfolio from lower to higher risk bonds. Notably, we do
not find significant pre-event trends in any of these figures, suggesting that post-hurricane
changes are a direct result of the hurricane as opposed to pre-existing differences in default


                                                   22
risk among hurricane-exposed municipalities.

        These results imply that municipalities face interest rates on debt that are approxi-
mately 1% larger after exposure to a hurricane. We arrive at this estimate using a back-of-
envelop calculation as follows: we translate the 0.1 percentage point change in the 10-year
default risk following exposure (Table 4) to the corresponding change in bond ratings using
Standard & Poor's Global Ratings US Public Finance Default Study (Witte and Gurwitz,
2018). Their study shows that bonds rated "AAA" (or "Aaa" on the Moody's scale) have
a default risk of zero for 10-year debt instruments; whereas bonds rated "A" (or "A2" on
Moody's scale) have a default risk of 0.11 for 10-year debt instruments. Next, we use the
Federal Reserve Bank's Pricing Index associated with the Municipal Liquidity Facility (Fed-
eral Reserve Board, 2020) to compare the interest rates charged for "AAA" relative to "A"
rated bonds; this difference is 100 basis points, or 1%. For a city like Philadelphia, which
had 84 road and bridge projects under construction as of 2020, a 1% higher interest rate
means that the city faces $13 million in added infrastructure costs for this year's projects
alone.20

        Whether changes in default risk translate into more expensive debt (higher bond
yields) relies on the assumption that credit markets accurately reflect all available informa-
tion and operate efficiently. Thus, it is an empirical question whether greater default risk
impacts municipal use of debt. To understand this, we next explore how hurricanes impact
municipal debt. We employ only the subset of cities that were available in the Moody's data
in order to interpret debt results relative to our bond ratings results. This subset of cities is
generally larger in population than the average city in the Census of Governments. Columns
5 through 7 in Table 4 show estimates of how local government debt responds to hurricane
exposure.21 Our debt outcomes include total debt outstanding, long-term debt issued, and
retired long-term debt. While average effects of hurricane exposure shown in Panel A indi-
cate imprecise, negative impacts of hurricanes on debt, Panel B Column 5 shows that major
hurricanes significantly reduce total debt outstanding in the 10 years following hurricane
20
   Based on an estimated total cost of $1.33 billion for 56 total road and bridge projects under construction
   and 28 planned for FY 2020 (Riley, 2020).
21
   The debt outcomes for fiscal year 2017 are not yet available in the Census of Governments, so we report
   the estimates for 1982­2012.


                                                     23
exposure. It is difficult to conclude whether this reduction is driven by decreased issuance
of new debt or increased retirement of existing debt, though the sign of the coefficients in
Columns 6 and 7 would imply this to be the case in the 6-10 years after a major hurricane.
Column 5 in Panel B implies that exposure to a major hurricane reduces debt outstand-
ing significantly by 19.2% in the first five years and 25.9% in the next 6-10 years following
hurricane exposure.

5.4      Mechanisms Driving Declines in Bond Ratings
Our analysis provides new evidence that hurricane exposure depletes local public financial
resources, reduces public goods expenditures, increases default risk, and reduces debt uti-
lization. These results indicate that climate-related natural disasters impose costs on local
governments that can propagate in the long run through delayed capital investments and de-
pleted debt reserves. Less clear, however, is the mechanism that drives changes in municipal
default risk and subsequent changes in debt. Ratings agencies may consider a government
inherently more at risk to natural disasters if those disasters become more salient. Given
few municipalities disclose climate-related risk when issuing debt (Bolstad et al., 2020), the
salience of such events likely has greater impact on ratings than a de facto measure or climate
risk.22 On the other hand, natural disasters can impact local public finance through raising
out-migration, reducing house prices, or depressing local economic activity. Ratings agencies
consider these fundamentals when assessing municipal default risk (Rubinfeld, 1973; Kliger
and Sarig, 2000). Consequently, it is possible that hurricanes impact debt ratings indirectly
through their effects on population and local economic activity. Understanding whether rat-
ings agencies respond to such routine fundamentals as opposed to hurricane exposure, itself,
is important for projecting the future costs of climate change.

          To this end, we proceed in two steps: we first assess how hurricanes impact local
economic activity by focusing on changes to local population, employment, and home values.
We, then, explore whether ratings agencies adjust their assessment of risk by comparing
municipalities that barely miss exposure to a major storm to bordering towns that are hit.
From the perspective of Moody's, these two types of locations shared similar ex ante exposure
22
     Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) finds, for instance, that the municipal bond market capitalizes climate
     change risk from sea level rise only after the IPCC 2013 report.


                                                      24
risk, and thus, should experience similar ratings downgrades if ex ante risk to climate shocks
matters for default risk.


Declining Local Economic Conditions?

           Table 5 reports how hurricane exposure impacts local economic activity. We source
county-level data on population and employment from the BEA, as well as county-level home
values from Zillow.23 Overall, we find that population decreased significantly throughout the
decade after a hurricane strike, particularly after major hurricanes strikes. A one standard
deviation increase in hurricane wind speed reduces population by approximately 0.7% in the
6-10 years following exposure (Panel A, Column 1). Columns 2 through 4 show county-level
outcomes from the BEA. The difference between municipal-level in Column 1 and county-
level population estimates in Column 2 may be driven by individuals relocating between
municipalities within the same county following a hurricane strike. If two municipalities serve
as close substitutes, individuals may re-optimize and choose a location with lower perceived
hurricane exposure risk. Such re-optimization is less likely, however, for households facing
high mobility costs.

           In Column 3, we find county employment estimates that mirror the population es-
timates in the previous two columns. Employment falls by 0.5% for a standard deviation
increase in hurricane wind speed and over 4% following major storms. These employment
effects echo prior findings by Belasen and Polachek (2009), who find major storms decrease
county employment by 4.7% on average. In the last column, we find that home values decline
immediately following hurricane exposure, as well as in the 6-10 years after exposure, corrob-
orating prior work by Hallstrom and Smith (2005); Davlasheridze et al. (2017); Ortega and
Tas
  . pinar (2018); Muller and Hopkins (2019) and Boustan et al. (2020). These magnitudes
are similar to the population decline. In general, these findings show that hurricane exposure
depresses local economic activity for at least a decade following exposure.

           We test for evidence of pre-trends and dynamic effects utilizing the annual variation
available in the county-level data. These dynamic effects are shown in Figure 8. Generally,
23
     We aggregate analysis for some outcomes in Table 5 to the county-level in order to obtain annual variation
     in outcomes rather than relying on municipal-level from the US Census which vary only by decade.


                                                       25
the annual-level partial effect estimates not only confirm the findings in Table 5 but also
do not exhibit any pre-hurricane trends, suggesting that omitted trends are unlikely to be
driving our local public finance results. Panel A shows a clear trend break in population:
hurricane-exposed counties, on average, have higher population levels relative to their non-
exposed counterparts in the years prior to hurricane strikes. Once exposed to hurricanes,
the affected locations begin to lose residents, leaving population levels on par with their
non-exposed, generally inland, counties. Panel B shows that employment falls below that
of non-exposed county levels in the years following hurricane exposure. Panel C shows
that home values fluctuate before hurricane strikes and begin to fall significantly by year
four. Collectively, the evidence is consistent with the idea that ratings agencies downgrade
municipal bond ratings because of economic decline and destabilization of the local tax base.
Another potential explanation is that changes in bond ratings are due to increases in ratings
agencies' assessment of climate risk in hurricane-exposed cities, which we examine below.


Changes in Moodys' Climate Risk Assessment? A "Near-Miss" Analysis

        We check whether ratings agencies update their risk assessment procedures in the
aftermath of hurricane shocks. Our approach compares changes in bond ratings across
municipalities exposed to a major hurricane relative to municipalities in adjacent counties
that miss exposure to the same storm event by chance.24 Figure 9 plots coefficient estimates
from this "Near Miss" analysis side-by-side with coefficient estimates from our main debt
results in Table 4. The "Near Miss" estimates in Figure 9, denoted by diamonds, are based on
the same estimation equation from Equation 3 except that we replace municipality-specific
fixed effects with municipality group-fixed effects.25 For ease of exposition, we plot only
estimates of the impact of a 1 standard deviation change in hurricane wind speed in the 6-10
years after exposure. However, we report the "Near-Miss" estimates of the 1-5 year average
24
   To construct municipality groups, we first identify the list of municipalities that have ever experienced
   wind speeds at least 96 kts. For each municipality on this list, we create a unique municipality group
   based on the set of counties that are adjacent the municipality. If an adjacent county appears in multiple
   municipality groups, we use the largest union of these groups.
25
   In unreported results, we control for municipality fixed effects and replace state-by-year fixed effects with
   municipality group-by-year fixed effects. The results from these regressions are similar to what we report
   below and are available upon request. We prefer the current, less data-demanding approach because major
   hurricanes are infrequent events.


                                                      26
effect, and effects by storm intensity in tabular form in Appendix Table B.2. We posit
that estimates showing no differences in the exposed municipality relative to a neighboring,
nearly exposed municipality imply that Moody's assesses the risk of the exposed municipality
equally to that of the municipality that nearly missed exposure.

       Instead, results of Figure 9 mimic results of our main approach in Table 4; exposed
municipalities experience an increase in their average debt instrument's risk of default and
an increase in the share of bonds rated as medium or high risk relative to municipalities not
directly affected by a hurricane. Given the magnitudes of estimates from the "Near Miss"
analysis are very similar to our main analysis, we conclude that ratings agencies do not take
ex post climate risk into account when determining municipal bond default rates. Rather,
post-hurricane increases in bond default risk are primarily a result of local tax revenue losses
and local economic shocks.

       Findings by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019) and Painter (2020) show that investors
do capitalize risk from sea level rise in the secondary market for municipal bonds. Though
outside the scope of this paper, it is possible that investors in the secondary market respond
similarly to hurricane shocks and actively factor in climate-specific risk when making bond
purchase decisions. Our results suggest climate-specific risk does not impact bond default
risk assessment in the primary "new issues" market differently than other non-climate related
shocks.


6   The Environmental Justice Implications of Hurricanes
Previous literature shows that places with high concentrations of minorities and low-income
households are on average, disproportionately affected by negative environmental hazards
(Brooks and Sethi, 1997; Hanna, 2007; Mohai et al., 2009; Banzhaf et al., 2019). The liter-
ature has substantially less to report about environmental justice and climate risk. Recent
work by Bakkensen and Ma (2020) shows that low income and minority households are more
likely to sort into high-risk flood zones because high income households outbid them for
properties in low-risk areas.

       We test whether local governments of minority and low-income groups are more ad-


                                              27
versely impacted by hurricane shocks. We focus on three municipality attributes: share
of population below the poverty line, share of population that are non-white, and share of
population with less than a high school degree. Our motivation for focusing on these three
sources of heterogeneity stems from the two key facts. First, our descriptive statistics in
Table 1 show that municipalities exposed to hurricanes had 4 percentage point larger popu-
lations of non-white residents as of 1970 compared to municipalities that never experienced
a hurricane between 1972 and 2017. Second, lower income and lower educated individuals
face larger barriers to relocating to avoid environmental hazards or local economic shocks
(Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008; Lin, 2019; Notowidigdo, 2020).

           To carry out this heterogeneity analysis, we interact the hurricane exposure measure
in Equation 3 with baseline municipality demographic characteristics measured as of 1970.
We focus on baseline attributes because demographic composition of municipalities may
change as a consequence of hurricane exposure. For ease of exposition, we combine the
1-to-5-year effect (1 ) and 6-to-10-year effect (2 ) into one parameter that measures the
hurricane's effect averaged over 10 years following exposure.

           Our findings in Figure 10 show that cities with a higher share of residents below the
poverty line, non-white residents, and residents with no high school degree are significantly
more harmed by hurricanes. The second row of each panel shows the heterogeneous treat-
ment effects.26 The coefficient estimate on revenues (colored in light blue) indicates that
municipalities with one percentage point greater share of residents in poverty, that are non-
white, or have less than a high school education experience, respectively, 9.8%, 7.1%, and
5.1% larger declines in own-source revenues as a result of a one standard deviation increase
in hurricane wind speed. Expenditures fall more in these low socio-economic status (SES)
municipalities, though the effect is precisely estimated only for historically non-white munic-
ipalities. The 10-year default risk increases significantly for low-SES municipalities as well,
as shown by the red dots.Population declines appear to only manifest in low-SES municipal-
ities (indicated in green). In fact, results of Figure 10 suggest that municipalities with no
poverty, no racial minorities, and only highly-educated residents appear to suffer very little
26
     We report coefficient estimates of Figure 10 in tabular form in Appendix Table B.3.



                                                      28
changes to local government resources, expenditures, default risk, or population. If anything,
these high-SES municipalities experience a stimulus in revenues and public goods provision,
possibly due to an inflow of intergovernmental transfers, though these main effects (denoted
in brown) are imprecisely estimated.

       Overall, the findings demonstrate how hurricanes can cause a divergence in fiscal
outcomes across municipalities that differ demographically, even within the same state. Our
findings are consistent with recent work by Begley et al. (2020) who find applications for
federal disaster-relief home loans are denied at higher rates in minority communities. To
the extent that hurricane-induced fiscal shocks impact individual economic mobility, our
results demonstrate that the spatial distribution of climate risk can contribute to structural
inequality in the US (Chetty et al., 2014).


7   Robustness Tests
Through a series of robustness checks, we show that our results are largely unchanged by
alternative specifications, the sampled decades, alternative measures of hurricane exposure,
or the level of government aggregation.

       Persistence and pre-trends --Despite having shown pre-trend analyses of bond ratings
and municipality characteristics, persistent effects of prior hurricanes as well as omitted
trends may still confound our estimates of hurricanes' fiscal impacts. We take several steps
to address these concerns. First, to check whether we are picking up the effects of historical
hurricanes, we include additional 5-year lags and 10-year lags, which correspond to indicators
for whether any hurricanes occurred between t - 15 and t - 11 and between t - 20 and
t - 11, respectively. Second, to check whether our results are confounded by unobserved
economic forces and differential growth paths of local economies, we perform a number
of tests, including controlling for 5-year leads, 10-year leads, and municipal government-
specific linear time trends. Appendix Table B.4 shows that our baseline estimate of the
impact of hurricanes on local revenues is comparable to the estimates from these alternative
specifications. We find that the magnitudes of the coefficients on the leads and lags are
close to null and are are never statistically significant. Together, the findings suggest that
differential local government growth paths are unlikely to drive our results.

                                              29
       Sensitivity to Hurricane Exposure Measure --Our preferred measure of hurricane expo-
sure can be interpreted as capturing the impact of the most severe storm a local jurisdiction
experiences in a give time period. This choice of measurement is motivated by the evidence
that storms' damages are a result of storm severity as opposed to storm frequency (Boustan
et al., 2020; Emanuel, 2011). In Appendix Table B.5, we show that this intuitive measure
yields similar conclusions as alternative measurements of hurricane exposure. For example,
when we use linear wind speeds or squared wind speeds to calculate hurricane exposure,
we find similar magnitudes as using cubed wind speeds. We also find similar estimates if
we do not impose any non-linearity in the damage function of hurricanes or if we exclude
major hurricanes from 2005 (Katrina, Rita, and Wilma), which was a year that saw unusual
hurricane activity, in measuring hurricane exposure.

       Sensitivity to Empirical Specification --We show in Appendix Table B.6 that our main
estimates are not sensitive to using alternative empirical specifications and approaches. In
Panel A, we do not weight observations by the 1970 municipal population and find results
qualitatively similar to those in Tables 2 and 3, although the effects are imprecisely esti-
mated. We believe this reflects the fact that larger local governments are better able to
accurately track and report changes to their annual budgets. Our reason for weighting by
population size is to reduce this source of measurement error. In Panel B, we measure fiscal
outcomes in per capita terms and find similar results. Even after accounting for popula-
tion outflows, own-source revenues (Column 2) and public works expenditures (Column 5)
decline significantly per resident in the 6-10 years after hurricane exposure. Panel C shows
restricting the analysis to the set of municipalities with non-interpolated 1970 covariates also
does not change our conclusions. Finally, in Panel D, we show that using the full sample of
municipal governments, as opposed to a balanced panel, renders similar conclusions to our
main results.

       Sensitivity to Alternative Treatment Units --We assess whether our results are sen-
sitive to using alternative government treatment units. This robustness check serves two
purposes: first, to test whether our focus on municipal governments is externally valid for
other local government types like townships; and second, to explore the incidence of public


                                              30
finance costs in the face of hurricanes.

        Our preferred empirical approach focuses on municipal governments because munici-
palities are the most common general purpose government type27 and because they perform
similar roles across US regions. In contrast, county governments, special districts, and town-
ships can differ significantly in their provision of goods and services from region to another.
In Appendix Table B.7 Panel A, we nonetheless include all local government types in our
analysis, including other general-purpose and special-purpose governments. We aggregate
outcomes across local governments to the county level, and replace municipality fixed effects
with fixed effects for the local government type. In Panel A, we also interact government
type with state-by-year fixed effects and baseline covariates to allow local government out-
comes to trend differently across government types and states. Regressions are weighted by
1970 county population.28 Although differences in sample compositions, geographic units,
and estimation methods render direct comparison with earlier results in Table 2 and Table
3 difficult, results are, nevertheless, qualitatively similar after including all local government
types in the analysis. The negative short-term effects of hurricanes on revenues and total
expenditures are larger in magnitude than our main estimates suggest. The longer-term 6-10
year effects are similar in magnitude to our main results, though less precisely estimated.

        In Panels B and C of Appendix Table B.7, we explore how results differ when consid-
ering the impact of hurricanes at the county geographic unit level (the smallest geography
for which geographic identifiers are available for all government types) and at the state gov-
ernment level, respectively.29 In Panel B, we also find evidence of revenue and expenditure
declines among hurricane-exposed counties, though smaller than the estimates in Panel A
for local governments, which indicates intergovernmental transfers likely occur between lo-
27
   Municipalities account for over 22% of all government types in the Census of Governments, whereas county
   governments account for 6% and townships account for 16%. Special districts, school districts, and state
   governments make up the remaining share.
28
   Because special-district governments have been increasing sharply over time, instead of creating a balanced
   sample of local governments, we use the full sample of governments for this analysis. For instance, while
   the number of local government-year observations has remained relatively stable for other government
   types, the number for special-district governments increased from 6,637 in 1982 to 10,989 in 2017 in our
   sample.
29
   Regressions in Panel B are weighted by 1970 county population. In Panel C, we interact baseline state-level
   covariates with linear time trends and cluster standard errors at the state level.



                                                     31
cal governments within the same county following hurricane exposure. At the state level,
we observe no significant revenue changes, though intergovernmental transfers and public
works expenditures increase.30 Taken together, Appendix Table B.7 suggests that the fiscal
impacts of hurricanes diminish as higher levels of government. These findings support prior
work by Strobl (2010) and underscore how fiscal costs of hurricanes estimated from state or
federal aggregates will likely understate the realized costs.

           Sensitivity to Debt Instrument Attributes --Our analysis of debt dynamics focuses on
variation in the 10-year default rate, a commonly-used long horizon benchmark. However,
ratings agencies may respond to hurricane shocks differently for short-term relative to long-
term debt instruments. Appendix Table B.8 shows that the risk of default does not change
for short-term debt instruments maturing in 1 or 5 years (Columns 1 and 5); but debt
instruments that mature in 22 years have a similar increase in default risk as the 10-year
debt instruments (Columns 2 and 4). In Columns 4 through 7, we estimate Equation 3 at
the debt instrument level rather than the municipal level. This allows estimated hurricane
effects on bond ratings to differ across debt instruments with differing characteristics such
as the coupon rate, whether the instrument is a general or revenue-backed bond, and the
maturity length. These specifications also weight by the bond's initial sales amount. Even
allowing for this added flexibility, our results are very similar to those shown in Table 4:
hurricanes increase the composition of municipal debt categorized as medium and high-risk
by approximately 5pp and 1pp, respectively in the 6-10 years after exposure.


8       Conclusion
We examine the impact of hurricanes on local governments through their effects on the
provision of local public goods and resources. Decentralized public funding of goods and
services can create immense budgetary pressure on local governments when they experience
large, adverse shocks. Our results show that hurricanes cause locally-generated revenues
30
     We also collect data on states' budget stabilization funds, i.e., "rainy day funds," from the National
     Association of State Budget Officers, which provide fiscal surveys of states. In unreported results, we find
     that the effect of hurricanes on these funds is large and negative, especially in the immediate aftermath.
     We estimate that the funds decrease by 57% (p < 0.01) in the 1­5 years post hurricanes for a one standard
     deviation increase in hurricane winds. The magnitude of this effect reduces by one-fifth in the next 6­10
     years and becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero.



                                                        32
as well as goods and services provision to fall significantly. In the decade following major
hurricanes, local revenue sources and expenditures fall between 5 and 6%. Local governments
with large minority, low income, or low educated populations face the largest revenue and
expenditure cut backs following hurricanes. Intergovernmental transfers to local governments
offset some of the initial fiscal impacts of hurricanes, but do not, on average, alleviate long-
term declines in local government funding sources.

       Our paper provides the first evidence that natural disasters can create a "vicious
cycle" for local governments by increasing their cost of debt, depleting the tax base, and
inhibiting their ability to make large, capital investments. In so doing, climate-induced
natural disasters can discourage local governments from investing in precisely the hazard
mitigation technologies or reconstruction projects required to deflect future damages from
hurricane shocks.

       The "viscous cycle" effect from major hurricanes documented here stands in contrast
with research on the medium term effects of war time military bombings (Miguel and Roland,
2011; Brakman et al., 2004; Bosker et al., 2007; Davis and Weinstein, 2002). These studies
generally conclude that cities experience quick economic recovery in the aftermath of military
bombings. We posit that the explanation for this difference in response to man-made versus
natural disasters is the expectation that certain areas will experience future natural disasters.
This expectation of a spatial serial correlation in shock patterns means that those who supply
capital to local governments or developers are likely to substitute away from these risky areas.

       This paper finds that over the period 1982 to 2017, Moody's does not appear to
factor in climate shocks into its rankings. However, given that climate change will likely
increase the frequency and severity of extreme weather events (Field et al., 2012; Emanuel,
2017), ratings agencies have an increased incentive to invest resources in expanding their
risk assessment capacities.

       These adjustments are already beginning to manifest in the municipal debt market.
Moody's Analytics purchased a climate risk intelligence firm in 2019 with the intent of
incorporating environmental risk factors into their credit ratings analyses (Flavelle, 2019).
This means that, in future years, municipal bond ratings will be more sensitive to climate

                                               33
shocks. Our study suggests that this market capitalization of climate risk will exacerbate
spatial inequality because poor and minority communities are less resilient to climate-related
shocks.

       Is it socially efficient for capital to retreat from areas with greater climate risk? Note-
ably, most global economic activity is concentrated in coastal cities despite their vulnerability
to natural disasters (Balboni, 2019). We leave it to future research to quantify the welfare im-
plications of reallocating economic activity of public funds toward inland areas less exposed
to climate-related shocks.




                                               34
References
Adelino, M., Cunha, I., and Ferreira, M. A. (2017). The economic effects of public financing:
  Evidence from municipal bond ratings recalibration. The Review of Financial Studies,
  30(9):3223­3268.
Albouy, D. and Farahani, A. (2017). Valuing public goods more generally: The case of
  infrastructure.
Alm, J., Buschman, R. D., and Sjoquist, D. L. (2011). Rethinking local government reliance
  on the property tax. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 41(4):320­331.
Anderson, B., Schumacher, A., Guikema, S., Quiring, S., and Ferreri, J. (2020). stormwind-
  model: Model Tropical Cyclone Wind Speeds. R package version 0.1.4.
Anttila-Hughes, J. and Hsiang, S. (2013). Destruction, disinvestment, and death: Economic
  and human losses following environmental disaster. Available at SSRN 2220501.
Bakkensen, L. A. and Ma, L. (2020). Sorting over flood risk and implications for policy
  reform. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, page 102362.
Balboni, C. A. (2019). In harm's way? infrastructure investments and the persistence of
  coastal cities. PhD thesis, The London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE).
Banzhaf, H. S. and Walsh, R. P. (2008). Do people vote with their feet? an empirical test
  of tiebout. American Economic Review, 98(3):843­63.
Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2019). Environmental justice: The economics of race,
  place, and pollution. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1):185­208.
Begley, T. A., Gurun, U., Purnanandam, A., and Weagley, D. (2020). Disaster lending: `fair
  prices', but `unfair access'.
Belasen, A. R. and Polachek, S. W. (2009). How disasters affect local labor markets the
  effects of hurricanes in florida. Journal of Human Resources, 44(1):251­276.
Bertinelli, L. and Strobl, E. (2013). Quantifying the local economic growth impact of hurri-
  cane strikes: An analysis from outer space for the caribbean. Journal of Applied Meteo-
  rology and Climatology, 52(8):1688­1697.
Betts, J. R. and Fairlie, R. W. (2001). Explaining ethnic, racial, and immigrant differences
  in private school attendance. Journal of Urban Economics, 50(1):26­51.
Billings, S. B., Gallagher, E., and Ricketts, L. (2019). Let the rich be flooded: The unequal

                                             35
  impact of hurricane harvey on household debt. Available at SSRN 3396611.
Bolstad, P., Frank, S., Gesick, E., and Victor, D. (2020). Flying blind: What do investors
  really know about climate change risks in the us equity and municipal debt markets?
Bosker, M., Brakman, S., Garretsen, H., and Schramm, M. (2007). Looking for multiple
  equilibria when geography matters: German city growth and the wwii shock. Journal of
  Urban Economics, 61(1):152­169.
Boustan, L. P., Kahn, M. E., Rhode, P. W., and Yanguas, M. L. (2020). The effect of
  natural disasters on economic activity in us counties: A century of data. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 118.
Brakman, S., Garretsen, H., and Schramm, M. (2004). The strategic bombing of german
  cities during world war ii and its impact on city growth. Journal of Economic Geography,
  4(2):201­218.
Brigham, E. F. and Daves, P. R. (2015). Intermediate financial management, 12th edition.
  Cengage Learning.
Brooks, N. and Sethi, R. (1997). The distribution of pollution: community characteristics and
  exposure to air toxics. Journal of environmental economics and management, 32(2):233­
  250.
Cagle, J. A. (1996). Natural disasters, insurer stock prices, and market discrimination: The
  case of hurricane hugo. Journal of Insurance Issues, pages 53­68.
Capeci, J. (1991). Credit risk, credit ratings, and municipal bond yields: A panel study.
  National Tax Journal, pages 41­56.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E., and Turner, N. (2014). Is the united states still
  a land of opportunity? recent trends in intergenerational mobility. American Economic
  Review, 104(5):141­47.
Cornaggia, J., Cornaggia, K. J., and Israelsen, R. D. (2018). Credit ratings and the cost of
  municipal financing. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(6):2038­2079.
Cromwell, E., Ihlanfeldt, K., et al. (2015). Local government responses to exogenous shocks
  in revenue sources: Evidence from florida. National Tax Journal, 68(2):339­376.
Davis, D. R. and Weinstein, D. E. (2002). Bones, bombs, and break points: the geography
  of economic activity. American Economic Review, 92(5):1269­1289.


                                              36
Davlasheridze, M., Fisher-Vanden, K., and Allen Klaiber, H. (2017). The effects of adapta-
  tion measures on hurricane induced property losses: Which FEMA investments have the
  highest returns? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 81:93­114.
del Valle, A., de Janvry, A., and Sadoulet, E. (2019). Rules for recovery: Impact of in-
  dexed disaster funds on shock coping in mexico. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics.
Deryugina, T. (2017). The fiscal cost of hurricanes: Disaster aid versus social insurance.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3):168­98.
Deryugina, T., Kawano, L., and Levitt, S. (2018). The economic impact of hurricane katrina
  on its victims: evidence from individual tax returns. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 10(2):202­33.
Deryugina, T. and Molitor, D. (2018). Does when you die depend on where you live? evidence
  from hurricane katrina. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eisensee, T. and Str¨
                    omberg, D. (2007). News droughts, news floods, and us disaster relief.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2):693­728.
Elliott, R. J., Strobl, E., and Sun, P. (2015). The local impact of typhoons on economic
  activity in China: A view from outer space. Journal of Urban Economics, 88:50­66.
Emanuel, K. (2005). Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30 years.
  Nature, 436(7051):686­688.
Emanuel, K. (2011). Global warming effects on US hurricane damage. Weather, Climate,
  and Society, 3(4):261­268.
Emanuel, K. (2017). Assessing the present and future probability of hurricane harvey's
  rainfall. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(48):12681­12684.
Federal Reserve Board (2020). Municipal liquidity facility. Technical report, Board of Gov-
  ernors of the Federal Reserve System.
Feler, L. and Senses, M. Z. (2017). Trade Shocks and the Provision of Local Public Goods.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(4):101­143.
Field, C. B., Barros, V., Stocker, T. F., and Dahe, Q. (2012). Managing the risks of ex-
  treme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation: special report of the
  intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press.


                                            37
Flavelle, C. (2019). Moody's buys climate data firm, signaling new scrutiny of climate risks.
  The New York Times.
Garrett, T. A. and Sobel, R. S. (2003). The political economy of fema disaster payments.
  Economic inquiry, 41(3):496­509.
Gaul, G. M. (2019). The Geography of Risk: Epic Storms, Rising Seas, and the Cost of
  America's Coasts. Sarah Crichton Books.
Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E., and Rappaport, J. (2008). Why do the poor live in cities? the
  role of public transportation. Journal of urban Economics, 63(1):1­24.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. S., Gustafson, M., Lewis, R., and Schwert, M. (2019). Sea level rise
  and municipal bond yields. Available at SSRN.
Gregory, J. (2013). The impact of post-katrina rebuilding grants on the resettlement choices
  of new orleans homeowners. Unpublished manuscript.
Groen, J., Kutzbach, M., and Polivka, A. (2016). Storms and jobs: The effect of hurricanes
  on individuals' employment and earnings over the long term.
Groen, J. A., Kutzbach, M. J., and Polivka, A. E. (2020). Storms and jobs: The effect of
  hurricanes on individuals' employment and earnings over the long term. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 38(3):653­685.
Hallstrom, D. G. and Smith, V. K. (2005). Market Responses to Hurricanes. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 50:541­561.
Hanna, B. G. (2007). House values, incomes, and industrial pollution. Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, 54(1):100­112.
Haughwout, A. F. (2002). Public infrastructure investments, productivity and welfare in
  fixed geographic areas. Journal of public economics, 83(3):405­428.
Healy, A. and Malhotra, N. (2009). Myopic voters and natural disaster policy. American
  Political Science Review, pages 387­406.
Holian, M. J. and Joffe, M. D. (2013). Assessing municipal bond default probabilities.
  Available at SSRN 2258801.
Hubler, J., Louargant, C., Laroche, P., and Ory, J.-N. (2019). How do rating agencies' deci-
  sions impact stock markets? a meta-analysis. Journal of Economic Surveys, 33(4):1173­
  1198.


                                             38
Jerch, R. (2020). The local benefits of federal mandates: Evidence from the clean water act.
  Technical report, Working Paper.
Kelly, M. (2019). The standard errors of persistence.
Kliger, D. and Sarig, O. (2000). The information value of bond ratings. The journal of
  finance, 55(6):2879­2902.
Knight, B. and Levinson, A. (1999). Rainy day funds and state government savings. National
  Tax Journal, pages 459­472.
Krueger, P., Sautner, Z., and Starks, L. T. (2020). The importance of climate risks for
  institutional investors. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(3):1067­1111.
Lamb, R. P. (1995). An exposure-based analysis of property-liability insurer stock values
  around hurricane andrew. Journal of Risk and Insurance, pages 111­123.
Liao, Y. and Kousky, C. (2020). The fiscal impacts of wildfires on california municipalities.
  Available at SSRN 3612311.
Lin, G. C. (2019). High-skilled immigration and native task specialization in us cities.
  Regional Science and Urban Economics, 77:289­305.
Lis, E. M. and Nickel, C. (2010). The impact of extreme weather events on budget balances.
  International Tax and Public Finance, 17(4):378­399.
Lutz, B., Molloy, R., and Shan, H. (2011). The housing crisis and state and local government
  tax revenue: Five channels. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 41(4):306­319.
Lutz, B. F. (2008). The connection between house price appreciation and property tax
  revenues. National Tax Journal, pages 555­572.
Mahajan, P. and Yang, D. (2020). Taken by storm: Hurricanes, migrant networks, and us
  immigration. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Masiero, G. and Santarossa, M. (2020). Earthquakes, grants, and public expenditure: How
  municipalities respond to natural disasters. Journal of Regional Science, 60(3):481­516.
Melecky, M. and Raddatz, C. (2011). How do governments respond after catastrophes?
  Natural-disaster shocks and the fiscal stance. The World Bank.
Melnik, W. (2017). Municipal government reaction to mass layoffs in ohio. Working Paper.
Miguel, E. and Roland, G. (2011). The long-run impact of bombing vietnam. Journal of
  development Economics, 96(1):1­15.


                                             39
Mohai, P., Pellow, D., and Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental justice. Annual review of
  environment and resources, 34:405­430.
Molloy, R., Smith, C. L., and Wozniak, A. (2011). Internal migration in the united states.
  Journal of Economic perspectives, 25(3):173­96.
MSRB (2019). Muni facts. Technical report, Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.
Muller, N. Z. and Hopkins, C. A. (2019). Hurricane Katrina Floods New Jersey: The Role
  of Information in the Market Response to Flood Risk. Working Paper 25984, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Notowidigdo, M. J. (2020). The incidence of local labor demand shocks. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 38(3):000­000.
Novy-Marx, R. and Rauh, J. (2014). The revenue demands of public employee pension
  promises. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1):193­229.
Noy, I. and Nualsri, A. (2011). Fiscal storms: public spending and revenues in the aftermath
  of natural disasters. Environment and Development Economics, 16(1):113­128.
Ortega, F. and Tas
                 . pinar, S. (2018). Rising sea levels and sinking property values: Hurricane
  Sandy and New York's housing market. Journal of Urban Economics, 106:81­100.
Ouattara, B. and Strobl, E. (2013). The fiscal implications of hurricane strikes in the
  caribbean. Ecological Economics, 85:105­115.
Ouazad, A. and Kahn, M. E. (2019). Mortgage finance in the face of rising climate risk.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Painter, M. (2020). An inconvenient cost: The effects of climate change on municipal bonds.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 135(2):468­482.
Riley, K. (2020). States workt o fund costly bridge repairs, replacements.
Rubinfeld, D. (1973). Credit ratings and the market for general obligation municipal bonds.
  National Tax Journal, pages 17­27.
Shoag, D., Tuttle, C., and Veuger, S. (2019). Rules versus home rule: Local government
  responses to negative revenue shocks. National Tax Journal, 72(3):543­547.
Skidmore, M. and Scorsone, E. (2011). Causes and consequences of fiscal stress in michigan
  cities. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 41(4):360­371.
Skidmore, M. and Toya, H. (2002). Do natural disasters promote long-run growth? Economic


                                             40
  inquiry, 40(4):664­687.
Stein, J. and Van Dam, A. (2019). Taxpayer spending on u.s. disaster fund explodes amid
  climate change, population trends.
Strobl, E. (2010). The Economic Growth Impact of Hurricanes: Evidence from U.S. Coastal
  Counties. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2):575­589.
Urahn, S. K. and Irwin, M. (2020). How states pay for natural disasters in an era of rising
  costs. Technical report, The Pew Charitable Trusts.
Vigdor, J. (2008). The economic aftermath of hurricane katrina. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 22(4):135­54.
Witte, L. R. and Gurwitz, Z. R. (2018). Default, transition, and recovery: 2018 annual u.s.
  public finance default study and rating transitions. Technical report, Standard & Poors
  Global Ratings.
Worthington, A. and Valadkhani, A. (2004). Measuring the impact of natural disasters on
  capital markets: an empirical application using intervention analysis. Applied Economics,
  36(19):2177­2186.




                                            41
               Figure 1: Public Goods Expenditures by Level of Government
Note: Figure plots per capita annual expenditures on public goods & services, including those related to
education, health, housing, welfare, public safety, justice, and building maintenance. Federal expenditures
sourced from Office of Management & Budget Historical Tables, and excludes expenditures related to na-
tional security, international affairs, science & space exploration, agriculture, Medicare, income and social
security, veterans affairs, or general government administrative functions. Local and state expenditures
sourced from Census of Governments. "Local" governments include municipalities, townships, school dis-
tricts, special districts, and county governments.




      Figure 2: Relationship between Municipal Bond Ratings and Municipal Debt
 Note: Panel A and Panel B plot the mean share of per capita debt outstanding and per capita debt
issued, respectively, in year t + 5 for each of 40 bins of a municipality's average bond rating rank in
year t. Each dot represents approximately 65 observations. All means residualized by state fixed ef-
fects and weighted by the 1980 local government population.  denotes the regression coefficient of
debt outstanding per capita (Panel A) or debt issued per capita (Panel B) in year t + 5 as a func-
tion of bond rating rank in year t, controlling for state fixed effects and weighting by 1980 munici-
pal population. Standard errors are in parentheses. Bonds with rating rank 1 have the lowest default
risk ("AAA") whereas bonds rated 11 have the highest default risk ("Ba1"). Values in thousands of
2017 USD. Sample spans 1972 through 2017. Source: Census of Governments; Moody's Analytics.


                                                   42
        Figure 3: Provision of Local Public Goods & Demographic Composition
Note: Figure plots the mean share of per capita local government expenditures as of 1982 for each of 50
bins describing local demographic composition. Demographic characteristics measured as of 1980. Each
dot represents approximately 130 general purpose governments. All means residualized by the 1980 local
government population. "Social Programs" include expenditures in public welfare, hospitals, health, hous-
ing, and unemployment compensation. "Public Works" includes expenditures in transportation, water,
sewer, trash, parks & rec, and the environment. Source: Census of Governments; NHGIS




                                                  43
                  Figure 4: Estimated Wind Speeds of Hurricane Harvey
Note: Figure plots the storm path of Hurricane Harvey in 2017 (in black) and the estimated county-level
maximum wind speeds. Source: Authors' calculations from the HURDAT2 Atlantic hurricane database.




                                                 44
             A. Number of years counties experienced hurricane-strength winds




                       B. Maximum wind speed experienced by counties

Figure 5: Geographic Distribution of Hurricane Events by Frequency & Intensity, 1972­2017
 Note: Panel A plots the geographic distribution of the number of years that counties experienced at least
 64 kts winds. Panel B plots the county-level distribution of maximum wind speeds. Source: Authors'
 calculations from the HURDAT2 Atlantic hurricane database.




                                                   45
        Figure 6: Distribution of Municipal Hurricane Exposure Index, 1972-2017
Note: Panel A shows the distribution of the hurricane exposure index. The y-axis measures the fraction
of observations with a given exposure index. For ease of exposition, we plot the distribution only for in-
dex values below 0.1. (The largest exposure index value in our data is 0.28 experienced in Coral Gables,
FL in 1992 due to Hurricane Andrew). A standard deviation change in the index (an increase of 0.02)
is equivalent to the change in damage experienced in NYC in 1985 from Hurricane Gloria relative that
of Lafayette, LA from Hurricane Andrew in 1992. See Appendix A for details on the index calculation.
Panel B shows the distribution of maximum hurricane-strength wind speed (wind speeds over 64 knots).
The y-axis measures the fraction of observations with a wind speed. We show the 1 SD change in the in-
dex from Panel A translated to maximum wind speed: Lafayette, LA experienced wind speeds of 93.6 kn
in 1992 whereas NYC experienced wind speeds of 78.6 in 1985. Source: Authors' calculations from the
HURDAT2 Atlantic hurricane database.


                                                  46
                                      A. Ten-year default rates (pp)                                B. Pct. bonds low risk (pp)
                      .002 .004




                                                                                      .05  0
            Coefficient




                                                                                 Coefficient
  -.004 -.002 0




                                                                                 -.05 -.1

                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4   6   8   10                      -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4   6     8   10
                                                    Year                                                         Year


                                     C. Pct. bonds medium risk (pp)                                D. Pct. bonds high risk (pp)
                                                                                      .06
                 .1




                                                                                    .02 .04
  Coefficient




                                                                                 Coefficient
  0      .05




                                                                                      0
                 -.05




                                                                                      -.02




                                  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4   6   8   10                      -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4   6     8   10
                                                    Year                                                         Year


                                    Figure 7: Hurricanes and Municipal Bond Rating Dynamics, 1982­2009
Note: Figure plots the estimates and 95% confidence intervals using Equation 5.




                                                                            47
                                 A. Population (log)                                                          B. Employment (log)




                                                                         -.01 -.005 0 .005 .01 .015
            .01
  -.01 -.005 0 .005
           Coefficient




                                                                                   Coefficient

                         -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4    6   8   10                                     -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4   6   8   10
                                           Year                                                                         Year


                              C. Zillow home index (log)
            .01  0
     Coefficient
  -.02 -.01 -.03




                         -10 -8 -6 -4 -2    0 2   4    6   8   10
                                           Year


Figure 8: Hurricanes and County Population, Employment, and Home Value Dynamics,
1982­2009
Note: Figure plots the estimates and 95% confidence intervals using Equation 5.




                                                                    48
Figure 9: Near-Miss Analysis vs Main Analysis: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Debt
Note: Figure plots coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals of 2 from Eq. 3, the effect of a 1 SD
change in hurricane wind speed 6-10 years after exposure. Diamonds show estimates from a "Near Miss"
analysis where we compare exposed municipalities to municipalities in bordering counties that were not
exposed to the same storm. Circles show estimates from Table 4, columns 1-4. Each coefficient is esti-
mated from a separate regression. Outcomes include the 10-year default risk, and the share of bonds rated
low risk, medium risk, and high risk, respectively. Estimates on Default Risk are statistically significant
at the 1% level.




                                                  49
     Figure 10: Fiscal Effects of Hurricanes by Demographic Attributes, 1982­2017
                                                                                                   1-10
 Note: Figure plots the estimates and 95% confidence intervals of 1 and 2 from yist = 1 Hit             +
      1-10
2 (Hit     × Di,1970 ) + i + st +  (Xi t ) + ist where Di,1970 measures one of three demographic at-
tributes of municipality i as of 1970: poverty rate, share of population that is non-white, and share of
population without a high school degree. Outcomes y include ln(revenues), ln(intergovernment transfers),
ln(expenditures), 10-year default risk, and ln(population). Estimates of 1 and 2 are estimated from
one regression per demographic attribute. 1 measures the average annual change in outcome y in the 10
years after hurricane exposure for municipalities where Di,1970 = 0 and 2 measures the differential effect
of hurricanes on outcome y for municipalities where Di,1970 > 0. All other controls are the same as Eq. 3.
Controls include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 municipality characteristics (share of
population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty
rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed
effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                  50
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                          Hurricane       Non-Hurricane        P-val
Panel A: 1970 Municipality Characteristics
  Population                                              15,833.170         5,869.551         0.000
  Land Area                                                 8.302              5.021           0.000
  Share 25 and older pop. less than high school              0.329             0.344           0.000
  Share pop. nonwhite                                        0.171             0.104           0.000
  Share pop. in poverty                                      0.163             0.148           0.000
Panel B: Budget Characteristics (Annual $mn.)
  Total Revenues                                            84.161             15.502          0.000
    Own Source                                              60.607             12.654          0.000
      Tax                                                   32.625              4.895          0.000
      Other Revenues                                        21.651              7.257          0.000
    Total Intergov.                                         23.554             2.848           0.000
      Federal Intergov.                                      3.737              0.594          0.000
      State & Local Intergov.                               19.817              2.254          0.000
  Total expenditures                                        84.176             15.710          0.000
    Education                                               15.661             1.302           0.000
    Safety                                                  10.883              2.590          0.000
    Public works                                            22.587             7.445           0.000
    Social programs                                         14.345              0.802          0.000
    G&A                                                      3.418              0.965          0.000
    Other expenditures                                      17.282             2.606           0.000
  Total out. debt                                           76.432             18.407          0.000
    Long-term debt issued                                   11.384              2.685          0.000
    Long-term debt retired                                   7.388              1.842          0.000
Panel C: Bond Characteristics
  Default Rate (10-yr horizon)                               0.002              0.003          0.004
  Share of medium risk bonds                                 0.232              0.308          0.000
  Share of high risk bonds                                   0.012              0.011          0.753
Number of governments                                        2,181             3,963
Observations                                                17,448             31,704
Note: The unit of observation is a municipal government-year. Data describes mean municipal attributes
from 1982 through 2017. Budget values measured in 2017 USD. Panel A characteristics measured as of 1970.
Sourced from US Census. Panel B data sourced from Census of Governments. Panel C data sourced from
Moody's Analytics.




                                                 51
                                 Table 2: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Government Revenues, 1982­2017.

                                                                                Own-source revenues                           Intergov. transfers
                                                                           Total                                         Total                      State
     Dependent variable:                                   Total        own-source                       Other
                                                         revenues        revenues          Taxes        revenues       transfers      Federal      & local
     revenues (log)                                         (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)
     Panel A. Hurricane wind speed
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years                 -0.003           -0.007         -0.007         0.004           0.023**      0.065         0.006
                                                          (0.005)          (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.011)       (0.071)       (0.019)
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years                -0.016***        -0.020***      -0.012**       0.009          -0.004        0.100         -0.016
                                                          (0.005)          (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.015)       (0.080)       (0.013)
     Panel B. Hurricane category
     Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
     in last 1­5 years (=1)                                -0.013           -0.035***      -0.023         -0.002         0.044         0.026         0.010
52




                                                          (0.010)          (0.013)        (0.015)        (0.022)        (0.032)       (0.120)       (0.035)
     Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
     in last 6­10 years                                    -0.006           -0.030***      -0.048*** -0.008              0.054         0.161         0.007
                                                          (0.013)          (0.012)        (0.014)    (0.019)            (0.033)       (0.108)       (0.042)
     Max wind speed  96 kts
     in last 1­5 years (=1)                                -0.033           -0.062**       -0.047         -0.007         0.099         0.189         0.044
                                                          (0.027)          (0.030)        (0.037)        (0.032)        (0.066)       (0.360)       (0.077)
     Max wind speed  96 kts
     in last 6­10 years (=1)                               -0.047**         -0.072***      -0.084*** 0.006               -0.035        0.270         -0.028
                                                          (0.022)          (0.026)        (0.032)    (0.035)            (0.085)       (0.397)       (0.065)
     Observations                                          49152            49152          49152         49152          49152          49152        49152
     Note: Outcomes are log revenues. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 municipality characteristics (share of
     population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the
     nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
      Table 3: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Government Expenditures, 1982­2017.

                                                                Public       Public                     Gov.
Dependent variable:                                 Total       works        safety        Misc.       admin.
expenditures (log)                                   (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
Panel A. Hurricane wind speed
1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years                0.005       -0.001        0.009        0.003       0.025***
                                                   (0.004)      (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.007)
1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years              -0.010*      -0.034***    -0.005       -0.003       0.012*
                                                   (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.016)      (0.006)
Panel B. Hurricane category
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                              -0.002       -0.008       0.013        -0.030       0.021
                                                   (0.010)      (0.020)      (0.016)      (0.024)      (0.022)
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 6­10 years                                  -0.000       -0.024       -0.032       -0.033       -0.008
                                                   (0.012)      (0.029)      (0.026)      (0.024)      (0.030)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                              -0.008       -0.062       0.030        0.019        0.100**
                                                   (0.024)      (0.041)      (0.036)      (0.051)      (0.045)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 6­10 years (=1)                             -0.059** -0.137*** -0.040              -0.094*      0.055
                                                   (0.030)   (0.048)   (0.038)            (0.052)      (0.046)
Observations                                        49152        49152        49152        49152        49152
Note: Outcomes are log expenditures. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of
1970 municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with
no high school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area),
municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county
level.




                                                      53
                                                       Table 4: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Debt, 1982­2012.

                                                                           Municipal bond ratings                                       Municipal government debt
                                                        Ten-year         Pct. bonds        Pct. bonds         Pct. bonds        Total debt        Long-term         Long-term
     Dependent variable:                               default risk       low risk         medium risk         high risk       outstanding        debt issued      debt retired
     municipal bond ratings                               (pp)              (pp)              (pp)               (pp)             (log)              (log)            (log)
     and municipal debt                                    (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)                (6)              (7)
     Panel A. Hurricane wind speed
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years                 0.001**           -0.023**          0.006             0.017***          -0.009            -0.224            -0.004
                                                          (0.000)           (0.011)           (0.008)           (0.005))          (0.022)          (0.230) )          (0.023)
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years                0.001***          -0.066***         0.052***          0.014***          -0.031*           -0.285            -0.030
                                                          (0.000)           (0.016)           (0.014)           (0.004)           (0.017)           (0.220)           (0.106)
     Panel B. Hurricane category
     Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
54




     in last 1­5 years (=1)                                -0.001**          0.035             -0.005            -0.030**          -0.102*           0.162             0.077
                                                          (0.001)           (0.037)           (0.035)           (0.013)           (0.054)           (0.358)           (0.091)
     Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
     in last 6­10 years (=1)                               -0.001*           0.050             -0.020            -0.030***         -0.126***         0.649*            0.025
                                                          (0.001)           (0.038)           (0.034)           (0.011)           (0.047)           (0.361)           (0.078)
     Max wind speed  96 kts
     in last 1­5 years (=1)                                0.005**           -0.127*           0.034             0.092***          -0.192**          0.051             0.109
                                                          (0.002)           (0.067)           (0.049)           (0.033)           (0.093)           (0.770)           (0.108)
     Max wind speed  96 kts
     in last 6­10 years (=1)                               0.005**           -0.291***         0.226**           0.065***          -0.259***         -0.266            0.186
                                                          (0.002)           (0.111)           (0.092)           (0.024)           (0.069)           (0.889)           (0.306)
     Observations                                          9943              9943              9943               9943              4067              4067              4067
     Note: Outcomes are municipal bond ratings, total debt outstanding, and debt issuance and retirement. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of
     1970 municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty rate, log population, log
     distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
                Table 5: Effect of Hurricanes on Local Population Dynamics, 1982­2017.

Dependent variable:                                                                                       Home value
population, employment,                            Population        Population        Employment           index
and home value index (log)                            (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
Panel A. Hurricane wind speed
1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years                  -0.008           -0.003             -0.005**           -0.011***
                                                      (0.007)          (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.003)
1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years                 -0.007*          -0.002             -0.005***          -0.010***
                                                      (0.004)          (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.003)
Panel B. Hurricane category
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                                 -0.009           0.001              -0.005             -0.040***
                                                      (0.008)          (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.012)
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 6­10 years                                     -0.030***        -0.002             -0.004             0.001
                                                      (0.010)          (0.006)            (0.008)            (0.010)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                                 -0.069*          -0.043**           -0.045**           -0.057**
                                                      (0.037)          (0.021)            (0.019)            (0.023)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 6­10 years (=1)                                -0.057**         -0.036**           -0.039**           -0.039*
                                                      (0.024)          (0.017)            (0.019)            (0.020)
Treatment unit                                     Muni. gov.          County             County             County
Observations                                        49152              45504              45504              19187
Note: Outcomes are log municipality population, log county population, log county employment, and log Zillow county
home value index. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 municipality or county
characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the
poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government or county fixed
effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Column 1 controls for municipality covariates and municipal government fixed ef-
fects; Columns 2 to 4 control for county covariates and county fixed effects. The sample period is from 1982 to 2017 except
for Column 4 which is from 1996 to 2017. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                          55
A        Data Description and Variable Definitions
A.1       Census of Governments

Below is the list of the individual components of the six broad expenditure categories:

       · Education expenditures: total spending on primary, secondary, and postsecondary
         education.

       · Government administration: local government finance, general public buildings, judi-
         cial and legal, and central staff services.

       · Miscellaneous expenditures: interests on debt, liquor stores, miscellaneous commercial
         activities, insurance trusts, and other general expenditures.

       · Public assistance: public welfare, public housing, hospital and health, and employment
         security administration.

       · Public works: sewer, water, trash, parks and recreational, the environment, housing,
         transportation, and total utilities.

       · Public safety: police, fire, correctional facilities, and protective inspection.

A.2 Hurricane Exposure
The Atlantic HURDAT2 dataset contains all known tropical and subtropical cyclones be-
tween 1851 and 2019. We supplement it with the Extended Best Track dataset that begins
in 1988 and ends in 2018. We consider all storm events with wind speeds at least 64 kts at
some point on the storm tracks.
       Using the storm tracks, we construct a measure of local jurisdictions' hurricane ex-
posure in four steps. First, for each storm, we use the storm tracks to predict the maximum
wind speed experienced at each census centroid.31 Second, for each year, we use the maxi-
mum predicted wind speed at each census tract centroid to calculate the potential economic
damage of hurricanes. Similar to Emanuel (2011), we assume that the damage function is
a cubic function of wind speed and tropical cyclones with wind speeds below the 50 kts
threshold do not cause economic damage. For census tract j in jurisdiction k in year t, the
potential damage is given by

                                                  max(Windjkt - 50, 0)3
                                    damagejkt   =                       ,                                   (6)
                                                      MaxWind3
where Windjkt is the maximum wind speed in census tract j in jurisdiction k in year t
and MaxWind is the maximum wind speed observed in the sample between 1972 and 2017.
Rescaling by MaxWind is purely for aesthetic purposes as it reduces the number of leading
31
     Storm tracks and wind speeds are estimated using Anderson et al. (2020). Their model accounts for surface
     friction using a reduction factor of 0.8 for points over land. We remove this surface friction component in
     the exposure measure by multiplying the estimated wind speeds by the reciprocal of 0.8.


                                                        56
zeros in the estimates. Third, we approximate the economic shock experienced by the local
jurisdiction in a given year or in a given time period using the most severe storm in that
time frame; i.e., we assume
                                   Hkt = max damagejkt .,                              (7)
                                           j

where the maximum is taken over all census tract centroids in a jurisdiction k . In instances
where census tracts overlap city boundaries, we allocate census tract population to cities
based a crosswalk provided by Missouri Census Data Center's "MABLE/Geocorr 2000."




                                               57
     B    Additional Tables




     Table B.1: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Tax Subcategories, Additional Expenditure Categories, and Employment and Payroll,
     1982­2017.

      Dependent variable:                                             Sales, income,                                                  Full-time
      public finance and                               Property         license, &         Public        Public         Public       equivalent       Public
      public employment                                 taxes          n.e.c taxes         educ.       assistance       emp.        public emp.       payroll
      outcomes (log)                                     (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)
58




      1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years              -0.001            -0.010           0.001         -0.053*       -0.018***       -0.015***      -0.012**
                                                        (0.006)           (0.010)          (0.033)       (0.028)       (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)
      1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years             -0.010            -0.003           0.012          0.017        -0.015***       -0.015***      -0.013**
                                                        (0.007)           (0.011)          (0.053)       (0.031)       (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.006)
      Observations                                       49152             49152           49152          49152         49152          49152           49152
      Note: Outcomes are log taxes, expenditures, public employment and payroll. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970
      municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty rate, log
      population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are
      clustered at the county level.
          Table B.2: Near-Miss Analysis: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Debt, 1982­2012.

                                                     Ten-year         Pct. bonds        Pct. bonds          Pct. bonds
Dependent variable:                                 default risk       low risk         medium risk          high risk
municipal bond ratings (pp)                             (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)
Panel A. Hurricane wind speed
1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­5 years                  0.001              -0.024***         0.008              0.015***
                                                      (0.001)            (0.009)           (0.007)           (0.005)) )
1 SD hurricane wind in last 6­10 years                 0.001***           -0.074***         0.060***           0.014**
                                                      (0.000)            (0.019)           (0.015)            (0.006)
Panel B. Hurricane category
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                                 -0.002*            -0.022            0.067**            -0.045***
                                                      (0.001)            (0.034)           (0.030)            (0.014)
Max wind speed  64 kts and < 96 kts
in last 6­10 years (=1)                                -0.002*            -0.020            0.064*             -0.044**
                                                      (0.001)            (0.051)           (0.036)            (0.022)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 1­5 years (=1)                                 0.009**            -0.185***         0.107***           0.078**
                                                      (0.005)            (0.057)           (0.037)            (0.038)
Max wind speed  96 kts
in last 6­10 years (=1)                                0.004              -0.302*           0.244*             0.058
                                                      (0.002)            (0.173)           (0.138)            (0.037)
Observations                                           10108             10108              10108              10108
Note: Outcomes are municipal bond ratings. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970
municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school
education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipality group fixed
effects, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                           59
                                 Table B.3: Fiscal Effects of Hurricanes by Historical Demographic Attributes, 1982­2017.

                                                                 Own-source        Intergov.          Total            Total debt          10-year
     Dependent variable:                                          revenues         transfers       expenditures       outstanding        default risk      Population
     municipal finances                                             (log)            (log)            (log)              (log)              (pp)             (log)
     and population                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)
     Panel A. Poverty rate
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years                          0.003            -0.009           0.003              -0.121             -0.003***         0.013
                                                                    (0.010)          (0.025)          (0.010)            (0.074)            (0.001)           (0.008)
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years
     × 1970 municipality poverty rate                                -0.098*          0.096            -0.038             0.578              0.019***          -0.116*
                                                                    (0.054)          (0.102)          (0.045)            (0.382)            (0.006)           (0.065)
     Panel B. Non-white population
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years                          0.001            0.011            0.006              -0.042             -0.001            0.009
60




                                                                    (0.007)          (0.012)          (0.006)            (0.037)            (0.001)           (0.007)
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years
     × 1970 non-white population                                     -0.071**         -0.014           -0.045**           0.099              0.008**           -0.075
                                                                    (0.034)          (0.046)          (0.020)            (0.151)            (0.004)           (0.051)
     Panel C. Less than high school
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years                          0.001            0.012            0.002              -0.048             -0.003***         0.007
                                                                    (0.007)          (0.028)          (0.009)            (0.052)            (0.001)           (0.009)
     1 SD hurricane wind in last 1­10 years
     × 1970 pct. pop. without a high school degree                   -0.049**         -0.010           -0.016             0.093              0.010***          -0.048
                                                                    (0.022)          (0.062)          (0.021)            (0.139)            (0.002)           (0.037)
     Observations                                                    49152            49152            49152              4067               9943              49152
     Note: Outcomes are log revenues by funding source, log total expenditures, log total debt, 10-year default risk, and log population. Control variables include inter-
     actions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high
     school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed
     effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
    Table B.4: Sensitivity Analysis to Persistent Hurricane Effects and Pre-Trends, 1982­2017.

                                           11 to 15-      11 to 20-      0­4-year       0­9-year       Muni. gov.
Dependent variable:          Baseline      year lags      year lags       leads          leads         time trends
total revenues (log)           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)
1 SD hurricane wind
in last 1­5 years             -0.003         0.001          -0.003         -0.002         -0.001          -0.004
                             (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.004)
1 SD hurricane wind
in last 6­10 years            -0.016***      -0.014**       -0.013*        -0.014*        -0.018**        -0.014*
                             (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.008)
1 SD hurricane wind
in last 11­15 years                          0.003
                                            (0.004)
1 SD hurricane wind
in last 11­20 years                                         0.000
                                                           (0.004)
1 SD hurricane wind
in next 0­4 years                                                          0.007
                                                                          (0.009)
1 SD hurricane wind
in next 0­9 years                                                                         -0.002
                                                                                         (0.006)
Observations                  49152          43008           36864         43008          36864           49152
Note: Outcomes are log total revenues. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970
municipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high
school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal
government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Column 2
controls for hurricane indices in t - 11 and t - 15; Column 3 controls for hurricane indices in t - 11 and t - 20; Col-
umn 4 controls for hurricane indices in t and t + 4, Column 5 controls for hurricanes in t and t + 9; Column 6 replaces
municipality covarites with municipality-specific linear time trends.




                                                        61
               Table B.5: Sensitivity Analysis of Hurricane Exposure Measurement, 1982­2017.

                                                                                                        Maximum
                                 Hurricane        Hurricane       Hurricane                          wind speed excl.
                                 exposure,        exposure,       exposure,         Maximum
                                 non-linear       non-linear      non-linear       wind speed,       Katrina, Rita, &
     Dependent variable:           in kt3           in kt2          in kt              kt3             Wilma, kt3
     total revenues (log)            (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)                 (5)
     Impact 1­5 years               -0.003          -0.006           -0.005            -0.007               -0.006
                                   (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.004)              (0.004)
     Impact 6­10 years              -0.016***       -0.016***        -0.012***         -0.012**             -0.012**
                                   (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.005)              (0.005)
62




     Observations                  49152            49152            49152            49152                 49152
     Note: Outcome is log total revenues. Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 mu-
     nicipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school
     education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal govern-
     ment fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The hurricane
     exposure measures in Columns 1 to 3 are based on non-linear functions of cubed, squared, and linear wind speed, re-
     spectively. The non-linear function is given by max(Windit - 50, 0)/MaxWind, where Windit is the maximum wind
     speed observed in municipality i and period t and MaxWind is the maximum wind speed in the sample. The hurricane
     exposure measure in Column 4 is cubed maximum wind speed cubed observed in the time period, adjusted by cubed
     maximum wind speed of the sample. The exposure measure in Column 5 is calculated in a similar fashion as Column
     4, excluding Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma.
                      Table B.6: Sensitivity Analysis of the Estimated Fiscal Impacts of Hurricanes, 1982­2017.

                                                                 Revenues                                         Expenditures
     Dependent variable:                                                          Intergov.         Total             Public            Public
     revenues and                                 Total        Own-source                        expenditures        works exp.       safety exp.
                                                revenues        revenues          transfers
     expenditures (log)                            (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)                (5)               (6)
     Panel A. Unweighted regressions
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                            0.005            -0.008           0.040**          0.006              0.000             -0.007
                                                 (0.007)          (0.006)          (0.018)          (0.007)            (0.010)           (0.015)
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                           -0.009           -0.014*          -0.019           -0.010             -0.012            -0.014
                                                 (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.020)          (0.010)            (0.014)           (0.018)
     Panel B. Per-capita finances
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                            0.005            0.001            0.031**          0.013***           0.007             0.016*
                                                 (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.013)          (0.005)            (0.006)           (0.009)
     1 SD hurricane wind
63




     in last 6­10 years                           -0.009           -0.013**         0.002            -0.003             -0.026***         0.001
                                                 (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.014)          (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.008)
     Panel C. Nonimputed sample
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                            -0.004           -0.008           0.025**          0.004              -0.003            0.010
                                                 (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.011)          (0.004)            (0.009)           (0.007)
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                           -0.015***        -0.019***        -0.002           -0.010*            -0.034***         -0.004
                                                 (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.016)          (0.006)            (0.007)           (0.008)
     Panel D. Unbalanced sample
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                            -0.003           -0.008           0.024**          0.005              -0.003            0.007
                                                 (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.011)          (0.004)            (0.009)           (0.006)
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                           -0.017***        -0.022***        -0.005           -0.011**           -0.037***         -0.008
                                                 (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.015)          (0.006)            (0.007)           (0.006)
     Note: N = 49, 152 except for Panel C (N = 18, 512), and Panel D (N = 51, 497). Outcomes are log revenues (total and by funding source) and
     expenditures (total and the two largest spending categories). Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 mu-
     nicipality characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty
     rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects.
     Standard errors are clustered at the county level. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
                              Table B.7: Effect of Hurricanes on Municipal Finances, Alternative Treatment Units, 1982­2017.

                                                                     Revenues                                                   Expenditures
     Dependent variable:                                                              Intergov.         Total                         Public
                                                      Total        Own-source                                            Public                    Public        Public
     public finances at different                   revenues        revenues          transfers      expenditures        works        safety       educ.       assistance
     levels of geographies (log)                       (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)
     A. County-government type analysis
     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                                -0.024***        -0.035***        0.009*           -0.024***        -0.005       0.003        0.001         -0.010
                                                     (0.006)          (0.007)          (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.007)      (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.009)
     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                               -0.011           -0.019**         0.006            -0.010           -0.011       -0.011       0.013         -0.003
                                                     (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.010)          (0.008)          (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.018)       (0.011)
     Observations                                     37914            37914            37914            37914            37914        37914        37914         37914
     B. County-level analysis
     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                                0.003            -0.002           0.013***         0.004            0.008        0.002        0.003         0.006
                                                     (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.007)      (0.002)      (0.005)       (0.007)
64




     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                               0.000            -0.004*          0.010***         -0.002           -0.009** -0.007*          -0.004        0.010
                                                     (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.002)          (0.004)   (0.004)         (0.005)       (0.009)
     Observations                                     10112            10112            10112            10112            10112     10112           10112         10112
     C. State-level analysis
     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                                0.004            0.001            0.009**          0.004            0.014*** 0.004            0.000         0.003
                                                     (0.004)          (0.005)          (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.004)   (0.011)         (0.003)       (0.005)
     1 SD in hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                               0.000            0.001            -0.001           -0.000           0.010**      0.007        -0.002        -0.001
                                                     (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.004)
     Observations                                      756              756              756              756              756          756          756           756
     Note: Outcomes are log revenues and expenditures. Panels A and B includes all governments (county, municipal, township, special-district, school-district governments)
     with non-missing total revenues and expenditures. Panel C reports state-level finances. The unit of observation in Panel A is county-government type-year and in Panel
     B is county-year. Baseline covariates include a vector of 1970 county characteristics (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no
     high school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance to the nearest coast, and log land area). Panel A controls for interactions between state fixed
     effects and government type-year dummies and interactions between baseline covariates and government type-year dummies. Panel B controls for baseline covariates
     interacted with year dummies and state-by-year fixed effects. Panel C controls for baseline covariates with state-specific linear time trends and census division-by-year
     fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level in Panels A and B and at the state level in Panel C.
               Table B.8: Sensitivity Analysis of the Estimated Effects of Hurricanes on Municipal Bond Ratings, 1982­2017.

                                             1-year           5-year            22-year        10-year                        Pct. bonds
                                             default          default           default        default      Pct. bonds         medium          Pct. bonds
     Dependent variable:                      risk             risk               risk           risk        low risk            risk           high risk
     municipal bond ratings (pp)               (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)              (7)
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 1­5 years                        0.000            0.000*            0.001***       0.001***       -0.017            -0.001            0.019***
                                             (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.011)           (0.008)           (0.004)
     1 SD hurricane wind
     in last 6­10 years                       0.000            0.000***          0.001***       0.001***       -0.062***         0.048***          0.014***
                                             (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.015)           (0.012)           (0.004)
65




     Treatment unit                       Muni. gov.        Muni. gov.       Muni. gov.         Bond            Bond             Bond              Bond
     Observations                           9943              9943             9943            176619          176619           176619            176619
     Note: Outcomes are implied municipal bond default rates and shares of bonds that are rated low risk (rated higher than "Baa)", medium risk (rated
     "Baa)", and high risk (rated lower than "Baa)". Control variables include interactions of year dummies with a vector of 1970 municipality characteristics
     (share of population that are non-white, share of 25 and over population with no high school education, the poverty rate, log population, log distance
     to the nearest coast, and log land area), municipal government or debt instrument fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Columns 1 to 3 conduct
     the analysis at the the municipal government-level, control for mean bond characteristics (coupon rate, share of bonds that are general obligation, share
     of bonds sold at public auction, and maturity length), and are weighted by 1970 municipality population. Columns 4 to 7 conduct the analysis at the
     the debt instrument level, control for year dummies interacted with initial debt instrument characteristics (coupon rate, whether the debt instrument is
     general obligation, whether the debt instrument is sold at public auction, and maturity length), and are weighted by initial debt instrument sales amount.
     Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
