                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE STRUCTURE OF BUSINESS TAXATION IN CHINA

                                         Zhao Chen
                                         Yuxuan He
                                         Zhikuo Liu
                                  Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                        Daniel Yi Xu

                                      Working Paper 28051
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28051


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We are grateful for detailed comments from Robert Moffitt and for suggestions from James
Poterba and participants of the Tax Policy and the Economy conference. Suárez Serrato and Xu
gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation (grant #17300024). Zhao
Chen gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Ministry of Education in China
(17JJD790004). All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhao Chen, Yuxuan He, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Structure of Business Taxation in China
Zhao Chen, Yuxuan He, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 28051
November 2020
JEL No. D25,E22,H25

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper documents facts about the structure of business taxation in China using administrative
tax data from 2007 to 2011 from the State Taxation Administration. We first document the
importance of different business taxes across industries. While corporate income taxes play an
important role for manufacturing firms, these firms also remit a large share of their tax payments
through the value-added tax system, through the excise tax system and through payroll taxes.
Gross receipts taxes play an important role for firms in other industries, leading to spillovers that
may affect the overall economy. Second, we evaluate whether the structure of China's tax
revenue matches its stage of development. A cross-country comparison of sources of government
revenue shows that China collects a high share of tax revenue from taxes on goods and services
and a high share of income tax on corporations. Finally, we study whether firm-level differences
in effective tax rates can be an important source of allocative inefficiencies. Decomposing the
variation in effective tax rates across firms, we find that government policies, including loss
carry-forward provisions and preferential policies for regional, foreign, small, and high-tech
firms, have significant explanatory power. Nonetheless, while effective tax rates vary along a
number of dimensions, tax policy does not explain the large dispersion in the returns to factors of
production across firms.

Zhao Chen                                         Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
China Center for Economic Studies                 Department of Economics
Fudan University                                  Duke University
Shanghai, 200433                                  213 Social Sciences Building
China                                             Box 90097
zhaochen@fudan.edu.cn                             Durham, NC 27708
                                                  and NBER
Yuxuan He                                         jc@jcsuarez.com
yuxuan.he@duke.edu
                                                  Daniel Yi Xu
Zhikuo Liu                                        Department of Economics
China Center for Economic Studies                 Duke University
School of Economics                               213 Social Science Bldg
Fudan University                                  419 Chapel Drive
600 Guoquan Rd, Shanghai                          Box 90097
China                                             Durham, NC 27708-0097
liuzhikuo@fudan.edu.cn                            and NBER
                                                  daniel.xu@duke.edu
1     Introduction
The structure of business taxation is at the heart of important economic and policy questions.
Governments often use tax policy to provide short-run economic stimulus and to promote long-
run growth. Understanding the structure of business taxation is critical for evaluating the pros
and cons of these policy initiatives. The design and implementation of business taxation are also
largely influenced by each country's stage of development. Policy goals and fiscal capacity could
differ substantially between developed and developing economies. All of these factors impact the
effectiveness of tax policies. Tax structures may also lead to differential returns to production
factors if firms face different tax burdens. It is well documented that allocative efficiency is a
major contributor to the large TFP differences across countries. However, it is still an open
question whether and how much the business tax structure can explain the observed differences
in measured factor returns at the micro level.
    This paper documents important facts about the structure of business taxation in China.
China is an ideal setting in which to investigate how the tax structure interacts with economic
development. Over the last two decades, China's income per capita has rapidly approached the
levels of middle income countries. Improving our understanding of business taxes can illuminate
broader fiscal policy trends in China such as the evolution of the mix of private and state
sectors as well as the government's growing focus on technology-intensive industries as a source
of future economic growth. In addition, policy makers in China also provide fiscal incentives for
a broad range of firm activities. Given that firm-level distortions in China are often used as a
leading example for misallocation, understanding the role of business taxation in generating these
distortions is important. Finally, because of China's growing dominance in manufacturing and
its crucial role in the global value chain, tax policy in China affects production and consumption
in the rest of the world.
    To improve our understanding of business taxation in China, we take advantage of admin-
istrative tax survey data for the years 2007­2011. These data have a number of advantages.
First, the fact that the data are used by Chinese tax authorities to audit companies helps fore-
stall concerns over data quality. By merging administrative tax data with the Annual Survey
of Manufactures, we provide a valuable cross-check for this well-studied database. Second, our
data allow us to characterize business taxes beyond the manufacturing sector. We validate the
representativeness of these data by showing that firm-level tax data result in aggregate decom-
positions similar to those published in China's statistical yearbook. Finally, with respect to
the misallocation literature, which infers the influence of taxes through "wedges" in production
choices, these data allow us to measure a variety of different taxes and how they interact with
each other.


                                                 1
       Our analysis starts by describing our data coverage and the different taxes paid by businesses
in China. We next document the following facts.
       First, we document the importance of multiple tax systems across Chinese industries. The
value-added tax (VAT) is the major tax for firms in primary industries (e.g., mining, agricul-
ture, and forestry) and the manufacturing industry. On the other hand, the business tax--a tax
on gross receipts--affects many firms in construction and several service sectors (e.g., finance,
insurance, transportation, and communications).1 Surprisingly, an excise tax on specific com-
modities affects a large fraction of manufacturing firms. We also document the importance of
payroll taxes for Chinese businesses. In spite of the fact that payments to the social security
fund are not official taxes, we find that these contributions constitute a non-negligible fraction
of payments to the Chinese government. The joint existence of VAT, gross-receipts taxes, and
excise taxes runs counter to the prescriptions of simple theories of optimal taxation and may
reflect practical aspects of tax administration in developing countries. Moreover, because these
tax systems generate different effective tax rates and distortions, they can encourage some sectors
while constraining growth in others.
       Second, given the extraordinary growth experience of China in the past two decades, a po-
tential hypothesis is that China's tax structure might not be well explained by its income level.
To evaluate this hypothesis, we conduct a cross-country analysis of government revenue sources
using public aggregate data from the IMF in 2011. A well-known fact is that the size of govern-
ment revenue as a share of GDP is increasing in GDP per capita. Based on this metric, China's
government revenue fits well with the level predicted by its income per capita and does not look
like an outlier. However, over 60% of China's tax revenue relies on taxes on goods and services,
which is very high compared to the proportions of other middle-income and high-income coun-
tries. Value-added tax represents around half of the total tax revenue from goods and services.
While China's total income tax as a share of total tax revenue is in line with its level of develop-
ment, relative to other countries, China relies disproportionately heavily on the corporate sector
for its income taxes. More than 70% of income tax revenue comes from the corporate income
tax.
       Finally, we explore the potential for tax policy to be an important source of misallocation
in China. To evaluate this possibility, we study drivers of differences in the effective corporate
income tax (CIT) rates of firms. Loss carry-forwards and tax credits for high-tech enterprises,
enterprises in transition, and small firms are the main drivers of the differences in effective CIT
rates.2 In addition, a small fraction of the variation in effective tax rates can be attributed
   1
     Starting from 2012, pilot experiments for a tax reform aiming to replace the business tax with the VAT were
launched in a few industries. The business tax was completely replaced by the VAT in May 2016.
   2
     Enterprises in transition include foreign-invested enterprises subject to preferential rates and enterprises



                                                       2
to industry and ownership structure. These differences are consistent with well-documented
government tax policies. However, we find that they are responsible for a very small fraction of
the observed dispersion in the returns to production factors.
   This paper is related to several strands of research. The first is the literature on taxes
in developing countries. Gordon and Li (2009) note that a lack of administrative capacity to
enforce compliance leads developing countries to rely on tax systems that interact with the
financial system, which generates a paper trail of economic activity. These kinds of frictions
lead to departures from first-best policy recommendations (e.g., Diamond and Mirrlees, 1971),
whereby governments may rely on gross-receipts taxes to limit compliance problems (e.g., Best,
Brockmeyer, Kleven, Spinnewijn and Waseem, 2015). By studying the structure of business
taxation in one of the largest emerging economies, we provide new facts that shed light on how
countries balance tax revenue needs with economic distortions.
   Second, this paper is related to recent work studying how Chinese firms respond to tax
incentives (e.g., Han and Kung, 2015; Chen, 2017; Cai and Harrison, 2018; Fan, Liu, Qian and
Wen, 2018; Chen, He and Zhang, 2018; Chen, Liu, Su´
                                                  arez Serrato and Xu, 2019b; Chen, Jiang,
Liu, Su´
       arez Serrato and Xu, 2019a; Liu and Mao, 2019). These papers show that, as in other
countries (e.g., Yagan, 2015; Maffini, Xing and Devereux, 2016; Rao, 2016; Zwick and Mahon,
2017; Ohrn, 2018, 2019; Moon, 2019), firms in China are highly responsive to tax policy incentives.
In addition, the government has relied on tax incentives as a way to implement national directives
to focus on technology upgrade and to foster its innovation sector (e.g., Wei, Xie and Zhang,
2017).
   Finally, this paper is related to the large literature that explains observed resource misallo-
cation by pointing to dispersion in the marginal products of inputs across firms (e.g., Restuccia
and Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). These so-called wedges are often interpreted as
distortions arising from fiscal policy. For the case of China, Brandt, Tombe and Zhu (2013)
document rich variation in these wedges across different regions and time periods. However, few
papers have quantified the costs of misallocation by measuring actual variation in tax policy (e.g.,
Fajgelbaum, Morales, Su´
                       arez Serrato and Zidar, 2019). Our unique data allow us to document
new patterns of dispersion in actual taxes and subsidies. By comparing these observed wedges
to those inferred from optimization, we can cross-check the extent to which fiscal policy is an
important driver of misallocation.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents basic facts about business
taxation in China and displays the structure of tax payment using the tax survey data. Section
3 compares the business tax structure of China with those of other countries. Section 4 describes
participating in the Western Development Program.



                                                    3
patterns that drive differences between the statutory and effective corporate income tax rates.
Section 5 concludes.


2         Business Taxes in China

2.1        Policy Background
Since the end of the 20th century, China has gone through a series of tax reforms. China's current
tax system has the primary goals of collecting fiscal revenue, facilitating economic development,
and improving the income distribution. By 2013, there were 18 taxes in China's tax system.
Among these taxes, 17 of them (except the personal income tax) can be classified as business
taxes.3 The 17 business taxes are the value-added tax, corporate income tax, business tax, excise
tax, city maintenance and construction tax, deed tax, tariffs, land appreciation tax, vehicle and
vessel tax, urban land use tax, real estate tax, farmland occupation tax, stamp tax, resources
tax, vehicle purchase tax, tonnage tax and tobacco tax.
        These 17 business taxes can be classified into three main categories: taxes on goods and
services, corporate income tax, and taxes on international trade. Taxes on goods and services
include the domestic VAT, business tax, domestic excise tax, city maintenance and construction
tax, deed tax, land appreciation tax, vehicle and vessel tax, urban land use tax, real estate tax,
farmland occupation tax, stamp tax and resources tax. The VAT is levied on the production and
sale of goods, while the business tax is levied on the provision of services. Taxes on international
trade include the VAT and excise taxes on imports and tariffs.
        China has implemented a number of reforms of taxes on goods and service since 2008. Con-
sider first the VAT, which is one of the consumption taxes and is levied on the value-added part
at each production and distribution stage for goods. The baseline VAT rate is 17% during our
sample period, but a 13% VAT is applied to the mining and utilities industries, and self-produced
agricultural output is exempt from the VAT. One of the major VAT reforms in China took place
during our sample period of 2007­2011. The VAT reform of 2009 changed China's production-
based VAT to a consumption-based VAT. Before 2009, the input VAT of fixed investment was
not allowed to be deducted from the output VAT. Since 2009, the VAT on investment in fixed
assets can be deducted from the output VAT base.
        Consider now the excise tax, which is also one of the consumption taxes but is levied on a small
group of intermediate and consumption goods, such as oil and gasoline, automobiles, tobacco,
alcohol, and a few other "luxury" goods to adjust consumer behaviors. The VAT and excise tax
    3
    Individuals also pay some of these 17 taxes. For example, individual taxpayers need to pay the real estate
tax, vehicle and vessel tax, vehicle purchase tax, stamp tax and deed tax if they engage in taxable activities.


                                                      4
are not mutually exclusive. That is, producers need to pay both the VAT and excise tax if the
goods are taxable under each. The excise tax can be calculated based on price, quantity, or both,
depending on the category of the goods. Excise tax rates have varied considerably over time.
For instance, in 2008, China raised the per-unit excise tax on refined oil and large displacement
vehicles and lowered the excise tax on small displacement vehicles. In 2009, China added a 5%
excise tax at the wholesale stage of tobacco. In addition, the input excise tax from purchases
cannot be deducted from excise tax liabilities, which is another feature that is different from the
VAT.
       The third largest consumption tax in China is the business tax, which is the counterpart
of the VAT on services and is levied on gross business receipts with no deductions of input
tax credits. Specifically, enterprises pay business tax on the gross business revenue from the
provision of services, the transfer of intangible assets, and the sale or leasing of real estate. The
business tax rate is 3% or 5% depending on the industries of service provision. The 3% business
tax is levied on business revenue in the construction, transportation, postal, telecommunication,
and culture and sports industries. The 5% business tax is applied to business revenue from
most other services industries.4 Due to limited enforcement and asymmetric information, the
business tax was a more reliable tax instrument than the VAT on services, as it was harder to
evaluate inputs in service industries and the business tax was levied on a broader tax base. As
technology progresses, the tax authority has been able to collect more firm information, which
was a foundation of the reform of replacing the business tax with the VAT starting in 2012.
       The CIT has also seen a number of reforms in recent years. Before 2008, the CIT followed
a dual-track system in which domestic enterprises paid a 33% CIT rate and foreign-invested
enterprises (FIEs) paid a preferential CIT rate of either 15% or 24% (The National People's
Congress, 1991). FIEs also enjoyed various preferential tax credits.5 In 2008, the CIT rate was
consolidated to a common rate of 25% for both domestic enterprises and FIEs. FIEs that paid
15% before 2008 were allowed to pay 18%, 20%, 22% and 24% transition rates in the following
four years thereafter and were then subject to the common 25% CIT rate from 2012.6
       Table 1 shows the breakdown of China's tax revenue in 2011.7 The total tax revenue from
business taxes accounts for over 93% of tax revenue in 2011. The value-added tax, corporate
   4
     The entertainment industry is subject to different business tax rates varying from 5% to 20%.
   5
     For example, the "2-year Free and 3-year Half" policy waives CIT liability for the first two years and cuts
CIT liability in half for the next three years for foreign-invested production enterprises from their first year of
making a positive accounting profit.
   6
     In addition, since 2006, China has unified several other taxes for domestic and foreign-invested enterprises.
These taxes include the vehicle and vessel tax, urban land use tax, farmland occupation tax, real estate tax,
resources tax, and city maintenance and construction tax.
   7
     Contributions to social security from employers and employees are not a formal tax in China and are therefore
excluded from the tax revenue calculations.



                                                        5
income tax, business tax and excise tax together contributed more than 80% of the total tax
revenue of China in 2011, as shown in the first column of Table 1.
       In addition to the 17 business taxes above, enterprises established in China also have to make
contributions to social security funds, similar to the payroll tax system in the United States.8


2.2       Administrative Tax Data
Our main data come from an administrative tax survey collected by the State Taxation Admin-
istration (STA) of China from 2007­2011. The STA is the Chinese counterpart of the IRS and
is responsible for tax collection and tax auditing. In these data, we have access to firm-level
records of detailed tax payment breakdowns for the above 17 business taxes, with details on the
specific annual tax bases, tax payable, tax deductions and exemptions, tax credits and actual
tax payment information for the VAT, CIT, business tax, and excise tax. In addition to tax
payments, the data also include payment information on contributions to social security funds
as well as charges and fees and financial statement information used in tax-related calculations.
       In the data cleaning procedure, we leave out observations that pertain to either tax authority
institutions or officials and observations classified under the public administration and social
organization or international organization categories. We end up with an enterprise-only sample
that accounts for over 99.6% of the raw data and has 3,564,691 observations in total. Our data
sample size expanded from 632,998 firms per year in 2007 to more than 740,000 firms per year
from 2008 to 2010, while there is a 7% drop (representing about 55,000 firms) in the total number
of observations in 2011 due to sample shrinkage in 4 provinces (Beijing, Hebei Province, Henan
Province and Hunan Province).9 The shrinkage in the number of observations for 2011 mainly
results from small firms with asset values of less than 20 million RMB.
       In Column (2) of Table 1, we break down the total tax payment in 2011 by adding up actual
tax payments by enterprises in the tax survey data. The sum of total tax payments in 2011 from
the tax survey data is 6.7 trillion RMB, which is around 75% of the total tax revenue reported
by the government.10 As can be seen from the comparison with aggregate tax revenue data, our
data match the aggregate tax revenue breakdown quite well. This result suggests that our data
are a representative sample with which to study business taxation in China.
   8
      Specifically, the contribution of enterprise for social security, health care, unemployment, work injuries and
childbirth insurance varies from 0.6% to 20% of the total wage bill.
    9
      The tax survey sample is not random. There is a core group and a sampling group within the survey. Firms in
the core group are main tax revenue payers in terms of VAT or business tax and are more likely to be repeatedly
surveyed, while firms in the sampling group are picked by the local tax authority each year(Ministry of Finance
and State Taxation Administration, 2008).
   10
      The total tax payment adds up to 7.6 trillion RMB, which is more than 85% of the total tax revenue in 2011,
if the paid VAT, CIT, business tax and excise tax amounts are replaced with amounts payable.



                                                         6
   As shown in Table 2, we reclassify the 18 industry groups into 10 groups according to the
meaningful differences in how they are treated by the tax code. Table 3 and Table 4 report sum-
mary statistics for firms in each industry and each ownership structure, respectively. Enterprises
in the first 5 groups are mainly subject to the VAT, which is levied on the value added during
production and distribution of goods. Specifically, in Group 1, self-produced agricultural prod-
ucts are exempt from VAT, and crops and agriculture machines are subject to a 13% statutory
VAT rate. In Group 2, the mining, quarrying and oil and gas extraction industry is subject to
a 13% statutory VAT rate and the resources tax. In Group 3, the statutory VAT rate for pro-
duction, assembly and processing activities is 17%. In addition, production of specific products
such as fireworks, alcohol, makeup, tobacco, automobiles, and petroleum gasoline are subject to
excise tax. In Group 4, the statutory VAT rate in the utilities and energy industry is 13%. The
wholesale and retail industry pays a 17% statutory VAT rate in Group 5, and certain products
(such as tobacco and gold and silver jewelry) are subject to excise tax. Starting from Group
6, activities in these industries are mainly subject to the business tax, which is levied on gross
business receipts. The statutory rate of the business tax in the construction industry is 3% in
Group 6, while the finance and insurance industry is subject to a 5% statutory business tax in
Group 7. The real estate industry in Group 8 is subject to a 5% statutory business tax and
various taxes such as the land appreciation tax, urban land use tax, real estate tax, farmland
occupation tax, stamp tax and deed tax. In Group 9, the transportation, postal and telecommu-
nication industries are subject to a 5% statutory business tax rate. Finally, in the last group, all
other service industries are in general subject to either a 3% or 5% statutory business tax rate.
   Summary statistics by industry and ownership structure are displayed in Table 3 and Table
4, respectively.

2.2.1   Industry

In Table 3, we summarize the overall importance of each sector. As shown in Panel A, firms in the
manufacturing and in the wholesale and retail industries account for over 60% of the firms in our
sample. The utilities, finance and insurance, and transportation, postal and telecommunication
industries have the highest average business revenue per enterprise in the sample, as shown in
Panel B. Although the average business revenue is small, the manufacturing and wholesale and
retail industries represent 36.1% and 29.6% of the total business revenue, respectively. Next, as
shown in Panel C, the finance and insurance and utilities and energy industries have the largest
average value of assets, and the finance and insurance industry share represents more than 50%
of the total value of assets. In terms of employment, the utilities, mining, quarrying, and oil
and gas extraction, and transportation, postal and telecommunication industries have the largest


                                                 7
average employment across the years, as shown in Panel D. However, the manufacturing industry
represents over 50% of total employment across all industries.

2.2.2    Ownership Structure

In our sample, we reclassified enterprises into one of three ownership structure categories--state-
owned enterprises (SOEs), FIEs or private enterprises--according to their Taxpayer Registration
and Affiliation Codes. SOEs include state-owned non-corporate enterprises, shareholding cor-
porations that are solely funded by the state, and state-owned joint ventures. Shareholding
companies that are affiliated with a central, province-level or city-level government at any point
during our sample period are also classified as SOEs. Enterprises with state-owned assets have
faced relatively competitive product prices in non-regulated industries since the late 1990s, but
they still have an advantageous status in markets for inputs such as land and capital. FIEs in-
clude all enterprises that receive equity funds from foreign investors, including those from Hong
Kong, Macau, or Taiwan. Compared to domestic enterprises, FIEs generally enjoyed preferential
tax treatment before 2008. Private corporations, collective-owned enterprises, sole proprietor-
ships, non-SOE shareholding corporations and other enterprises are classified into the private
group.
   Table 4 displays the number of observations and summary statistics on business revenue,
assets and employment in each ownership structure group. This table drops firms in Beijing,
Henan Province, Hebei Province and Hunan Province to alleviate the impact of sample shrinkage
in 2011. As shown in Table 4 Panel A, about 80% of enterprises in the tax survey data are private
enterprises. About 13% (10% in the full sample) of enterprises are FIEs, and less than 10% are
SOEs. In addition, the number of SOEs generally remained stable during our sample period,
while the number of FIEs and private enterprises expanded from 2007 to 2011. Panel B shows
that the average business revenue size of SOEs and FIEs is more than three times that of private
enterprises, and SOEs and FIEs account for 32.2% and 22.5%, respectively, of total business
revenue in the full sample. In addition, SOEs have the highest average value of assets and
represent approximately 60% of total assets on average across the years in the full sample, as
shown in Panel C. In terms of employment, the average employment sizes of SOEs and FIEs are
approximately three times that of private enterprises, and SOEs and FIEs account for 27.9% and
23.8% of total employment, respectively. The significant role of SOEs can be traced back to the
SOE reform started in the late 20th century, which was focused on "grasping the big, and letting
go of the small"(Hsieh and Song, 2015). As a result, SOEs are concentrated in monopoly and
upstream industries such as finance, energy and telecommunications (Li, Liu and Wang, 2015).




                                                8
2.3       Tax Payment
In this section, we look at the tax payment structure within each industry. Tax payment is
defined as the sum of all VAT, excise tax, business tax, and CIT payable amounts plus local taxes,
VAT and excise tax on imported goods, duties, and social security funds contributions, excluding
personal income tax, withholding excise tax, and refunded VAT and excise tax on exports, among
all enterprises within the same industry classification group. Due to data availability, in our tax
calculations, we used the realized tax payment of taxes other than VAT, business tax, excise tax
and CIT, instead of the tax obligation.
      The tax structure of the total tax payment across industries is shown in Figure 1. As can
be seen from the figure, the VAT is the major tax type among the agriculture, mining, manu-
facturing, wholesale and retail, and utilities industries, while the business tax is the major tax
among the construction and other service industries, which is consistent with the tax codes. The
corporate income tax is in general the second largest tax payment category in all industries.
Within the manufacturing industry, the excise tax represents a large share of the total payment.
In addition, the VAT and excise tax on imported goods take up a substantial share of total pay-
ments in agriculture, manufacturing and wholesale and retail industries. Noticeably, payments
to social security funds compose a non-negligible share of enterprises' payment to the government
in most industries. The tax payment structure of each industry group remains relatively stable
over the sample period.
      Figure 2 displays the breakdown of the tax payment by industry in the pooling sample from
2008 to 2011. More than 40% of the total tax payment and VAT amounts and about one-fourth
of the CIT amount are paid by the manufacturing industry, followed by the wholesale and retail
trade industry. The finance and insurance industry contributes one-quarter of the CIT liability.
Moreover, the real estate, construction and finance and insurance industries are the main payers
of the business tax. The breakdown of the tax payment by industry remains relatively stable
across the whole sample period.11


3       Development Stages as Drivers of Tax Structures
This section conducts a cross-country comparison of the sources of government revenue, follow-
ing Gordon and Li (2009). We use data from the IMF's Government Finance Statistics and
International Finance Statistics. Table 5 compares the sources of government revenue among 81
countries and regions with different levels of GDP per capita. We group countries and regions
into one of three categories--a low-income and lower-middle-income group, an upper-middle-
 11
      In Appendix A1, we also break down the tax payment by ownership structure and region.


                                                      9
income group, and a high-income group--according to income thresholds from the World Bank's
2011 World Development Indicators. Table 5 shows that high-income countries and regions,
which have a GDP per capita higher than $12,275 in 2011, have a higher tax revenue share of
GDP and a higher share of government revenue from social contributions than those of their
low- and middle-income counterparts. The sources of government revenue in China align well
with the average sources for the group of upper-middle-income countries. Specifically, tax rev-
enue as a fraction of GDP in China is about three-quarters of that of high-income countries and
regions. Social security contributions as a fraction of GDP in China are about two-thirds of the
average level in high-income countries and regions. The difference in the government revenue
share of GDP could result from differences in the capacity of the tax authorities or in the social
preferences over public and private consumption.
      Table 6 shows the sources of tax revenue among countries of different income levels. Among
low- and middle-income countries and regions, the main sources of government revenue are
taxes on goods and services and income taxes from corporations. Specifically, over 66% of the
tax revenue comes from taxes on goods and service, and 73.5% of income tax revenue comes
from taxes on corporations in China. By comparison, these fractions in the United States are
22.6% and 15.9%, respectively. Anecdotal evidence shows that firms have incentives to relabel
wages as expenses to undercut their payroll tax liability. Specifically, employee welfare programs
can be implemented through expenditure reimbursement, which would be accounted for as an
administrative cost instead of employee welfare and bonus expense. To deal with the relabeling
issue, the tax authority in China also sets an expenditure cap on itemized expenses. Nevertheless,
the relabeling phenomena can partially explain the low share of personal income tax in income
taxes in China. In addition, taxes on international trade are higher as a fraction of tax revenue
among low- and middle-income countries and regions than among high-income countries and
regions. However, the fraction of taxes on international trade in China is less than the average
level in upper-middle-income countries and regions. The reliance of tax revenue on taxes on goods
and services in China might reflect the enforcement capability of the Chinese tax authority.
      We next break down the components of taxes on goods and services in Table 7. As can be
seen, the value-added tax represents about half of the amount of taxes on goods and services,
followed by excise taxes. The second largest goods and services tax in China is the sales tax
(business tax in the tax system). In contrast, there is no value-added tax in the United States,
and about half of taxes on goods and services come from sales tax. Most OECD countries have
only VAT or its equivalent as the major tax applied on general goods and services, in addition
to excise taxes on specific goods and services (OECD, 2012).12
 12
      Canada has a 5% goods and services tax at the federal level and a 7% retail sales tax in some provinces



                                                        10
   Figure 3 displays scatter plots of sources of government revenue against nominal GDP per
capita in 2011. As seen in Panel A, the size of tax revenue in China as a fraction of GDP is at
the average level for the upper-middle-income group. Note that the United States is below the
average level in the high-income group. Next, Panel B shows that tax revenue in China relies
heavily on taxes on goods and services, which is the opposite of the trend in the United States.
In terms of taxes on corporations, as a fraction of total tax revenue, the size of CIT in China is
in line with that in other upper-middle-income countries and regions. However, it is very high
as a fraction of overall income taxes, as shown in Panels C and D. This pattern reflects the lack
of capacity of Chinese tax authorities to enforce individual income taxes. In contrast, the size of
taxes on corporations as a fraction of either tax revenue or income tax is smaller in the United
States than in other countries and regions in the high-income group and in China.
   Could the differences in the tax revenue share of GDP among countries come from differences
in statutory rates? Table 8 displays the maximum statutory rates of corporate income tax,
personal income tax and indirect taxes in 2011. As we can see, low- and middle-income countries
and high-income countries share very similar maximum statutory corporate income tax rates
(21.8% versus 24.0%) and indirect tax rates (15.5% versus 16.8%), while the average maximum
statutory personal income tax rate among low- and middle-income countries and regions is less
than two-thirds that of high-income countries and regions. Specifically, China has statutory CIT
and VAT rates that are close to the average levels, while the maximum CIT rate is 25% and is
above that in most low- and middle-income countries and regions. In contrast, the combined
federal and state CIT in the United States is approximately 40%, which is one of the highest
among high-income countries and regions, but there is no uniform national VAT. Given the
similarity in the maximum statutory rates of corporate income taxes and indirect taxes, the
difference in the share of government revenue is more likely driven by the tax authority's tax
collection capacity and less by tastes for redistribution.
   Finally, we add up the tax payable or paid amounts of all observations for 2011, calculate the
tax shares and compare them with the aggregate statistics in Table 5 to Table 7. The results
are shown in Appendix A2 Table A1. The detailed breakdown of tax revenue by income taxes,
taxes on goods and services and taxes on international trade and the tax structure within goods
and services taxes align well with the aggregate statistics above. In sum, similar conclusions to
those in the cross-country comparison above hold here as well.




                                                11
4     Understanding Unequal Burdens from Business Taxa-
      tion
The previous sections show that China's stage of development may partly explain its tax mix.
This mix features different taxes and tax rates that may encourage or discourage economic
activity in different sectors. Importantly, China has a strong reliance on revenue from corporate
income taxes. In this section, we delve into the details of the three main business taxes in China
(CIT, VAT, and business tax). We first characterize the average rates and dispersion in rates
across firms. Based on these results, we further investigate the sources of dispersion in the CIT
and study whether these differences are major factors in the misallocation measures that are
commonly studied in the literature (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow, 2009).


4.1    Dispersion in Effective Tax Rates
We first show the distribution of effective CIT, VAT and business tax rates in 2008 and 2011.
The effective tax rates are defined as tax payable over the corresponding tax base. Specifically,
the effective VAT rate is defined as VAT payable over the VAT base. The effective business tax
rate is the ratio between business tax payable and the business tax taxable revenue base. The
effective CIT rates are defined as CIT payable over enterprise profit after tax adjustment. All
calculations are limited to observations with a positive tax base. Finally, the effective VAT and
business tax rates are winsorized at the 1% level, while the effective CIT rates are winsorized at
the 5% level.
    The distributions of effective VAT and business tax rates are shown in Panels A and B,
respectively, in Figure 4. The effective VAT and business tax rates are heavily concentrated
around the corresponding statutory rates. As shown in Panel C, the distribution of the effective
CIT rate is more dispersed than that of the statutory rate. Next, we look in detail at the effective
CIT rates for one year. As shown in Figure 5 Panel A, around 40% of enterprises in 2011 had
non-positive profits after tax adjustment, which implies no CIT liability. After omitting these
enterprises, we find that the majority of the effective CIT rates are concentrated around 25%,
the statutory rate, while the rates of small groups of enterprises concentrate around 15% and
20%, as shown in 5 Panel B. The 15% and 20% CIT rates reflect the preferential treatment of
high-tech companies and small firms, as explained in further detail in the next section.
    Since the effective CIT is the only tax that deviates considerably from the statutory rate, we
focus solely on this tax in the following sections.




                                                 12
4.2       The Role of Loss Carry-forwards and Tax Credits
We first describe two sets of policies that can impact effective tax rates: loss carry-forwards and
tax credits.
       After tax adjustment, a preliminary CIT payable is calculated by multiplying the statutory
CIT rate and the adjusted profits after deducting loss carry-forwards from prior years.13 Sub-
tracting various tax credits from the preliminary CIT payable gives the actual CIT liability. In
our 2008­2011 sample, 9% of firms have a positive balance of loss carry-forwards.
       Among the different tax credits, there are four main tax credit programs that allow deduc-
tions from CIT liability. The first tax credit is for "enterprises-in-transition." Tax credits for
production FIEs and tax credits for enterprises participating in Western Development Programs
are major sub-categories of these enterprise-in-transition tax credits.14 Specifically, before 2008,
qualified FIEs established in open areas and involved in eligible industries could enjoy a 15%
or 24% (or "2-year Free and 3-year Half"15 ) preferential CIT rates. Enterprises that operate in
eligible industries in the western region of China can claim Western Development tax credits
(State Taxation Administration, 2002). As mentioned in Section 2, FIEs that were taxed at the
15% CIT rate prior to 2008 were taxed at 18% in 2008, 20% in 2009, 22% in 2010, 24% in 2011
and 25% from 2012. Enterprises that were taxed at the 24% CIT rate prior to 2008 were taxed
at 25% from 2008(The State Council, 2008a). As can be seen in Figure 4C, the density of firms
that had effective tax rates between 15% and 20% in 2008 flattened in 2011, which reflects the
declining number of firms claiming in-transition tax credits. About 2.5% of all enterprises in
the sample claimed the transition tax credit, and the average16 size of the claimed transition tax
credit17 is 2.3 million RMB, which is about 42% of the preliminary CIT payable.18
       The second tax credit is for enterprises located in minority autonomous areas. Local gov-
ernments can decide to waive or deduct the CIT liability to be paid into local fiscal revenue
for enterprises located in national autonomous area(State Taxation Administration, 2018). Only
0.06% of the enterprises in our sample have claimed these minority tax credits. The average size
of minority tax credit claims is 1.6 million RMB, which accounts for 38% of the preliminary CIT
payable of the eligible firms.19
  13
     According to the corporate income tax code (The National People's Congress, 2007), losses incurred by an
enterprise in previous tax years (up to five years) are allowed to be carried forward to the following year and to
be made up with the income of the subsequent year.
  14
     According to a detailed breakdown of data (available only for 2009) on enterprise-in-transition tax credits by
policy.
  15
     This policy waives an enterprise's entire CIT liability for the first two years after it begins to turn a profit
and half of its CIT liability for the next three years thereafter.
  16
     The sample average from 2009 to 2011.
  17
     The transition tax credits are winsorized at the 1% level for positive credit observations only.
  18
     Preliminary CIT payable is winsorized at the 1% level.
  19
     The minority tax credits are winsorized at the 1% level for positive credit observations only.


                                                         13
       The third tax credit is for high-tech enterprises,20 who pay CIT at a preferential rate of
15% (The National People's Congress, 2007). About 1.1% of the enterprises in our sample have
claimed the high-tech tax credits. The average size of the claimed high-tech tax credits is around
4 million RMB, accounting for 47% of the preliminary CIT payable of the eligible firms.21 These
firms are reflected in the density around 15% in 2008 and 2011 in Figure 4C.
       The fourth tax credit is for small firms. According to the corporate income tax code in 2008,
small firms paid CIT at a preferential rate of 20% (The State Council, 2008b).22 About 4.2% of
the enterprises in our sample have claimed the small-firm tax credit. The average size of these
credits is around 4 thousand RMB, accounting for 27% of the preliminary CIT payable of the
eligible firms. Groups of small firms are clustered around the 20% effective CIT rate in Figure
4C.


4.3       What Explains the Differences in Effective CIT Rates?
To see what explains the level differences in effective CIT rates across firms, we regress the ef-
fective CIT rates on industry dummies, ownership dummies, region dummies; binary indicators
for export, claiming of tax credits and use of loss carry-forwards; and standardized asset, em-
ployment and R&D values.23 The results are shown in Table 9. The baseline group is private
enterprises in agriculture, fishing and forestry in the northeast of China.
       As can be seen from Table 9, there are pronounced level differences in the effective CIT
rates across industries, regions, and ownership types. Specifically, the effective CIT rates in
the real estate, leasing and business services, professional, scientific and technical services, min-
ing, manufacturing, construction and transportation and warehousing industries are on average
                   4
approximately      3
                       times the baseline level, while the effective CIT rates in the information and
art, entertainment and recreation industries are roughly 1.1 times the baseline level. Next, the
effective CIT rates on SOEs and FIEs are in general 0.75 and 1.35 percentage points lower than
those in the baseline groups. In addition, we find that the effective CIT rates among enterprises
in the east are on average 0.72 percentage points (5% on a relative scale) higher than those at
the baseline level, while those in the west are on average 0.73 percentage points (5% on a relative
scale) lower than the baseline rates.
  20
     The scope of eligibility for high-tech companies can be found in Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Science and
Technology and State Taxation Administration (2008).
  21
     The minority tax credits are winsorized at the 1% level for positive credit observations only.
  22
     Manufacturing firms with less than 300 thousand RMB CIT payable, fewer than 100 employees, and less than
30 million RMB in assets or other firms with less than 300 thousand RMB CIT payable, fewer than 80 employees,
and less than 10 million RM in assets are small firms.
  23
     The means (standard deviations) for assets, employment and R&D are 131,449,400 RMB, 126 people and
203,700 RMB (452,602,500 RMB, 271 people and 1,032,700 RMB), respectively.



                                                       14
       Second, we explore how much government tax policies could influence the effective CIT rate
level. As shown in Table 9, whether an enterprise has loss carry-forwards from prior years has a
great impact on the effective CIT rates. For example, the predicted effective CIT rate for a private
manufacturing enterprise located in the east of China and with an average level of assets, employ-
ment and R&D declines from 21.08% (15.85%+4.51%+0.72%) to 3.50% (15.85%+4.51%+0.72%-
17.58%) if the enterprise has loss carry-forwards from prior years. In addition, the various tax
credit programs can reduce the effective CIT rates by an amount varying from 4.42 to 7.31
percentage points, or from 25% to 50% of the baseline value.
       To understand what drives the dispersion in effective CIT rates, we conduct a variance decom-
position analysis. The dependent variable is the effective CIT rate, and the explanatory variables
include indicators for industry, ownership structure, and region as well as firm characteristics such
as assets, R&D, and indicators for whether the enterprise exports, has loss carry-forwards from
prior years, or claims a transition tax credit, high-tech tax credit, small-firm tax credit or mi-
nority region tax credit; we also include year fixed effects. Asset, employment and R&D are
standardized values.
       Figure 6 shows the variance decomposition of effective CIT rates defined based on the adjusted
profit base using the 2008­2011 pooling sample. As seen in Panel A, more than half of the total
variation can be explained by the selected explanatory variables. Out of the model-explained
variation, over 80% of the R2 is explained by loss carry-forwards. Panel (B) further breaks
down the explanatory share of the R2 by factors other than loss carry-forwards. Among these
other explanatory factors, the enterprise-in-transition, high-tech and small-firm tax credits are
all main factors that explain the variation in effective CIT rates. This indicates that government
tax policies play an important role even within industry-region-ownership categories. In addition,
industry, ownership structure, region and R&D expenses can also partially explain the variation
in effective CIT rates.24


4.4       Effective CIT Rates and Returns to Production Factors
The dispersion in effective tax rates raises the possibility that the CIT may be a source of factor
misallocation across firms. We explore this possibility by investigating whether the effective CIT
rates could explain differences in enterprises' measured returns to production factors.
       To do so, we follow the setup in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), where firms with heterogeneous
  24
    According to the corporate income tax code (The National People's Congress, 2007), if R&D expenses have
been included in the current profits and losses and no intangible assets are formed, firms are allowed to directly
deduct 50% of the actual R&D expenses incurred from their taxable income for the current year. If R&D expenses
form intangible assets, they are amortized before tax at 150% of the cost of the intangible assets. Unless otherwise
provided for by law, the amortization period is not less than 10 years.



                                                        15
productivity engage in monopolistic competition. In this setup, the marginal revenue product of
capital (MRPK) and labor (MRPL) are given by:

                                               - 1 Psi Ysi      1
                            M RP Lsi = (1 - s )            =w                                     (1)
                                                      Lsi     1-
                                          - 1 Psi Ysi      1
                            M RP Ksi = s              =R      ,                                   (2)
                                               Ksi        1-

where s is the capital share in the Cobb-Douglas production technology for good i in sector s and
 is the downward-sloping demand elasticity. Psi and Ysi are the price and output, respectively,
for good i in sector s. Therefore, Psi Ysi is the revenue of good i in sector s. w is the market price
of labor, and it is assumed that all firms face the same wage. R is the rental rate for capital,
and  is the corporate income tax rate.
   By taking logs on both sides of Equations 1 and 2 and rearranging terms, we can obtain the
elasticity of returns to production factors with respect to the return after corporate income tax.

                                                Psi Ysi
                                         log    wLsi
                                                          = -1                                    (3)
                                          log(1 -  )
                                                Psi Ysi
                                         log    RKsi
                                                          = -1                                    (4)
                                          log(1 -  )

The elasticity is a constant -1, which implies that the marginal revenue product of either capital
or labor increases (decreases) on a one-for-one percentage basis when the return after corporate
income tax decreases.
   Following the results above, we construct the returns to capital and labor by dividing business
income over assets and total wage expenses, respectively. Then we regress the log returns to
capital and labor on ln(1 -  ), where  is the effective CIT rate, using the following specification:

                    log(M RPc,i,t ) =  +  log(1 - c,i,t ) + c + i + t + c,i,t ,                   (5)

where M P Rc,i,t is the marginal revenue product of either capital or labor of firm c in industry
i and year t, c,i,t is the effective CIT rate, c is the firm effect, i is the industry effect, and
t is the year effect. The sample for these regressions is the set of firms that have non-negative
after-adjustment profits in the current year.  is the parameter of interest and captures the
relation between the marginal revenue products of capital and labor and the after-tax return.
   Table 10 reports the results of these regressions. In Panel A, Column (1) reports the overall
variation in the returns to capital that can be explained by the effective after-CIT return with
year fixed effects. The coefficient is -0.584, which is about half of the theoretical value. Although


                                                  16
the coefficient of the effective after-CIT rates is statistically significant and has the expected
sign, the adjusted R2 of this model is low (0.005). The conclusion holds in Column (2) with
industry fixed effects. Column (3) explores the variation of returns to capital within firms that
can be explained by effective after-CIT rates. The coefficient of effective after-CIT return is
statistically significant, but the magnitude is lowered to -0.136. In addition, the adjusted within-
R2 of this model becomes minimal. Column (4) adds year fixed effects, and the conclusion
remains. In conclusion, (1 - CIT ) has a negative impact on returns to capital, although the
power in explaining the total variance of returns to capital is limited, and the dispersion can be
mostly attributed to firm heterogeneity.
   Panel (B) shows the results of regressing log returns to labor on the log effective after-CIT
returns. Column (1) reports the estimated elasticity of returns to labor with respect to effective
after-CIT rates with year fixed effects. The coefficient of effective after-CIT rates is -0.899,
which is statistically significant and is close the theoretical value. However, the adjusted R2
of this model is only 0.006. Column (2) explores the variation within industries that could
be explained by effective after-CIT rates. The estimated elasticity is statistically significant,
but the magnitude is lowered to -0.613, and the adjusted within-R2 of this model is moderate
(0.004). Column (3) investigates the within-firm variation of returns to labor. The coefficient of
effective after-CIT rates is significant, but the magnitude is further reduced to -0.161, and the
adjusted within-R2 of this model is minimal. In sum, the estimated elasticity of returns to labor
with respect to corporate income tax policy is significant, but compared to firm and industry
heterogeneity, the corporate income tax level explains little of the dispersion of returns to labor.
   As firms could use loss carry-forwards from previous years to reduce their CIT liability in the
current year, we might worry that the effective after-CIT return could incorporate information
about firm productivity and be correlated with the error term. Thus, instead of using the
current effective after-CIT return, we use the one-period-ahead effective after-CIT return as the
explanatory variable in the fixed effects models. The results are reported in Table 11.
   As shown in Table 11 Columns (1) and (2) in both panels, before we add firm fixed effects, the
estimated elasticities of returns to capital and labor are statistically significant, and compared to
that of the estimates in Table 10, the magnitude is slightly reduced. The main difference is that
the estimated elasticities either have opposite signs to the ones predicted by theory or become
insignificant after we add firm fixed effects, as shown in Columns (3) and (4) in both panels.
However, the explained variation in returns to production factors by effective after-CIT returns
is modest in all specifications.
   On the whole, the estimated elasticity of returns to production factors with respect to after-
CIT returns varies from 14% to 89% of the theoretical values. However, compared to the ex-
planatory power of industry and firm heterogeneity, that of effective CIT rates with regard to

                                                 17
the dispersion in returns to production factors is quite limited. As a robustness check, we con-
duct regressions of returns to production factors on predicted effective CIT rates from the linear
regression specification in Table 9 and use alternative definition of returns to production fac-
tors within the manufacturing sample. The results are displayed in Appendix A3, and similar
conclusions hold.
    Finally, we estimate the elasticity  while accounting for time variation in the returns to
production factors within a dynamic panel. We estimate the following specification:

          log(M RPc,i,t ) =  +  log(1 - c,i,t ) +  log(M RPc,i,t-1 ) + c + i + t + c,i,t ,      (6)

where we add the one-period-lag marginal revenue product of capital or labor on the right-hand
side to capture how firm productivity persists over time, and where  measures the degree of
persistence. In this case, we might be worried that the correlation between the lagged returns
to production factors and error terms would violate the exogeneity restriction. As a result, we
adopt the Arellano­Bond method of taking the first difference to eliminate the firm fixed effect
and use further-period-lagged returns to production factors as instrumental variables. We report
the results of this procedure in Table 12.
    As shown in Table 12, the auto-correlation coefficient of returns to capital is 0.170, while
that of returns to labor is 0.103. After we account for time variation, the estimated elasticity
of returns to capital with respect to the effective after-CIT rate is -0.138, and that of returns
to labor is -0.110. These estimated elasticities are statistically significant, but the magnitude is
lower than the estimated results of a fixed effects model in Table 10.


5     Conclusion
This paper presented facts describing the business tax environment in China. While academic
research has focused on manufacturing firms, our detailed tax data show that business tax policies
in other sectors are subject to various forms of taxation that require additional research. With
regard to the view of China as a quickly developing country, we find that China's tax system
mirrors that of other counties at a similar stage of development. Two Chinese characteristics are
an over-reliance on both sales taxes and VAT as well as an under-reliance on personal income
tax as part of general income tax. As a result, it is not surprising that these two areas have been
the focus of active policy reforms in recent years. Finally, we evaluate the possibility that tax
policy is a major contributor to differences in the returns to factors of production across firms.
While a prevalent literature points to government intervention as a source of misallocation, our
data show that corporate income tax policy explains a very small fraction of this dispersion.

                                                18
References
Best, Michael Carlos, Anne Brockmeyer, Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Johannes Spin-
  newijn, and Mazhar Waseem, "Production versus Revenue Efficiency with Limited Tax
  Capacity: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan," Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (6),
  1311 ­ 1355.

Brandt, Loren, Trevor Tombe, and Xiaodong Zhu, "Factor Market Distortions across
  Time, Space and Sectors in China," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16 (1), 39 ­ 58.

Cai, Jing and Ann Harrison, "Industrial Policy in China: Some Unintended Consequences?,"
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2018, pp. 1­36.

Chen, Shawn Xiaoguang, "The Effect of a Fiscal Squeeze on Tax Enforcement: Evidence
  from a Natural Experiment in China," Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 147, 62­76.

Chen, Yuyu, Zongyan He, and Lei Zhang, "The Effect of Investment Tax Incentives:
  Evidence from China's Value-Added Tax Reform," International Tax and Public Finance,
  2018, 25 (4), 913­945.

Chen, Zhao, Xian Jiang, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Su´
                                                  arez Serrato, and Daniel Xu,
  "Tax Policy and Lumpy Investment Behavior: Evidence from China's VAT Reform," Working
  Paper 26336, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2019.

  , Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Su´
                              arez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu, "Notching R&D Invest-
  ment with Corporate Income Tax Cuts in China," Technical Report, mimeo, Duke University
  2019.

Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:
  Production Efficiency," The American Economic Review, 1971, 61 (1), 8­27.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Su´
                                                    arez Serrato, and Owen
  Zidar, "State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation," The Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86
  (1), 333­376.

Fan, Haichao, Yu Liu, Nancy Qian, and Jaya Wen, "The Effects of Computerizing VAT
  Invoices in China," Working Paper 24414, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2018.

Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, "Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
  Possible Explanation," Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7), 855 ­ 866.



                                             19
Gov.cn, "2011 Nian Quanguo Gongong Caizheng Shouru Juesuan biao [National Public Finance
  Revenue Final Accounts, 2011]," 2012. Available at: http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2012-07/11/
  content_2181145.htm (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

Han, Li and James Kai-Sing Kung, "Fiscal Incentives and Policy Choices of Local Govern-
  ments: Evidence from China," Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 116, 89­104.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
  and India*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

  and Zheng Michael Song, "Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: the Transformation of
  the State Sector in China," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2015.

KPMG.org, "Tax Rates Online," 2020.               Available at:   https://home.kpmg/xx/en/
  home/services/tax/tax-tools-and-resources/tax-rates-online.html (Date Accessed:
  September 8, 2020).

Li, Xi, Xuewen Liu, and Yong Wang, "A model of China's State Capitalism," Available at
  SSRN 2061521, 2015.

Liu, Yongzheng and Jie Mao, "How do Tax Incentives Affect Investment and Productivity?
  Firm-Level Evidence from China," Technical Report 3 2019.

Maffini, Giorgia, Jing Xing, and Michael P Devereux, "The Impact of Investment Incen-
  tives: Evidence from UK Corporation Tax Returns," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2016.

Ministry of Finance and State Taxation Administration, "Guowuyuan, Guojia Shuiwu
  Zongju Guanyu Zuohao 2008 Nian Quanguo Shuishou Diaocha Gongzuo De Tongzhi [Notice
  of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation on the 2008 National
  Tax Survey]," 2008. Available at: http://pkulaw.cn/fulltext_form.aspx?Db=chl&Gid=
  0a2df100fdfa8dddbdfb (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

  , Ministry of Science and Technology, and State Taxation Administration, "keji
  Bu, Caizheng Bu, Guojia Shuiwu Zongju Guanyu Yinfa Gaoxin Jishu Qiye Rending Gunli
  Banfa De Tongzhi [Measures about Assessment and Administration of High-tech Enterprises],"
  2008. Available at: http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/aarticle/b/g/200805/20080505533668.
  html (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

Moon, Terry S., "Capital Gains Taxes and Real Corporate Investment," Job Market Paper,
  Princeton University, 2019.

                                             20
OECD, Consumption Tax Trends 2012 2012.

Ohrn, Eric, "The Effect of Corporate Taxation on Investment and Financial Policy: Evidence
  from the DPAD," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2018, 10 (2), 272­301.

  , "The Effect of Tax Incentives on U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from State Accelerated
  Depreciation Policies," Journal of Public Economics, 2019, 180, 104084.

Rao, Nirupama, "Do Tax credits Stimulate R&D Spending? The Effect of the R&D Tax Credit
  in Its First Decade," Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 140, 1­12.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, "Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
  with Heterogeneous Plants," Review of Economic Dynamics, October 2008, 11 (4), 707­720.

State Taxation Administration, "Guanyu Luoshi Xibu Dakaifa Youguan Shuishou
  Zhengce Juti Shishi Yijian De Tongzhi [Notice on Implementing the Specific Implemen-
  tation Details on Tax Policies Concerning the Western Development]," 2002.              Avail-
  able at:     http://www.chinatax.gov.cn/chinatax/n810341/n810765/n812203/200203/
  c1209328/content.html (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

  , "Minzu Zizhi Difang Qiye Jianzheng Huozhe Mianzheng Shuyu Difang Fenxiang De Qite
  Suodeshui [Reduction or Exemption of Local Share of Corporate Income Tax for Enter-
  prises in Minority Autonomous Areas]," 2018. Available at: http://www.chinatax.gov.
  cn/chinatax/n810219/n810744/n3439465/n3439490/n3439608/c3453666/content.html
  (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

The National People's Congress, "Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo Waishang Touzi Qite He
  Waiguo Qiye Suodeshui Fa [Corporate Income Tax Code of the People's Republic of China on
  Foreign-invested Enterprises and Foreign Enterprises]," 1991. Available at: http://www.npc.
  gov.cn/wxzl/wxzl/2000-12/05/content_4550.htm (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).

  , "Zhonghua Renmin Gonghe Guo Qiye Suodeshui Fa [Corporate Income Tax Code]," 2007.
  Available at: http://www.gov.cn/flfg/2007-03/19/content_554243.htm (Date Accessed:
  September 8, 2020).

The State Council, "Guowuyuan Guanyu Shishi Qiye Suodeshui Guodu Youhui Zhengce De
  Tongzhi [State Council's Notice of Implementing Transitional Preferential Policies of Corporate
  Income Tax]," 2008. Available at: http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2008/content_
  871686.htm (Date Accessed: September 8, 2020).



                                               21
  , "Zhonghua Renmin Gonghe Guo Qiye Suodeshui Fa Shishi Tiaoli [Corporate Income Tax
  Code Implementing Regulations]," 2008.      Available at: http://www.chinatax.gov.cn/
  n810341/n810765/n812176/n812748/c1193046/content.html (Date Accessed: September
  8, 2020).

Wei, Shang-Jin, Zhuan Xie, and Xiaobo Zhang, "From "Made in China" to "Innovated
  in China": Necessity, Prospect, and Challenges," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31
  (1), 49­70.

Yagan, Danny, "Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend
  Tax Cut," The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3531­3563.

Zwick, Eric and James Mahon, "Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior," The
  American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (1), 217­248.




                                             22
Tables and Figures

                Table 1: Breakdown of Business Taxes Revenue, 2011

                        Type of Tax                      Tax Revenuea Tax Surveyb
       Total Tax Revenue                                        100 %          100 %

       Domestic Value Added Tax (VAT)                           27.0%           29.5%
       Corporate Income Tax                                     18.7%           19.1%
       Business Tax                                             15.2%           14.2%
       VAT and Excise Tax on Import                             15.1%           15.4%
       Domestic Excise Tax                                        7.7%          10.9%
                              c
       Personal Income Tax                                        6.7%           5.2%
       City Maintenance and Construction Tax                      3.1%           3.4%
       Deed Tax                                                   3.1%           0.4%
       Tariff                                                     2.9%           2.8%
       Land Appreciation Tax                                      2.3%           0.6%
       Vehicle and Vessel Tax                                     0.3%           0.3%
       Urban Land Use Tax                                         1.4%           1.0%
       Real Estate Tax                                            1.2%           1.4%
       Farmland Occupation Tax                                    1.2%           0.1%
       Stamp Tax                                                  1.2%           1.0%
       Resources Tax                                              0.7%           0.8%
       Other taxesd                                               2.4%           0.2%

       VAT and Excise Tax Refunded on Exports                   -10.3%          -6.2%
       Notes:      a Calculations are based on 2011 fiscal revenue report from Gov.cn

      (2012).    b All taxes are amounts paid, except for that of CIT, where the prepaid
      CIT amount is used due to data availability. c In tax survey data, personal in-
      come tax only includes reported withholding personal income tax by enterprises
      and paid personal income tax from sole proprietorship, private proprietorship,
      and private partnership enterprises.
      d In tax survey data, this category includes the tobacco tax and vehicle purchase

      tax. On top of these two taxes, government fiscal revenue also includes revenues
      from the tonnage tax and other miscellaneous taxes.




                                             23
                                    Table 2: Industry Classification

 Group                  Industry                                China Industry Classification
    1     Agriculture, Fishing and Forestry       Agriculture, Fishing and Forestry

          Mining, Quarrying,                      Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
    2     and Oil and Gas Extraction

    3     Manufacturing                           Manufacturing

    4     Utilities                               Utilities and Energy

    5     Wholesale and Retail                    Wholesale and Retail Trade

    6     Construction                            Construction

    7     Finance and Insurance                   Finance and Insurance

    8     Real Estate                             Real Estate

                                                  Transportation, Warehousing and Postal Industry
          Transportation, Postal                    - Transportation, Postal Industry
    9     and Telecommunication                   Information - Telecommunications
                                                  Transportation, Warehousing and Postal Industry
                                                    - Warehousing
                                                  Information - Information Service, Software
                                                  Accommodation and Food Services
                                                  Leasing and Business Services
   10     Other                                   Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
                                                  Water, Environment and Public Facilities Management
                                                  Resident Services and Other Services
                                                  Educational Services
                                                  Health Care and Social Assistance
                                                  Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Notes: Eighteen China Industry Classification codes from China's Bureau of Statistics are reclassified based
on the tax code treatment of each industry. Industries that share a similar statutory tax rate for a certain tax
and similar structure of applicable taxes are classified into one group.




                                                   24
                       Table 3: Summary Statistics by Industry

            Industry             2007        2008         2009       2010       2011
(A) Number of Firms
Agriculture                        4,287          7,206     8,100      6,867      6,206
Mining                            16,894         18,130    17,224     18,132     18,192
Manufacturing                    273,455     313,797      308,789    315,358    283,051
Utilities                         11,417         12,737    13,764     13,874     13,463
Wholesale/Retail                 192,020     242,376      239,721    220,184    191,289
Construction                      23,597         26,149    27,404     30,226     30,537
Finance/Insurance                 16,862         18,765    19,886     20,853     22,443
Real Estate                       21,375         25,554    30,467     36,186     37,367
Transport/Postal/Telecom          16,699         18,941    19,796     21,850     24,229
Other                             56,292         66,009    58,738     63,152     64,803
Total                            632,898     749,664      743,889    746,682    691,580

(B) Business Revenue (000's of RMB)
Agriculture                       20,910         20,536    28,046     39,662     60,713
                                  [3,416]    [2,266]       [2,512]    [4,799]    [9,012]
Mining                            60,477         81,946    75,780    100,353    122,805
                                 [11,428]   [14,116]      [11,368]   [16,904]   [21,452]
Manufacturing                     56,261         57,756    61,584     77,256     98,303
                                  [6,617]    [6,643]       [8,137]   [11,492]   [18,153]
Utilities                        156,867     164,069      167,096    193,297    192,898
                                 [18,304]   [18,842]      [17,338]   [21,170]   [20,900]
Wholesale/Retail                  49,247         50,540    59,566     87,956    116,424
                                  [4,447]    [4,873]       [5,503]    [9,141]   [12,484]
Construction                      74,858         89,146   109,913    129,855    148,271
                                 [13,381]   [17,190]      [25,666]   [33,322]   [37,270]
Finance/Insurance                141,684     172,574      175,035    201,662    206,384
                                 [38,286]   [44,278]      [50,000]   [55,291]   [38,036]
Real Estate                       75,065         71,543    94,731    106,496    105,186
                                 [18,471]   [15,754]      [23,000]   [27,961]   [24,090]
Transport/Postal/Telecom          83,089         93,257    96,807    108,486    101,762
                                 [12,791]   [16,057]      [17,550]   [22,954]   [18,634]
                                                                 Continued on next page


                                            25
                       Table 3 ­ continued from previous page
            Industry           2007          2008          2009          2010          2011
Other                          20,820           24,987     42,977        41,660        48,979
                               [1,756]       [2,787]       [6,195]       [7,816]       [7,979]

(C) Assets (000's of RMB)
Agriculture                    32,534           33,164     37,791        57,400        82,747
                               [3,988]       [3,631]       [3,633]       [5,685]       [9,794]
Mining                         97,484       113,487       141,852       161,056       197,510
                              [10,443]      [13,046]      [15,931]      [17,330]      [23,510]
Manufacturing                  66,086           66,178     77,720        92,414       118,672
                               [6,790]       [6,762]       [8,772]      [10,762]      [17,030]
Utilities                     330,224       340,536       355,008       384,058       417,477
                              [55,809]      [53,748]      [52,310]      [53,914]      [64,515]
Wholesale/Retail               32,460           31,564     40,323        54,225        74,779
                               [2,499]       [2,714]       [3,116]       [4,469]       [6,160]
Construction                   95,291       110,514       128,828       146,316       177,961
                              [17,992]      [20,708]      [24,886]      [28,166]      [32,814]
Finance/Insurance           1,131,008      1,196,557     1,220,267     1,256,477     1,177,810
                             [503,674]     [533,294]     [500,587]     [433,214]     [164,035]
Real Estate                   261,100       281,304       340,503       387,119       459,363
                              [82,054]      [90,446]     [107,640]     [127,436]     [162,689]
Transport/Postal/Telecom      186,200       188,780       191,637       194,651       196,527
                              [12,543]      [12,281]       [9,594]      [10,844]      [11,022]
Other                          66,507           76,967    102,025       116,560       137,613
                               [3,314]       [4,546]       [7,264]       [8,515]       [9,632]

(D) Employment
Agriculture                           67            57            61            73            89
                                  [19]            [15]        [15]          [18]          [22]
Mining                            209             206         222           221           221
                                  [66]            [65]        [75]          [65]          [65]
Manufacturing                     148             134         139           149           163
                                  [42]            [38]        [44]          [50]          [60]
Utilities                         238             220         212           209           206
                                                                   Continued on next page


                                           26
                               Table 3 ­ continued from previous page
                 Industry              2007          2008           2009          2010             2011
                                          [99]             [84]        [78]             [71]              [70]
     Wholesale/Retail                         34            30             34            38                43
                                            [9]            [10]        [11]             [11]              [11]
     Construction                         189              181         193              195               193
                                          [40]             [40]        [50]             [49]              [47]
     Finance/Insurance                    146              151         159              167               168
                                          [50]             [49]        [52]             [55]              [50]
     Real Estate                              50            45             48            48                47
                                          [25]             [23]        [24]             [24]              [24]
     Transport/Postal/Telecom             197              193         198              194               181
                                          [55]             [52]        [56]             [58]              [48]
     Other                                    84            86         109              118               121
                                          [20]             [22]        [36]             [40]              [39]

Notes: This table presents summary statistics on the number of firms, business revenue, assets, and em-
ployment by industry from 2007 to 2011. Business revenue, reported in 1,000 RMB, is the revenue from main
business activities and other business activities. Assets, reported in 1,000 RMB, are the end of year assets,
which include both current and non-current assets. Employment is the average number of workers within a
calendar year. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Medians are reported in brackets.




                        Table 4: Summary Statistics by Ownership

                   Ownership               2007           2008      2009         2010           2011
         (A) Number of Observations
         State Owned Enterprise           45,568          43,439    44,033       43,820         47,832
         Foreign Invested Enterprise      55,768          61,276    67,213       80,517         77,923
         Private                         349,334         387,980   406,439      442,453        467,417
         Total                           450,670         492,695   517,685      566,790        593,172

         (B) Business Revenue (000's of RMB)
         State Owned Enterprise          140,729         171,851   185,004      224,937        225,767
                                         [17,503]    [21,966]      [25,474]     [36,200]       [28,280]
         Foreign Invested Enterprise     142,443         149,658   143,260      156,898        172,651
                                         [31,683]    [32,218]      [30,021]     [33,116]       [37,565]
                                                                      Continued on next page

                                                    27
                                Table 4 ­ continued from previous page
                    Ownership               2007            2008      2009       2010       2011
          Private                           43,001          50,008    58,793     72,276     81,691
                                            [5,136]        [6,349]    [8,878]   [11,814]   [12,963]

          (C) Assets (000's of RMB)
          State Owned Enterprise          370,754          435,636   480,958    559,371    577,150
                                          [31,205]     [36,826]      [37,149]   [46,718]   [44,207]
          Foreign Invested Enterprise     179,442          187,693   201,086    202,146    230,712
                                          [35,965]     [35,367]      [36,425]   [34,144]   [40,329]
          Private                           66,684          75,064    89,969    105,118    117,020
                                            [5,117]        [5,711]    [7,530]    [9,183]   [11,008]

          (D) Employment
          State Owned Enterprise               235            237        248        254        246
                                               [65]           [66]       [71]       [75]       [66]
          Foreign Invested Enterprise          265            255        243        233        234
                                             [110]           [103]      [100]       [96]       [97]
          Private                               88             86         90         94         92
                                               [20]           [20]       [24]       [25]       [25]

 Notes: This table presents summary statistics on the number of firms, business revenue, assets, employment
and production by firm ownership structure from 2007 to 2011, excluding observations from Beijing, Henan
Province, Hebei Province and Hunan Province due to sample shrinkage. The "Foreign Invested Enterprise"
category includes enterprises owned by either foreign investors or investors in Hong Kong, Macau or Taiwan.
The "Private" category includes private corporations, collectively owned enterprises, sole proprietorship corpo-
rations and non-SOE shareholding companies. Business revenue, reported in 1,000 RMB, is the revenue from
main business activities and other business activities. Assets, reported in 1,000 RMB, are the end of year as-
sets, which include both current and non-current assets. Employment is the average number of workers within
a calendar year. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Medians are reported in brackets.




                                                      28
                        Table 5: Sources of Government Revenue, 2011

             GDP                 Revenue          Tax                 Social           Grantsb          Otherc
          per capita                            revenue         contributiona
                                (% GDP)       (% revenue)       (% revenue)          (% revenue)    (% revenue)
  $3,975                               23.4             62.4                   7.9            5.1            24.6
 $3,975 - $12,275                      27.6             68.2               14.6               0.5            16.7
 China: mainland ($5,465 )             27.4             72.1               14.7               0.0            13.2
 > $12,275                             36.1             60.4               25.1               0.3            14.6
 United States ($49,882)               29.2             63.0               20.3               0.0            16.7
 Notes: Calculations are based on available data for 2011 from 81 countries and regions from the Gov-
ernment Finance Statistics and International Finance Statistics of the IMF and the World Development
Indicators of the World Bank. The ranges for GDP per capita follow the World Bank 2011 classification of
low-income, lower-middle-income, upper-middle-income and high-income countries and regions. The rev-
enue share is weighted by GDP, and other average calculations are weighted by total government revenue.
a Social contribution includes contributions to social security from employers, employees, and self-employed

and non-employed workers.       b Grants include current and capital transfers from foreign governments or

international organizations. c Other revenue includes but is not limited to property income, capital gains,
fines, penalties and forfeits.



                             Table 6: Breakdown of Tax Revenue, 2011

             GDP                 Income          Corporate             Taxes on goods        Taxes on        Othere
         per capita               taxesa        income taxesb            and servicesc       int'l traded     taxes
                                (% taxes)     (% income taxes)            (% taxes)          (% taxes )     (% taxes)
  $3,975                              41.3                     72.7                   48.9          6.2             3.7
 $3,975 - $12,275                     28.6                     61.7                   60.9          3.4             7.1
 China: mainland ($5,465)             23.8                     73.5                   66.6          2.7             6.8
 > $12,275                            48.6                     25.1                   37.5          2.2          11.6
 United States($49,882)               59.9                     15.9                   22.6          1.1          16.4
 Notes: Calculations are based on available data from 2011 for 81 countries and regions from the Government
Finance Statistics and International Finance Statistics of the IMF and the World Development Indicators of the
World Bank. The ranges for GDP per capita follow the World Bank 2011 classification of low-income, lower-
middle-income, upper-middle-income and high-income countries and regions. Corporate income tax shares are
weighted by income tax revenue, and other average calculations are weighted by total tax revenue.
a Taxes on income, profits and capital gains.   b Taxes payable by corporations and other enterprises.
c Taxes on goods and service include but are not limited to value-added taxes, sales tax, turnover taxes, taxes

on financial and capital transactions, and excise taxes.     d Taxes on international trade include but are not

limited to customs and other import duties and taxes on exports.       e Other taxes include but are not limited

to property taxes and workforce taxes.

                                                   29
        Table 7: Breakdown of Taxes on Goods and Services, 2011

             GDP               Value-added tax       Sales tax    Excise      Othera
         per capita                (% GST)           (% GST)     (% GST)    (% GST)
  $3,975                                    55.6           9.5       20.3         14.6
 $3,975 - $12,275                           48.0          16.1       19.3         16.6
 China: mainland ($5,465)                   43.4          21.4       16.5         18.7
 > $12,275                                  42.4          11.2       20.9         26.4
 United States ($49,882)                       0.0        48.1       23.6         28.3
 Notes: Calculations are based on available data from 2011 for 81 countries and regions
from the Government Finance Statistics and International Finance Statistics of the IMF
and the World Development Indicators of the World Bank. The ranges for GDP per
capita follow the World Bank 2011 classification of low-income, lower-middle-income,
upper-middle-income and high-income countries and regions. Average calculations are
weighted by taxes on goods and services (GSTs).
a Other GSTs include but are not limited to turnover and other general taxes on goods

and services, taxes on financial and capital transactions, and taxes on the use of goods
and on permissions to use goods or perform activities.




                                          30
                                                            Table 8: Statutory Tax Rates, 2011

        Country/Region           Taxesa(% GDP)       CITb PIT       Indirect Taxes      Country/Region         Taxes (% GDP)       CIT    PIT     Indirect Taxes
 GDP per capita  12, 275                                                             GDP per capita > 12, 275
 Afghanistan                                   9.2   20.0   20.0                 -   Australia                             24.4    30.0   45.0              10.0
 Albania                                     18.8    10.0   10.0              20.0   Austria                               27.1    25.0   50.0              20.0
 Armenia                                     17.7    20.0   20.0              20.0   Belgium                               29.5    34.0   50.0              21.0
 Azerbaijan                                  12.3    24.0 c 35.0             18.0    Brazil                                24.1    34.0   27.5              19.0
 Belarus                                     23.9    24.0   17.0              20.0   Bulgaria                              18.5    10.0   10.0              20.0
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                      23.0    10.0   10.0              17.0   Canada                                26.4    28.0   29.0               5.0
 Cabo Verde                                  20.4       -       -                -   Chile                                 20.2    20.0   40.0              19.0
 China: Mainland                             19.7    25.0   45.0             17.0    China: Hong Kong                      14.2    16.5   15.0               0.0
 Colombia                                    17.3    33.0   33.0              16.0   China: Macao                          37.6    12.0   12.0               0.0
 Congo                                         8.8   30.0       -            18.9    Croatia                               23.6    20.0   40.0              23.0
 Costa Rica                                  14.0    30.0   15.0              13.0   Cyprus                                23.8    10.0   35.0              15.0
 Egypt                                       13.3    20.0   20.0              10.0   Czech Rep.                            18.9    19.0   15.0              20.0
 El Salvador                                 16.3    30.0   30.0             13.0    Denmark                               44.8    25.0   55.4              25.0
 Georgia                                     25.2     0.0   20.0             18.0    Estonia                               19.5    21.0   21.0              20.0
 Honduras                                    15.5    35.0   25.0              12.0   Finland                               29.9    26.0   49.2              23.0
 Indonesia                                   12.2    25.0   30.0              10.0   France                                27.3    33.3   41.0              19.6
 Jordan                                      15.7    14.0   14.0              16.0   Germany                               22.5    29.4   45.0              19.0
 Kazakhstan                                  21.7    20.0   10.0              12.0   Greece                                22.9    20.0   45.0              23.0
 Kiribati                                    18.3       -       -                -   Hungary                               23.7    19.0   16.0              25.0
 Kosovo                                      23.5    10.0    0.0             18.0    Iceland                               29.5    20.0   46.2              25.5
 Mauritius                                   18.2    15.0   15.0              15.0   Ireland                               22.8    12.5   48.0              21.0
 Mexico                                      10.7    30.0   30.0              16.0   Israel                                25.4    24.0   45.0              16.0
 Moldova                                     18.1    12.0   12.0             20.0    Italy                                 28.4    31.4   43.0              21.0
 Mongolia                                    20.8    10.0   10.0             10.0    Japan                                 16.4    40.7   50.0               5.0
 Morocco                                     24.3    31.0   38.0             20.0    Korea                                 17.6    22.0   35.0              10.0
 Paraguay                                      9.9   10.0   10.0              10.0   Latvia                                19.5    15.0   25.0              22.0
 Peru                                        16.4    30.0   30.0              18.0   Lithuania                             16.0    15.0   15.0              21.0
 Serbia                                      23.6    10.0   15.0              18.0   Luxembourg                            26.3    28.8   42.0              15.0
 Seychelles                                  33.0    40.0   15.0             15.0    Malta                                 26.2    35.0   35.0              18.0
 South Africa                                26.6    34.6   40.0              14.0   Netherlands                           21.5    25.0   52.0              19.0
 Thailand                                    17.7    30.0   37.0               7.0   New Zealand                           28.0    28.0   33.0              15.0
 Timor-Leste                                 24.9       -       -                -   Norway                                32.8    28.0   47.8              25.0
 Tunisia                                     21.5    30.0   35.0              18.0   Poland                                20.6    19.0   32.0              23.0
 Turkey                                      19.3    20.0   35.0              18.0   Portugal                              23.2    25.0   46.5              23.0
 Ukraine                                     24.1    25.0   17.0              20.0   Romania                               19.1    16.0   16.0              24.0
 Uzbekistan                                  24.8    12.0   12.0              20.0   Russia                                22.3    20.0   13.0              18.0
 Yemen                                         7.4   20.0   15.0               5.0   San Marino                            16.2   17.0    50.0               0.0
                                                                                     Singapore                             13.1    17.0   20.0               7.0
                                                                                     Slovak Rep.                           16.9    19.0   19.0              20.0
                                                                                     Slovenia                              21.8    20.0   41.0              20.0
                                                                                     Spain                                 19.1    30.0   45.0              18.0
                                                                                     Sweden                                39.2    26.3   56.6              25.0
                                                                                     Switzerland                           20.3    18.3   40.0               8.0
                                                                                     United Arab Emirates                  21.6    55.0     0.0              5.0
                                                                                     United Kingdom                        27.6    26.0   50.0              20.0
                                                                                     United States                         18.4   40.0    35.0               0.0
 All low- and middle-income                  18.6    21.8   21.8              15.5    All high-income                      23.7    24.0   35.3              16.8
 Notes: Statutory tax rates for 2011 come from the tax rate tables in KPMG.org (2020).        a Calculations are from Table 6. b The statutory rates displayed are

the maximum statutory rates. If local CIT taxes exist, then the statutory rates are calculated by KPMG as the effective tax rates.
c Numbers in italic font represent missing values for 2011 that are replaced by the most current available statutory rates.




                                                                               31
            Table 9: Level Differences in Effective CIT Rates

                                                       Effective CIT Rate
Industry
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction                     5.41
                                                                    [0.12]
Manufacturing                                                     4.51
                                                                    [0.11]
Utilities                                                         4.21
                                                                    [0.12]
Construction                                                      5.76
                                                                    [0.11]
Transportation and Warehousing                                    5.44
                                                                    [0.12]
Information                                                       2.27
                                                                    [0.13]
Wholesale and Retail Trade                                        4.65
                                                                    [0.11]
Accommodation and Food Services                                   5.18
                                                                    [0.12]
Finance and Insurance                                             3.67
                                                                    [0.14]
Real Estate                                                       6.78
                                                                    [0.11]
Leasing and Business Services                                     5.29
                                                                    [0.12]
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                  5.20
                                                                    [0.12]
Water, Environment and Public Facilities Management               4.78
                                                                    [0.22]
Resident Services and Other Services                              5.07
                                                                    [0.12]
Educational Services                                              4.03
                                                                    [0.23]
                                                   Continued on next page



                                       32
                  Table 9 ­ continued from previous page
                                                       Effective CIT Rate
Health Care and Social Assistance                                 3.61
                                                                   [0.27]
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                               2.01
                                                                   [0.16]

Ownership
State Owned Enterprise                                           -0.75
                                                                   [0.03]
Foreign Invested Enterprise                                      -1.35
                                                                   [0.02]

Region
East                                                              0.72
                                                                   [0.02]
Middle                                                               0.01
                                                                   [0.02]
West                                                             -0.73
                                                                   [0.02]

Indicators
Loss Carry-forward                                              -17.58
                                                                   [0.02]
High-tech Tax Credit                                             -7.04
                                                                   [0.03]
Small Firm Tax Credit                                            -4.42
                                                                   [0.02]
Enterprise-in-transition Tax Credit                              -7.31
                                                                   [0.03]
Minority Region Tax Credit                                       -6.02
                                                                   [0.16]
Export                                                             0.08
                                                                   [0.02]

Controls
                                                  Continued on next page

                                      33
                          Table 9 ­ continued from previous page
                                                                Effective CIT Rate
 Asset                                                                             X
 R&D                                                                               X
 Year Fixed Effect                                                                 X

 Constant                                                                    15.85
                                                                               [0.12]
 Observations                                                              1,183,048
                   2
 Adjusted R                                                                    0.563
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes:     Regression of the effective CIT rate is conducted on a pooling sample of
enterprises with positive net profit after adjustment, with data from 2008 to 2011.
The effective CIT rate variable is winsorized at the bottom 1% and top 5% levels.
Loss carry-forwards, high-tech tax credit, small-firm tax credit, enterprise-in-transit
tax credit, minority region tax credit, and export are indicator variables. Assets and
R&D are standardized values and are winsorized at the 1% level. Year fixed effects
are included. The baseline group is private enterprises in agriculture, fishing and
forestry in the northeast of China.




                                              34
Table 10: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on
Effective CIT Rates

                       (A) Returns to Capital, Log Scale
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)         (4)
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.584          -0.550        -0.136      -0.182
                                  [0.007]          [0.006]    [0.008]     [0.008]
 Year FE                            Y                Y                      Y
 Industry FE                                         Y
 Firm FE                                                        Y           Y
 Observations                  1,592,413       1,592,333     1,151,281   1,151,281
 Adjusted R2                      0.006            0.227      0.760       0.764
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.005            0.005      0.000       0.001


                        (B) Returns to Labor, Log Scale
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)         (4)
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.899          -0.613        -0.161      -0.201
                                  [0.009]          [0.008]    [0.011]     [0.011]
 Year FE                            Y                Y                      Y
 Industry FE                                         Y
 Firm FE                                                        Y           Y
 Observations                  1,587,671       1,587,591     1,148,144   1,148,144
 Adjusted R2                      0.006            0.334      0.759       0.760
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.006            0.004      0.000       0.001
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes:    Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted on a
pooling sample of enterprises with positive net profit after adjustment with
data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent variables for Panels A and B are
the marginal business revenue product of assets, and wages and bonuses,
respectively. The independent variable is 1 deducting the effective CIT
rate. Both the dependent and independent variables are in log scale and
are winsorized at the 10% level. Robust standard errors are applied.




                                              35
Table 11: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on
Lagged Effective CIT Rates

                       (A) Returns to Capital, Log Scale
                                    (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)
 Lag of log(1 - CIT )          -0.510           -0.405     0.047      0.005
                                  [0.010]        [0.009]   [0.012]   [0.012]
 Year FE                            Y              Y                   Y
 Industry FE                                       Y
 Firm FE                                                     Y         Y
 Observations                     664,649       664,572    453,805   453,805
                   2
 Adjusted R                        0.004         0.252      0.808     0.809
 Adjusted R2 -within               0.004         0.003      0.000    -0.000


                       (B) Returns to Labor, Log Scale
                                    (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                                 
 Lag of log(1 - CIT )          -0.799           -0.356     0.093     0.074
                                  [0.014]        [0.012]   [0.017]   [0.017]
 Year FE                            Y              Y                   Y
 Industry FE                                       Y
 Firm FE                                                     Y         Y
 Observations                     661,645       661,566    452,097   452,097
 Adjusted R2                       0.006         0.358      0.792     0.792
                   2
 Adjusted R -within                0.005         0.001      0.000     0.000
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes:     Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted
on a pooling sample of enterprises with positive net profit after ad-
justment with data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent variables for
Panels A and B are the marginal business revenue product of assets,
and wages and bonuses, respectively. The independent variable is the
one-period-ahead effective after-CIT rate. Both the dependent and
independent variables are in log scale and are winsorized at the 10%
level. Robust standard errors are applied.




                                           36
Table 12: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on Effective CIT Rates, Dy-
namic Panel

                        Marginal Revenue Product of Capital    Marginal Revenue Product of Labor
                                                   
 log(1 - CIT )                            -0.138                              -0.110
                                              [0.014]                          [0.019]
 Lag of MRPK                              0.170
                                              [0.005]
 Lag of MRPL                                                                  0.103
                                                                               [0.010]
 Observations                                 272,610                         272,256
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes: Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted on a pooling sample of enterprises
with positive net profit after adjustment with data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent variables for Pan-
els A and B are the marginal business revenue product of assets, and wages and bonuses, respectively.
The independent variables are the effective after-CIT return and one-period-ahead returns to produc-
tion factors, instrumented by deeper lags of the dependent variables. Both the dependent and indepen-
dent variables are in log scale and are winsorized at the 10% level. Robust standard errors are applied.




                                                        37
      Agriculture               Mining               Manufacturing            Utilities          Wholesale/Retail




     Construction          Finance/Insurance          Real Estate     Transport/Postal/Telecom        Other




             Value Added Tax                   Corporate Income Tax                   Business Tax
             Excise Tax                        VAT & Excise on Imports                Social Security Fund Payment
             Other Taxes


                    Figure 1: Tax Payment Structure of Industries, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the structure of the total tax payment among each industry in the pooling
sample from 2008 to 2011. The total tax payment is calculated as the sum of tax payable of domestic
VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, actual paid amounts of VAT and excise tax on imports, other
taxes, and payments to social security funds, excluding paid personal income tax, withholding business
taxes and refunded VAT and excise tax on exports. The figure shows, first, that the tax payment struc-
ture varies across industries but remains quite stable over the years. Second, the excise tax represents
a large share of the tax payment within the manufacturing industry, while the VAT and excise tax on
imports account for substantial shares in agriculture, manufacturing and wholesale and retail industries.
In addition, payments to social security funds are non-negligible across industries.




                                                       38
                                    4.5%        8.5%
                                6.7%


                         9.9%

                                                                                                                                                        24.4%
                         3.2%
                                                               40.8%


                            16.5%                                                                                24.2%
                                        5.2%

                                                                                                                                        13.8%


     Agriculture                     Mining                Manufacturing       Utilities
     Wholesale/Retail                Construction          Finance/Insurance   Real Estate
     Transport/Postal/Telecom        Other                                                           Finance/Insurance               Manufacturing              Wholesale/Retail



                   (A) Total Tax Payment                                                               (B) Corporate Income Tax


                                                                                                                            11.3%
                                                       15.2%
                                                                                                                                                 16.9%
                          22.8%
                                                                                                                 13.0%




                        11.4%
                                                                                                                                                  28.1%
                                                                                                                    26.2%
                                                         48.5%




                                                                                                Real Estate                 Finance/Insurance                            Construction
       Manufacturing                Wholesale/Retail               Mining        Utilities      Other Services              Transport/Post/Telecommunications



                    (C) Value-Added Tax                                                                           (D) Business Tax

                          Figure 2: Tax Payment Breakdown by Industry, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the breakdown of the total tax payment, CIT payment, VAT payment and
business tax payment by industry in the pooling sample from 2008 to 2011. The total tax payment
is calculated as the sum of tax payable of domestic VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, actual
paid amounts of VAT and excise tax on imports, other taxes, and payments to social security funds,
excluding paid personal income tax, withholding business taxes and refunded VAT and excise tax on
exports. This figure shows that more than half of the total tax payment and CIT and more than 70% of
the VAT are paid by the manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade and mining industries. The finance
and insurance industry is the second largest payer of CIT. In addition, the real estate, construction,
and finance and insurance industries are the main payers of business tax.




                                                                                           39
                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                   Taxes on Goods and Service, % Tax Revenue
                                        50




                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                        40
 Tax Revenue, % GDP




                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                        30




                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                     6                         8                      10                         12
                                             6                         8                      10                         12                                                                         Nominal GDP Per Capita in USD, log scale 2011
                                                            Nominal GDP Per Capita in USD, log scale 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                         < $3,975   $3,975 ~ $12,275   > $12,275   China: Mainland   United States
                                                 < $3,975   $3,975 ~ $12,275   > $12,275   China: Mainland   United States



                                                                                                                               (B) Share of Taxes on Goods and Services in
                                             (A) Share of Tax Revenue in GDP
                                                                                                                               Tax Revenue
                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                        40
 Taxes on Corporations, % Tax Revenue




                                                                                                                                   Taxes on Corporations, % Income Tax
                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                        30




                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                             6                         8                      10                         12                                                          6                         8                      10                         12
                                                            Nominal GDP Per Capita in USD, log scale 2011                                                                                           Nominal GDP Per Capita in USD, log scale 2011
                                                 < $3,975   $3,975 ~ $12,275   > $12,275   China: Mainland   United States                                                               < $3,975   $3,975 ~ $12,275   > $12,275   China: Mainland   United States




                                                 (C) Share of CIT in Tax Revenue                                                                                                     (D) Share of CIT in Income Taxes

                                                               Figure 3: Government Revenue and GDP Per Capita, 2011
Notes: This figure displays the relationship between the share of revenue in GDP and GDP per capita in
2011. Countries and regions are grouped into 3 categories--low- and lower-middle income, upper-middle
income and high income -- according to the 2011 World Development Indicator thresholds of the World
Bank. This figure shows that tax revenue relied heavily on taxes on goods and services in China, while
the share of income tax from CIT is higher than the average levels in the upper-middle-income and
high-income groups and in the United States.




                                                                                                                              40
     5




                                                                            2
     4




                                                                            1.5
        3
 Density




                                                                         Density
                                                                          1
     2




                                                                            .5
     1
     0




                                                                            0
            0   5              10                      15      20                  0               1          2             3            4   5
                      Effective VAT Rate                                                                  Effective Business Tax Rate

                         2008                   2011                                                             2008             2011




                    (A) VAT                                                                            (B) Business Tax
                                    .5
                                    .4 .3
                                Density
                                    .2
                                    .1
                                    0




                                            0           5   10            15                  20         25
                                                              Effective CIT Rate

                                                                 2008                  2011


                                                            (C) CIT

                Figure 4: Dispersion in Effective Tax Rates, 2008 & 2011
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of effective VAT, business tax, and CIT rates in 2008 and
2011. The effective VAT rate is defined as VAT payable over the VAT base, and the effective business
tax rate is the ratio between business tax payable and the business tax base. The effective CIT rate is
defined as CIT payable over profits after tax adjustment. All calculations are limited to observations
with a positive tax base. The effective rates of VAT and business tax are winsorized at the 1% level,
while the effective CIT rates are winsorized at the 5% level. This figure shows that there is much more
dispersion in effective CIT rates than in effective VAT and business tax rates.




                                                                    41
                                                                                                          50
           60




                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                          30
           40




                                                                                                Percent
 Percent




                                                                                                          20
           20




                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                          0
           0




                                                                                                               0   5           10          15           20           25   30
                -25000   -5000     15000     35000     55000      75000   95000   115000                           Effective CIT Tax Rate of Adjusted Profit Base, 2011
                                      Profit After Tax Adjustment, 2011


                                                                                            (B) Effective CIT Rate, Adjusted Profit Base
                     (A) Profit after Tax Adjustment

                                 Figure 5: Distribution of Profits and Effective CIT Rate, 2011
Notes: This figure displays the distributions of profits after tax adjustment and the effective CIT rate
in 2011. The effective CIT rate is defined as the ratio of CIT payable over profit after tax adjustment
and is only available for firms with positive adjusted profits.




                                                                                           42
                            100       80
               % of Explained Variation
                    40      60
                            20
                            0




                                                           Total Variation                       Model Explained Variation

                                                                       Explained                  Loss Carry-forwards
                                                                       Unexplained                Other Factors

                                                                (A) Variance Decomposition




              0                                       20               40              60                             80             100
                                                                   % Non-loss Explained Variation
                                           Industry                     Ownership                 Region                   Asset

                                           R&D                          Export                    Transition Credit        High-tech Credit

                                           Small Firm Credit            Minority Region Credit    Year Variation



                                                       (B) Share of Model-explained Variance

       Figure 6: Effective Corporate Income Tax Rate Variance Decomposition
Notes: This figure decomposes the variation in the effective CIT rate from 2008 to 2011. The effective
CIT rate is defined as the ratio of CIT payable over profit after tax adjustment. This figure shows that
the main factor driving the variation in effective CIT rates is loss carry-forwards and the transition,
high-tech and small-firm tax credits.



                                                                                         43
Appendix

A1          Tax Payment by Ownership and Region

A1.1         By Ownership
The tax structure of total tax payment varies across SOEs, FIEs and private enterprises. As seen
in Figure A1, the VAT and CIT are the dominant taxes across all ownership structures. The
relative share of excise tax in the tax payment is largest among SOEs, while the relative shares
of VAT and excise tax on imported goods represent substantial shares within FIEs. In addition,
business tax is the third largest tax within private enterprises.
       The breakdown of the tax payment by SOEs, FIEs and private enterprises is shown in Figure
A2. As shown in Table 4, SOEs and FIEs make up less than 20% of the total enterprises in the
sample, but disproportionately represent around half of the total tax payment and CIT, VAT
and business tax payments on average. In detail, SOEs account for over one-third of the total
tax payment and CIT and VAT payments, while FIEs represent more than 20% of the total tax
payment and CIT and VAT payments. In addition, the tax payment breakdown by ownership
structure remains relatively stable across years.


A1.2         By Region
Next, we decompose the structure of the tax payment among four regions (East, Middle, West
and Northeast25 ).Specifically, CIT exceeds VAT to become the largest tax payment category in
the East, while VAT is the dominant category in the rest of the regions. In the Middle, West
and Northeast areas, the excise tax makes up a larger share of the tax payment than in the East.
       According to the breakdown of the tax payment by region, as shown in Figure A4, enterprises
in East China contribute more than half of the total tax payment and CIT, VAT and business tax
payments on average, while the Northeast of China displays the smallest shares. The breakdown
of the tax payment by region remains relatively stable across the whole sample period.




  25
    According to the classification system of the 2008 China Economic Census, the East area includes Beijing,
Tianjin, Hebei Province, Shanghai, Jiangsu Province, Zhejiang Province, Fujian Province, Guangdong Province
and Hainan Province. The Middle area includes Shanxi Province, Anhui Province, Jiangxi Province, Henan
Province, Hubei Province and Hunan Province. The West area includes Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region,
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Chongqing, Szechuan Province, Guizhou Province, Yunnan Province, Tibet
Autonomous Region, Shaanxi Province, Gansu Province, Qinghai Province, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region
and Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. The Northeast area includes Liaoning Province, Jilin Province and
Heilongjiang Province.


                                                     44
               SOE                                   FIE                               Private




             Value Added Tax              Corporate Income Tax                  Business Tax
             Excise Tax                   VAT & Excise on Imports               Social Security Fund Payment
             Other Taxes


              Figure A1: Tax Payment Structure of Ownership, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the structure of total tax payment among SOEs, FIEs and private enterprises
in the pooling sample from 2008 to 2011. The total tax payment is calculated as the sum of tax payable of
domestic VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, actual paid amounts of VAT and excise tax on imports,
other taxes, and payments to social security funds, excluding paid personal income tax, withholding
business taxes and refunded VAT and excise tax on exports. The figure shows that the 3 largest taxes
within SOEs are the VAT, CIT and excise tax. Within FIEs, the 3 largest taxes are the VAT, CIT, and
VAT and excise tax on imported goods, while the top three taxes are the VAT, CIT and business tax
within private enterprises.




                                                   45
                                       36.8%                   38.2%                          37.8%
             39.3%




                           23.9%                                            24.0%




                     SOE      FIE          Private                    SOE       FIE               Private




           (A) Total Tax Payment                           (B) Corporate Income Tax




                                       32.6%
                                                                                              35.4%

             44.6%
                                                              51.4%




                               22.8%                                                  13.2%




                     SOE      FIE          Private                    SOE       FIE               Private




            (C) Value-Added Tax                                  (D) Business Tax

      Figure A2: Tax Payment Breakdown by Ownership Structure, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the breakdown of total tax payment and CIT, VAT and business tax pay-
ments by SOEs, FIEs and private enterprises in the pooling sample from 2008 to 2011. The total tax
payment is calculated as the sum of tax payable of domestic VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax,
actual paid amounts of VAT and excise tax on imports, other taxes, and payments to social security
funds, excluding paid personal income tax, withholding business taxes and refunded VAT and excise
tax on exports. This figure shows that SOEs and FIEs disproportionately contribute to the total tax
payment and CIT, VAT and business tax payments.




                                                     46
                          East                                               Middle




                         West                                              Northeast




            Value Added Tax               Corporate Income Tax                Business Tax
            Excise Tax                    VAT & Excise on Imports             Social Security Fund Payment
            Other Taxes


                Figure A3: Tax Payment Structure of Regions, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the structure of the total tax payment across regions in the pooling sample
from 2008 to 2011. The total tax payment is calculated as the sum of tax payable of domestic VAT,
CIT, excise tax and business tax, actual paid amounts of VAT and excise tax on imports, other taxes,
and payments to social security funds, excluding paid personal income tax, withholding business taxes
and refunded VAT and excise tax on exports. The figure shows that CIT is the main tax category in
the East, while VAT is the largest tax payment category in the other regions.




                                                  47
                                 8.1%                                                         5.9%
                                                                                   11.5%
                  16.7%

                                                                               10.5%


                                               60.9%
                 14.3%
                                                                                                     72.2%




          East              Middle      West           Northeast        East               Middle    West       Northeast




           (A) Total Tax Payment                                        (B) Corporate Income Tax


                             8.9%                                                            6.3%

                                                                                 16.1%

                 22.2%

                                               50.7%
                                                                               13.4%
                                                                                                        64.2%


                         18.2%




          East              Middle      West           Northeast        East               Middle    West       Northeast




             (C) Value-Added Tax                                                 (D) Business Tax

                   Figure A4: Tax Payment Breakdown by Region, 2008­2011
Notes: This figure displays the breakdown of the total tax payment and CIT, VAT and business tax
payments by region in the pooling sample from 2008 to 2011. The total tax payment is calculated as
the sum of tax payable of domestic VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, actual paid amounts of VAT
and excise tax on imports, other taxes, and payments to social security funds, excluding paid personal
income tax, withholding business taxes and refunded VAT and excise tax on exports. This figure shows
that East China represents more than 50% of the total tax payment and CIT, VAT and business tax
payments for 2008, while the Northeast of China contributes the smallest shares.




                                                                   48
A2      Breakdown of Tax Revenue in Tax Survey Data

    Table A1: Comparison of Tax Survey Sample Statistics with Aggregate Statis-
    tics from the IMF, 2011

                                 (A) Breakdown of Tax Revenue
                      Income        Corporate          Taxes on goods    Taxes on        Otherc
        Data          taxesa       income taxes         and services     int'l tradeb     taxes
                    (% taxes)   (% income taxes)         (% taxes)       (% taxes)      (% taxes)
     IMF                 23.8                  73.5               66.6          2.7           6.8
     Tax Survey          27.4                  83.4               66.0          2.5           4.1


                         (B) Breakdown of Taxes on Goods and Services
               Data              Value-added taxd        Sales tax         Excisee       Otherf
                                     (% GST)             (% GST)         (% GST)        (% GST)
     IMF                                       43.4               21.4         16.5          18.7
     Tax Survey                                58.9               19.3         15.8           6.0
     Notes: The total tax revenue from the tax survey data is calculated as the sum of payable
    amounts of VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, paid amounts of personal income tax, local
    taxes, and other taxes net of refunded VAT and excise tax on exports from tax survey data.
    a Income tax from the tax survey data is the sum of CIT payable and paid withholding per-

    sonal income tax and paid personal income tax from sole proprietorship, private proprietorship
    and private partnership enterprises. b Taxes on international trade from the tax survey data
    are the sum of duty paid on imports and exports.       c Other taxes from the tax survey data

    include paid vehicle and vessel tax, farmland occupation tax, deed tax, land appreciation tax,
    urban land use tax, resources tax, and vehicle purchase tax. d VAT from the tax survey data
    is the sum of domestic VAT payable and paid VAT on imports, net of refunded VAT on ex-
    ports.    e Excise tax from the tax survey data is the sum of domestic excise tax payable and

    paid excise tax on imports, net of refunded excise tax on exports.
    f Other taxes on goods and services from the tax survey data are the sum of paid stamp tax,

    tobacco tax, and city maintenance and construction tax.

   The total tax revenue is calculated from the tax survey data as the sum of payable amounts
of VAT, CIT, excise tax and business tax, paid amounts of personal income tax, local taxes, and
other taxes net of refunded VAT and excise tax on exports. As shown in Table A1, the aggregate
breakdowns using the tax survey data generally align well with the statistics from the IMF data.
In Panel A, the tax survey data show that about two-thirds of tax revenue comes from taxes
on goods and services. Income tax revenue is calculated as the sum of CIT payable and paid
personal income tax due to data availability, which results in a higher share of CIT within income
tax from the tax survey data than the 73.5% in the IMF data. In Panel B, VAT and excise tax

                                                  49
are calculated as the sum of domestic payable amounts and paid amounts on imports, net of
refunded amounts on exports. The total taxes on goods and services are calculated as the sum
of VAT, business tax payable, excise tax, and paid stamp tax, tobacco tax, and city maintenance
and construction tax in the 2011 sample. As can be seen, the sizes of VAT, business tax and
excise tax as a fraction of taxes on goods and services are similar to the IMF aggregate statistics.
The higher share of VAT and lower share of other taxes on goods and services in the tax survey
data than in the IMF aggregates could be attributed either to sampling issues or to the fact that
only paid amounts instead of payable amounts are available to calculate VAT and excise tax
on imports and exports and other taxes on goods and services. Nevertheless, the overall data
pattern is consistent with our conclusions in the cross-country comparison above.


A3      Regression of Returns to Production Factors on Ef-
        fective CIT Rates, Alternative Specification




                                                50
Table A2: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on
Predicted Effective CIT Rates

                     (A) Returns to Capital, Log Scale
                                   (1)              (2)        (3)       (4)
 log(1 - ^CIT )                -0.512            -0.398      0.089     0.066
                                  [0.011]         [0.010]    [0.013]   [0.013]
 Year FE                            Y               Y                    Y
 Industry FE                                        Y
 Firm FE                                                       Y         Y
 Observations                  1,172,798         1,172,735   789,960   789,960
 Adjusted R2                      0.003           0.224       0.768     0.770
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.002           0.001       0.000     0.000


                      (B) Returns to Labor, Log Scale
                                   (1)              (2)        (3)       (4)
 log(1 - ^CIT )                -0.789            -0.459      0.069     0.045
                                  [0.015]         [0.012]    [0.017]   [0.018]
 Year FE                            Y               Y                    Y
 Industry FE                                        Y
 Firm FE                                                       Y         Y
 Observations                  1,165,750         1,165,681   786,492   786,492
 Adjusted R2                      0.003           0.333       0.767     0.767
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.003           0.001       0.000     0.000
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes: Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted on
a pooling sample of enterprises with positive net profit after adjustment
with data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent variables for Panels A
and B are the marginal business revenue products of assets, and wages
and bonuses, respectively. The independent variable is 1 minus the pre-
dicted effective CIT rate from the specified linear regression in Table
9. Both the dependent and independent variables are in log scale and
are winsorized at the 10% level. Robust standard errors are applied.



                                            51
Table A3: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on
Effective CIT Rates, Manufacturing

                       (A) Returns to Capital, Log Scale
                                   (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.662            -0.615     -0.083     -0.144
                                  [0.009]         [0.009]   [0.011]    [0.011]
 Year FE                            Y               Y                    Y
 Industry FE                                        Y
 Firm FE                                                      Y          Y
 Observations                  705,796           705,770    537,929    537,929
                   2
 Adjusted R                       0.010           0.069      0.741      0.747
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.008           0.007      0.000      0.001


                       (B) Returns to Labor, Log Scale
                                   (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                                    
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.304            -0.354     -0.030     -0.091
                                  [0.011]         [0.010]   [0.015]    [0.015]
 Year FE                            Y               Y                    Y
 Industry FE                                        Y
 Firm FE                                                      Y          Y
 Observations                  704,072           704,046    536,692    536,692
 Adjusted R2                      0.002           0.149      0.693      0.694
                   2
 Adjusted R -within               0.001           0.002      0.000      0.000
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes:     Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted
on a manufacturing sample of enterprises with positive net profit af-
ter adjustment with data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent variables
for Panels A and B are the marginal business revenue products of as-
sets, and wages and bonuses, respectively. The independent variable is
1 minus the effective CIT rate. Both the dependent and independent
variables are in log scale and are winsorized at the 10% level. Robust
standard errors are applied.




                                            52
Table A4: Regression of Returns to Capital and Labor on
Effective CIT Rates, Manufacturing Sample and Con-
structed Value-added Base

                       (A) Returns to Capital, Log Scale
                                   (1)             (2)       (3)       (4)
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.855            -0.839    0.036     -0.149
                                  [0.013]        [0.013]   [0.016]   [0.017]
 Year FE                            Y              Y                   Y
 Industry FE                                       Y
 Firm FE                                                     Y         Y
 Observations                     662514         662488    496887    496887
 Adjusted R2                      0.009           0.068     0.717     0.723
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.007           0.007     0.000     0.000


                       (B) Returns to Labor, Log Scale
                                   (1)             (2)       (3)       (4)
 log(1 - CIT )                 -0.339            -0.449    0.042     -0.114
                                  [0.013]        [0.012]   [0.018]   [0.018]
 Year FE                            Y              Y                   Y
 Industry FE                                       Y
 Firm FE                                                     Y         Y
 Observations                  661,715           661,689   496,274   496,274
                   2
 Adjusted R                       0.004           0.148     0.644     0.647
 Adjusted R2 -within              0.001           0.002     0.000     0.000
 Standard errors in brackets
                               
    p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001

Notes:     Regressions of returns to production factors are conducted
on a manufacturing sample of enterprises with positive net profit af-
ter adjustment with data from 2008 to 2011. The dependent vari-
ables for Panels A and B are the marginal value-added products of
assets, and wages and bonuses over assets and business revenue over
wages and bonuses, respectively, where value-added variables are con-
structed based on VAT sales and VAT input purchases. The indepen-
dent variable is 1 minus the effective CIT rate. Both the dependent
and independent variables are in log scale and are winsorized at the
10% level. Robust standard errors are applied.
                                            53
