                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FORWARD GUIDANCE AND DURABLE GOODS DEMAND

                                       Alisdair McKay
                                     Johannes F. Wieland

                                     Working Paper 28066
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28066


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




Some of the material in this paper previously appeared as part of the working paper "Lumpy
Durable Consumption Demand and the Limited Ammunition of Monetary Policy." That paper no
longer discusses forward guidance. We are grateful to Adrien Auclert, Robert Barsky, David
Berger, Jeff Campbell, Adam Guren, Jim Hamilton, Christopher House, Rohan Kekre, Emi
Nakamura, Valerie Ramey, Matthew Rognlie, Jón Steinsson, Ludwig Straub, Stephen Terry, Joe
Vavra, Venky Venkateswaran, Tom Winberry, Christian Wolf, and seminar participants at ASU,
NYU, Bank of Canada, and Bank of Japan. The views expressed here are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alisdair McKay and Johannes F. Wieland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Forward Guidance and Durable Goods Demand
Alisdair McKay and Johannes F. Wieland
NBER Working Paper No. 28066
November 2020
JEL No. E21,E22,E43,E52,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

Durable goods attenuate the power of forward guidance. The extensive and intensive margins of
durable goods demand are both more sensitive to the contemporaneous user cost than to future
user costs. Changes in the contemporaneous real interest rate directly affect the contemporaneous
user cost and durable demand, whereas promises of low future real interest rates have weaker
effects through equilibrium price changes. Quantitatively, reducing the real interest rate one year
from now increases output by only forty percent as much as reducing the real interest rate today.
Our results are little affected by the maturity of financial assets that finance durable purchases.


Alisdair McKay
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
alisdair.mckay@gmail.com

Johannes F. Wieland
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jfwieland@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction
Forward guidance plays an increasingly important role in the conduct of monetary policy and
is one of the main tools of unconventional monetary policy (Bernanke, 2020). Despite the
prominence of forward guidance in modern monetary policy, the theoretical underpinnings of
how future interest rates affect aggregate demand are still a matter of debate within monetary
economics. Workhorse New Keynesian models are viewed by many as being too forward
looking and thereby attributing too much power to forward guidance policies (Carlstrom
et al., 2015; Del Negro et al., 2015). Indeed, the predictions of the Euler equation at the
heart of the three-equation New Keynesian model illustrates the issue starkly: changes in
expected real interest rates at any horizon have an equally large effect on the current level
of aggregate demand. This implausible prediction has come to be known as the "forward
guidance puzzle."
    A number of authors have offered modifications to the New Keynesian framework that
can reduce the power of forward guidance. These include market incompleteness (McKay
et al., 2016; Werning, 2015; Hagedorn et al., 2019; Acharya and Dogra, 2020), behavioral
or informational frictions (Farhi and Werning, 2019; Gabaix, 2020; Angeletos and Lian,
2018), and including wealth in the utility function (Campbell et al., 2017; Michaillat and
Saez, 2019). In these approaches aggregate demand is solely determined by non-durable
consumption. However, monetary policy is generally viewed as having a particularly strong
influence on durable demand and investment spending (Mishkin, 1995; Barsky et al., 2007;
Sterk and Tenreyro, 2018).
    In this paper, we characterize the power of forward guidance in an incomplete markets
model of durable goods demand subject to fixed adjustment costs. We show that forward
guidance is much less powerful relative to contemporaneous interest rate changes.
    Real interest rates affect demand for durable goods by changing the user cost of durables.
Our main analytical result is that households discount future user costs at both the extensive
and intensive margins of durable adjustment. At the extensive margin, this discounting is
very stark because the contemporaneous user cost plays a special role in the timing deci-
sion. The smooth pasting condition requires that households at an adjustment threshold are

                                              1
indifferent between adjusting now versus waiting a little bit. Consider a household that is
contemplating increasing its durable position. Upgrading the durable position now brings a
higher utility flow but at the cost of paying the contemporaneous user cost on the addition
to its durable stock. On the other hand, waiting a short time to adjust brings a smaller util-
ity flow over that time but saves the contemporaneous user cost. As the contemporaneous
user cost enters this trade off, its effect on the extensive margin of durable adjustment is
qualitatively different from the effects of future user costs.
   At the intensive margin of durable adjustment, the marginal cost of acquiring a larger
durable stock is the expected discounted user cost over the time until the next durable
adjustment takes place. User costs at longer horizons receive less weight in the intensive
margin decision both because of time discounting and because the cumulative probability of
a durable adjustment increases with time.
   These results imply a steep discounting of future user costs in durable demand decisions.
With an upward sloping supply curve for durable goods, however, user costs are themselves
forward looking because they depend on the relative price of durables and any expected
capital gains on durables. The equilibrium response of durables prices is therefore a channel
through which forward guidance can operate to stimulate durable demand. We characterize
this channel analytically in a special case of the model. While these price movements make
forward guidance more powerful, we show that durable demand continues to discount future
real interest rates.
   We quantitatively evaluate the power of forward guidance and find it is substantially less
powerful than contemporaneous interest rate changes. For example, an interest rate cut at
a horizon of one year has an effect on current output that is only about forty percent of
the effect of a contemporaneous interest rate cut. Durable goods demand drives our results;
forward guidance is essentially as powerful as contemporaneous interest rate changes in a
version of the model without durables.
   It is often argued that forward guidance is powerful because it affects the (long-term)
interest rates on financing for durable goods purchases such as mortgage rates. While our
main model abstracts from long-term financing, we show the first order conditions are the
same in an extension with a long-duration financial asset. Thus, durable decisions continue

                                                2
to discount future user costs. Furthermore, it is the short-term real interest rate that enters
the user cost not the long-term real interest rate. For intuition, let us focus on the extensive
margin. The benefit of waiting a short time to make a purchase depends on how the long-
term rate is expected to change over that time, as opposed to the level of the long-term
rate. In every day language, if households expect long-term interest rates to rise they want
to lock in the rate now. The expected change in the long-term rate over that short period is
closely related to the expected return on the long-term bond, which is equal to the short-term
interest rate by no-arbitrage.
    Our focus on the fixed-cost model is motivated by the microeconomic evidence of inaction
and lumpy adjustments in household durable demand. These patterns of behavior naturally
point to (S, s) policies of the type generated by fixed-cost models. Our model is closely
related to the fixed-cost model we developed in McKay and Wieland (2020), in which we
study how monetary policy shifts durable demand intertemporally. In that paper, we show
that the model matches micro-data on durable adjustment hazards and that it accurately
describes the transmission of real interest rate changes to durable demand both on the
intensive and extensive margins.



2     Model

2.1    Households

Households consume non-durable goods, c, and a service flow from durable goods, s. House-
hold i  [0, 1] has preferences given by
                                            
                                     E0         e-t u (cit , sit ) dt.
                                          t=0

The service flow from durables is generated from the household's stock of durable goods dit
as we describe below. The felicity function is CES,
                                                                         (1- )
                                                1   -1        1   -1      -1
                                     (1 -  ) c           + s                     -1
                         u(c, s) =
                                                         1-
, where  is the elasticity of substitution between nondurables and durables and  -1 is the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
                                                     3
   Households hold a portfolio of durables and liquid assets denoted ait . When a household
with pre-existing portfolio (ait , dit ) adjusts its durable stock, it reshuffles its portfolio to
(ait , dit ) subject to the payment of a fixed cost such that

                                  ait + pt dit = ait + (1 - f )pt dit ,                        (1)

where pt is the relative price of durable goods in terms of nondurable goods, and f pt dit is a
fixed cost proportional to the value of the durable stock.
   The stock of durables depreciates at rate  . A fraction  of depreciation must be paid
immediately in the form of maintenance expenditures so we have
                                         .
                                        dit = -(1 - )dit ,                                     (2)

where a dot over a variable indicates a time derivative. The household must also pay a flow
cost of operating the durable stock equal to pt dit . These operating costs reflect expenditures
such as fuel, utilities, and taxes.
   Liquid savings pay a safe real interest rate rt . Borrowers pay real interest rate rt + rs ,
where rs is an exogenous borrowing spread. The household is able to borrow against the
value of the durable stock up to a loan-to-value (LTV) limit 

                                       ait  -(1 - f )pt dit .                                  (3)

When a household does not adjust its durable stock, its liquid assets evolve according to

                      .
                      ait = rt ait + rs ait I{ait <0} - cit + yit - ( +  )pt dit .             (4)

Household after-tax income, yit , is given by yit = (1 - t )zit Yt , where Yt is aggregate income,
zit is the household's idiosyncratic income share, and t is a time-varying income tax rate.
The log income share ln zit follows the Ohrnstein-Uhlenbeck process

                          dln zit = z ln zit dt + z dWit + (1 - z ) ln z
                                                                       ¯ dt,                   (5)

where dWit is a Brownian motion, z < 0 controls the persistence of the income process, z
determines the variance of the income process, and z
                                                   ¯ is a constant such that         zit di = 1.
   The service flow of the durable sit = qit dit is modulated by match quality qit . qit equals
one when an adjustment takes place but subsequently drops to zero with Poisson intensity
                                                   4
. These match-quality shocks stand in for unmodeled life events that cause households to
adjust their durable positions such as a new job in a distant city. Match-quality shocks are
a source of inframarginal adjustments of the household durable stock, which help the model
match the responsiveness of durable demand to monetary policy shocks (see McKay and
Wieland, 2020).


2.2       Firms

Nondurable goods are produced with a technology that is linear in labor, Yt = Lt . Non-
durable goods are converted to durable goods using a technology with a congestion exter-
nality,
                                                                 -
                                                        Xt
                                         Xkt = Mkt      ¯            ,
                                                        X
                                                                                   1
where Xkt is durable output by firm k , Mkt is nondurbale input, Xt =             0
                                                                                       Xkt dk is aggregate
durable production, and  determines the strength of the externality. Firms are competitive
and price equals marginal cost,
                                                          
                                                     Xt
                                             pt =    ¯       .                                        (6)
                                                     X
The congestion externality yields an upward sloping supply curve for durables with elasticity
 -1 . For our purposes the source of the slope is not important. It could, for instance,
arise from aggregate adjustment costs or a fixed factor such as land. An advantage of the
congestion externality is that durable firms make zero profit, so we do not have to specify
the distribution of dividends across heterogeneous agents.


2.3       Government

We assume that the central bank directly chooses a path for the real interest rate, {rs }s0 .
Implicitly we assume nominal rigidities allow the central bank to implement this real rate
path through an appropriate choice of the nominal interest rates.1 This is a common way of
analyzing forward guidance (e.g. McKay et al., 2016; Werning, 2015).
   1
    We select the equilibrium in which the economy returns to steady state. This can be implemented by
assuming that the central bank reverts to a standard interest rate rule at some arbitrarily far away date.
                                                    5
    Financial assets are in positive net supply due to a fixed supply of real government bonds
     ¯. The tax rate t adjusts to finance debt payments and maintain a balanced budget,
At = A
                                                1
                                    ¯=
                                 rt A               t zit Yt di = t Yt .
                                            0



2.4    Market Clearing

By integrating over all households we obtain aggregate quantities,
                                                           1
                                           Ct =                cit di,
                                                       0
                                                           1
                                       Dt =                    dit di.
                                                       0

Total durable expenditure (including maintenance), Xt , can be obtained either by summing
individual policy functions or from the durable accumulation equation,

                                       .
                                      Dt = -Dt + Xt .                                      (7)

In equilibrium, aggregate income must equal aggregate expenditure

                                   Yt = Ct + pt Dt + pt Xt .                               (8)

    It is unnecessary to fully specify the supply side of the model for our analysis of the
demand response to a given real interest rate path. In this regard, our approach follows
Werning (2015). In equilibrium, Yt is determined by (8) and then divided among households
according to yit = (1 - t )zit Yt . In McKay and Wieland (2020) we provide a complete supply
side that yields these equilibrium relationships. In that formulation, zit is idiosyncratic
labor productivity and wages are sticky and set by unions that ration hours equally across
households.



3     Durable Adjustment with Fixed Costs
We now show that households place less weight on user costs (and thus interest rates) in the
future than in the present. Denote the value function by Vt (a, d, z ). When no adjustment

                                                      6
takes place, the value function follows the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation,

                                                                     d
                         Vt (a, d, z ) = max u(ct , d) + Et             Vt (a, d, z ) ,        (9)
                                              ct                     dt

subject to the laws of motion for the individual states and the LTV constraint (2)-(5).
   When an adjustment takes place, the household picks the optimal durable stock given
its cash-on-hand xt  a + (1 - f )pt d to maximize the post-adjustment value subject to the
LTV constraint

                           Vtadj (x, z ) =         max          Vt (x - pt d , d , z ).
                                             pt (1-(1-f ))d x


Let dt (x, z ) be the solution to this problem.




3.1     Extensive Margin

A durable adjustment takes place when the household hits an adjustment threshold. The
optimal adjustment thresholds are characterized by the value matching and smooth past-
ing conditions. The value matching condition simply states that the value pre- and post-
adjustment is the same,

                           Vt a - pt (d                 
                                       t - (1 - f )d), dt , z = Vt (a, d, z ).


The smooth pasting condition requires that the household is indifferent between adjusting
and waiting another instant,

                         d                                             d
                    Et      Vt (a - pt (d                 
                                         t - (1 - f )d), dt , z ) = Et    Vt (a, d, z ).
                         dt                                            dt

The instantaneous user cost of durables is an important determinant of this indifference
condition. It is given by,

                                         d
                                        rt  pt (rt +  +  ) - pt ,
                                                                      .                       (10)

and captures the marginal cost of holding durables for an instant. A unit of durables acquired
at pt costs forgone interest pt rt , operating costs pt  , depreciation pt  , and potential capital
         .
losses -pt .

                                                       7
       In Supplementary Appendix A, we derive a characterization of the adjustment thresholds
assuming rs = 0,
          1
                      u(c     
                         t , dt ) - u(ct , d) =                                                           (11)
Va,t (a     
       t , dt , z )
    d
   rt (d          d                   
        t - d) + rt - ( + )pt f d + (ct - ct )

              1         Vd,t (a       
                                t , dt , z )        at d
    +                                          -1      r - ( + )pt + z (1 - t )Yt - ct - ( + )pt d ,
          1 - (1 - f ) pt Va,t (a      
                                  t , dt , z )      pt t

where c       
       t and at are post-adjustment consumption and assets. The crucial thing to note here
         d
is that rt enters (11) in a way that future user costs do not. In this sense, the contempora-
neous user cost plays a special role in the extensive margin decision.
       To understand this result, begin with the first line of (11), which captures the benefit of a
durable adjustment this instant. For concreteness, consider an upward adjustment, dt > d.

The term u(c     
            t , dt ) - u(ct , d) captures the increased flow utility from upgrading durables,

which is converted into nondurable goods units via Va,t (a            -1
                                                          t , dt , z ) .

       The other side of the smooth pasting condition captures the marginal benefit of delaying
the adjustment. The second line represents the benefit for a household that is not LTV-
constrained. For this household, delaying the purchase dt - d incurs a flow benefit given by

the instantaneous user cost: the household earns additional interest, pays lower operating
and maintenance costs, and does not incur any capital losses on the purchase. In addition,
the household delays the payment of the fixed cost, which is valued at the instantaneous user
cost less the operating and maintenance costs.2 Finally, complementarities in the choices of
nondurable consumption and durable expenditure through, for example, the utility function
or borrowing constraints, yield an additional benefit of delaying equal to ct - ct .
                                                                             Vd,t
       For an unconstrained household the third line is zero since          pt Va,t
                                                                                      = 1 upon adjustment.
However, for a household constrained by LTV, the third line also enters the equation as
 Vd,t
pt Va,t
          > 1 upon adjustment. This household incurs an additional benefit from waiting since
                                                                                        1
by accumulating more assets it can relax the LTV constraint, with                     1-(1-f )
                                                                                                 leveraging up
these savings. Savings are valued at the user cost less the operating and maintenance costs:
not only does interest accumulate, but waiting delays the depreciation of the purchase and
   2
    Subtracting the operating and maintenance costs leaves the interest expense rt pt and reduction in resale
                   .
value pt  (1 - ) - pt .
                                                      8
potentially allows the household to buy the durable for a lower price (-pt ) thereby converting
                                                                                                            .
liquid assets into a higher durable stock. The household's purchasing power also evolves with
its flow income less its expenditures on nondurables and operating and maintenance costs.
   The smooth pasting condition implies that the contemporaneous user cost plays a central
role in determining durable demand. If the user cost is low, for example because rt is low,
then the benefit of waiting shrinks both for constrained and unconstrained households. We
would then expect households to accelerate their durable purchases and a corresponding
increase in aggregate durable demand. The contemporaneous interest rate is more powerful
in stimulating durable demand than are future interest rates because it directly affects the
contemporaneous user cost.


3.2        Intensive Margin

We now turn to the intensive margin, which is more forward-looking, but still discounts far
future user costs relative to those in the near future.
   To begin, we define the cumulative user cost from t to t +  as
                                                                                         
                                                                                                
             d                    rt+u du           - (1-)                                          rt+u du- (1-)k
            rt,t+    = pt e   0             - pt+ e               + ( + )                   e   k                    pt+k dk.
                                                                                     0

This is the cost of buying a unit of durables at t and holding it to t +  (exclusive of
adjustment costs). The first two terms accumulates lost interest, depreciation, and capital
losses over the holding period. The third term accumulates (with interest) the flow payments
for operating and maintenance costs over the holding period. Note that over a short interval,
 d
rt,t
                                                                        d
                                                                       rt,t +dt                            d
                                                                                  = pt (rt +  +  ) - pt = rt
                                                                                                                .
     +dt is the instantaneous user cost as limdt0                         dt
                                                                                                             .
   In Supplementary Appendix B we show that with rs = 0 the intensive margin first order
condition can be expressed as
               
                                                                adj
      Et          e-(+(1-))s ud (ct+s , e-(1-)s d) ds = Et e- Vx,t    d
                                                                   + rt,t+ + e
                                                                              - (1-)
                                                                                     pt+ f                                      (12)
           0
                                                          
                                             + Et            e-s t+s rt,t
                                                                      d
                                                                         +s + (1 - (1 - f ))e
                                                                                             - (1-)s
                                                                                                     pt+s ds
                                                      0

where t +  is the optimal (stochastic) stopping time when the next durable adjustment
takes place and t is the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint at date t. An un-
constrained household ( = 0) equates the expected discounted marginal utility of durables
                                                                   9
over the holding period of the durable to the expected discounted cumulative user cost over
the holding period plus the losses from the fixed cost. When borrowing constraints bind
for some t + s, the household also considers how liquid assets at date t + s are affected by
                                                    d
increasing the durable position, which is given by rt,t+s , and how durables act as collateral

to relax the borrowing constraint.
    The crucial thing to note about (12) is that the planning horizon stops at the next
adjustment date t +  . Suppose  were deterministic, then only the cumulative user cost
between t and t +  enters the equation, whereas user costs after t +  get zero weight.
Since  is in fact stochastic, it is integrated out by the expectation operator which weighs
the user cost at t + s by the probability the durable position has not been adjusted before
that date. At longer horizons, it is quite likely that the household has already adjusted its
durable position so user costs at these horizons receive little weight relative to those in the
more immediate future.



4     The User Cost in Equilibrium
We have shown that durable demand is particularly sensitive to the contemporaneous user
cost and user costs in the near future. However, in equilibrium, user costs are themselves
forward looking through the relative price of durables and its expected evolution. We now
characterize this channel, which smooths out the relationship between durable demand and
interest rates. To do so we use a special case of the model in which there are no fixed
costs (f = 0), durables are fully collateralizable ( = 1) and there is no borrowing spread
(rs = 0). In this case, the LTV constraint never binds and households continuously adjust
their durable positions. The first order condition is the limit of the intensive margin first
order condition (12) as the time between adjustment shrinks to zero,   0. It implies
that all households set their marginal rate of substitution between durables and nondurables
equal to the contemporaneous user cost,
                                       1
                               cit     
                                                               .    d
                                           = pt (rt +  +  ) - pt = rt .                   (13)
                            1 -  dit



                                                10
Since the contemporaneous user cost is common across households, so is the cit /dit = Ct /Dt
ratio. While this first order condition is considerably simpler than those in Section 3, it
shares the property with the smooth-pasting condition that the contemporaneous user cost
plays a special role in determining durable demand. In this sense, the insights of this special
case are relevant to the fixed-cost model.
   For given paths {rt , Ct }                                      d 
                             t=0 we can solve for {Xt , Dt , pt , rt }t=0 using equations (6), (7),

(10), and (13). After linearizing this system, we can use standard differential equation
                                                                             ^t =              Kt -K¯
methods to solve for durable expenditure (see Supplementary Appendix C). Let k                  K ¯

denote percent deviation from steady state of variable Kt . Starting from steady state, durable
expenditure is given by
                                             
                                1                                  r
                                                                   ¯+  + 
                         ^0 = -
                         x                      e-2 t (rt - r
                                                            ¯) +          c
                                                                          ^t dt                 (14)
                                         0                            

              r+        r+ )2
                       (¯            [¯
                                      r+ + ]
where 2 =      2
                   +      4
                                +       
                                                               ¯ +  +  is the positive eigenvalue of
                                                    r +  + ) > r
                                                +  (¯
the system.
   While the first order condition (13) shows that durable demand depends only on the
contemporaneous user cost and consumption level, equation (14) shows that durable expen-
diture is a smooth function of the expected interest rate and the consumption paths. The
forward-looking nature of equation (14) reflects equilibrium movements in the relative price
of durables that smooth changes in the user cost. Suppose the real interest rate is reduced
at some future date t leading to an increase in durable demand and durable prices at that
date. Before t, there is an incentive to accumulate durables to exploit the anticipated appre-
ciation. In equilibrium, the contemporaneous price of durables will react to the increase in
future demand. The higher price reflects stronger demand for durables, which itself reflects
a lower user cost due to the anticipation of capital gains. Therefore the relative price of
durables rises upon the news and then rises further as date t approaches. Given the isolestic
supply curve, (6), equilibrium movements in durables prices are proportional to movements
in durable expenditure so the path for pt directly maps into the path for Xt .
   While equilibrium price movements make durable expenditure forward-looking, future
real interest rates are discounted at rate 2 > r
                                               ¯ +  +  . This discounting makes forward
guidance less effective than contemporaneous real rate cuts at stimulating durable demand.
                                                       11
To understand the discounting, again consider the scenario in which the real rate is low
at date t, causing an increase in durable demand and prices at t. How strongly prices
before t respond to the anticipated appreciation depends on the costs of holding the asset.
With higher (steady state) interest rates, operating costs, or depreciation there is a higher
flow cost of holding the asset and the price path will need to compensate households for
those costs meaning it will need to be steeper and the initial price response will be smaller.
Moreover, part of the payoff of acquiring durables is the marginal utility flow they bring.
With diminishing marginal utility, taking on a larger durable position to exploit anticipated
appreciation brings about a smaller dividend and the price path will need to compensate
the household for this, too. Marginal utility drops by more if the the change in the durable
stock is large (the supply elasticity 1/ is large) or the elasticity of substitution  is small.
Again, as movements in pt are proportional to those of xt , these considerations for prices
immediately translate to the path for xt .
    We find that the patterns described here carry over to the numerical solution for the full
fixed-cost model, which we turn to next. In particular, the user cost of durables is forward
looking in equilibrium, which makes the extensive margin forward looking. Moreover, future
real rates are less powerful than contemporaneous real rates in line with the discounting
discussed above.



5     Quantitative Results
We now quantitatively assess the power of forward guidance.


5.1    Calibration

The calibration largely follows McKay and Wieland (2020) where we show the model accu-
rately captures the transmission of monetary shocks to the intensive and extensive margins
of durable demand as well as nondurable consumption.
    We choose an elasticity of substitution between durables and nondurables of  = 0.5,
which is at the lower end of the range of values estimated empirically (Ogaki and Reinhart,
1998; Davis and Ortalo-Magn´
                           e, 2011; Pakos, 2011; Davidoff and Yoshida, 2013; Albouy
                                              12
                              Table 1: Calibration of the Model
 Parameter    Name                                 Value Source
              Elas of substitution                    0.5      See text
              Inverse EIS                             4        Estimated C IRF
              Durable exponent                        0.581    d/c ratio = 2.64
              Depreciation rate                       0.068    BEA Fixed Asset Table
              Required maintenance share              0.35     See text
              Operating cost                          0.048    See text
              Discount rate                           0.096    Net Assets/Private GDP = 1.12
     r¯       Real interest rate                      0.015    Annual real FFR
     ¯s
     r        Borrowing spread                        0.017    Mortgage T-Bill spread
     f        Fixed cost                              0.194    Ann. adjustment prob = 0.19
              Intensity of match-quality shocks       0.158    McKay and Wieland (2020)
              Borrowing limit                         0.8      20% Down payment
     z        Income persistence                      -0.090   Floden and Lind´ e (2001)
     z        Income st. dev.                         0.216    Floden and Lind´ e (2001)
              Inverse durable supply elasticity       0.049    See text


et al., 2016). Higher values imply that durable demand is overly sensitive to monetary
policy (McKay and Wieland, 2020). We also verified numerically that choosing a higher
value for the elasticity of substitution  reduces the power of forward guidance relative to
contemporaneous interest rates and in this sense our choice is conservative. We set the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution to 1/4, which allows the model to match the small
response of nondurable consumption to monetary policy shocks (McKay and Wieland, 2020).
It is at the lower end of the range typical in calibrations, but on the higher end of traditional
time-series estimates (Hall, 1988; Campbell and Mankiw, 1989; Yogo, 2004) as well as recent
cross-sectional estimates (Best et al., 2020).
   We calibrate the taste for durables to match the value of the stock of durables relative to
nondurable consumption from 1970-2019. Durables include housing and consumer durables.
The depreciation rate is set to match durable stock depreciation in the BEA fixed asset table.
We measure maintenance costs as the sum of intermediate goods and services consumed in
the housing output table, the PCE on household maintenance, and the PCE on motor vehicle
maintenance and repair. Operating costs include taxes on the housing sector and PCE on


                                                 13
household utilities and motor vehicle fuels and fluids.
       We calibrate the discount rate, , to match aggregate holdings of financial assets net of
mortgage and auto loans. We set the steady state real interest rate to 1.5%, which is the
average real federal funds rate between 1991 and 2007. We set the borrowing spread to 1.7%,
which is the average spread between the 30-year mortgage and 10-year Treasury rates.
       The fixed adjustment cost is set to match the frequency of durable adjustments. Our
calibration target is a weighted average of the frequency of moving residence or making a
housing addition or substantial repair and the frequency of buying a car. These frequencies
are weighted in proportion to the values of the respective durable stocks. In McKay and
Wieland (2020), we estimate the arrival intensity of match-quality shocks, , from PSID data
on durable adjustments using the method of Berger and Vavra (2015).  is identified by the
frequency with which households adjust their durable position despite having a small gap
between their existing durable position and their target position. The LTV limit,  is set
to 80% and we take the parameters of the idiosyncratic risk process from Floden and Lind´
                                                                                        e
(2001).
       To calibrate the supply elasticity of durable goods we interpret the production externality
as reflecting congestion caused by a fixed factor specifically land. This leads us to an inverse
durable supply elasticity of  = 0.049. This value reflects the share of residential investment
in durable expenditure (36%), the share of new permanent-site structures in residential
investment (58%), and the cost of land in new permanent-site structures (approx. 24%).3
An elastic supply is consistent with the muted response of the relative price of durables
estimated by McKay and Wieland (2020) and with House and Shapiro's (2008) finding that
capital goods production responds significantly to investment stimulus but prices do not.4
The supply elasticity determines the variation in durable prices and thereby the importance
of capital gains in the user cost discussed in Section 4. In Supplementary Appendix E we
show forward guidance is only slightly more powerful when we calibrate  to the inelastic
end of the range estimated by House and Shapiro (2008).
   3
      The first two values are from NIPA Table 1.1.5 and NIPA Table 5.4.5, 1969-2007. We calibrate the cost
of land in housing prices using the midpoint of new and existing houses in Davis and Heathcote (2007). See
McKay and Wieland (2020) for further details.
    4
      Goolsbee (1998) finds stronger price responses, but for the categories of goods that also serve as consumer
durables (autos, computers, and furniture) he, too, finds little price response.

                                                       14
    We solve the model using continuous-time methods from Achdou et al. (2017) and the
sequence-space methods from Auclert et al. (2019).


5.2     Results

Figure 1 shows the change in contemporaneous output in response to interest rate cuts
at different horizons. The solid line corresponds to our main model. A contemporaneous
interest rate cut of 1% for one quarter increases output by 0.75%. Promises of interest
rate cuts in the future are less powerful and substantially so at more distant horizons. If
the same interest rate change occurs one year from now, then today's output increases by
0.30%, only forty percent as much compared to contemporaneous stimulus. For promises
more than four years out, the power of forward guidance settles at a fifth of the effectiveness
of a contemporaneous cut. In short, forward guidance is considerably less powerful than
contemporaneous interest rate cuts in our model. In Supplementary Appendix D we show
that 73 percent of the weaker effects of forward guidance at a one-year horizon reflect a
weaker extensive margin response and the intensive margin accounts for 21 percent.
    We plot results from two other models for comparison. First, as is well-known, the
standard new Keynesian model predicts real rate changes at any horizon have the same
effect on output today. This prediction of the model is widely regarded as implausible and
at the heart of the forward guidance puzzle (see Carlstrom et al., 2015; Del Negro et al., 2015;
McKay et al., 2016). Our model makes several changes from the new Keynesian model, but
the addition of durables is particularly important. We plot the effect of forward guidance in
a version of our model with only nondurables.5 In that model, forward guidance effects are
only slightly attenuated relative to the three-equation model. For example, an interest rate
cut three years from now is 90% as effective as a contemporaneous interest rate cut.
   5
     In this model, the durable share in utility is set to zero,  = 0, rendering , , f, ,  irrelevant. The
inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution,  , is calibrated to match the impact response of output to a
contemporaneous 1% real rate reduction in our full model. The borrowing limit is set to - times the 25th
percentile of durable holdings in our full model. The parameter  is set to match the same net asset to GDP
ratio as in the full model. Other parameters are unchanged.




                                                     15
Figure 1: Contemporaneous output response to promises of interest rate cuts at different
horizons. At each horizon the real interest rate drops by 1 percentage point for one quarter.
The solid blue line represents our main model from Section 2. The dashed red line is a version
of the same model without durables and the dashed-dotted yellow line is the standard Three-
Equation model. The latter two models are calibrated to yield the same output effects for a
contemporaneous real interest rate cut as our main model.

6     Long-Term Financing
Forward guidance is often thought to affect household purchasing decisions by moving long-
term financing rates such as mortgage rates. Our model abstracts from this mechanism as
households use short-term assets for financing. We now extend the model to include a long-
term asset and show that the smooth-pasting condition governing durable adjustment timing
(11) and the first order condition for the intensive margin (12) are unchanged. Furthermore
the interest rate that appears in the user cost is the short-term return on the long-term asset
not the yield to maturity.
    The long-term asset is a bond that can be bought and sold at price qt . Each unit of this
bond pays a flow coupon v dt each instant with the quantity of bonds amortizing at rate
 dt. The instantaneous return on the bond is
                                             .
                                             qt + v
                                        b
                                       rt           - .                                   (15)
                                                qt

Borrowing through the long-term bond incurs an intermediation fee rs proportional to the
                                                 16
                                                                                         b
value of the debt so the instantaneous cost of borrowing through the long-term asset is rt + rs .
       Define total holdings of short-term assets by a
                                                     ~it and total holdings of the long-term bond
by bt . Total liquid wealth of the household is ait = qt bit + a
                                                               ~it . Absent a durable adjustment,
the household's budget constraint is

                        .     a
                       ait = rit ait + rs ait I{ait <0} - ( +  )pt dit - cit + zyit                  (16)

       a                                                qt bit
where rit is the return on wealth.6 Let it =             ait
                                                                 be the portfolio share of the long-term
bond. Then the return on wealth is a portfolio-weighted average of the two asset returns,

                                        a        b
                                       rit = it rt + (1 - it )rt

The short-term return on wealth replaces the short-term real rate in the user cost equation
(10), since it captures the return that could be earned by delaying a durable adjustment.
       The no-arbitrage condition implies that all assets must pay the same return on a perfect
                 a     b
foresight path, rit = rt = rt . Combining this condition with (16) yields the budget constraint
(4). Therefore, the model with a long-term asset has the same budget constraint conditional
on not adjusting as the model with a short-term asset only. The budget constraint conditional
on adjusting (1) and the borrowing constraint (3) from the short-term asset model are also
unaffected. Therefore, long-term debt does not change the household problem conditional on
the household's initial states (ai0 , di0 , zi0 ) and the paths for aggregate variables. We obtain
exactly the same smooth-pasting condition (11) and intensive margin first order condition
(12). Thus, durable demand decisions discount future user costs exactly as in our baseline
model. Moreover, as the decision problem is unchanged, so is the definition of the user cost
(10). In particular, the user cost depends on the short-term real interest rate, not the yield
to maturity.
       To understand why the first order conditions are unaffected, let us focus on the extensive
margin. Recall that households make a short-term decision near the adjustment threshold--
to adjust now or a little later. By adjusting later, the household avoids paying the expected
return on the long-term debt over that period. By no-arbitrage, the return on the long-term
bond is equal to the short-term rate. Using the same logic, the instantaneous user cost
   6
    In writing (16), we incorporate that households will never hold a positive position in one asset and a
negative position in the other in equilibrium.
                                                   17
depends on the instantaneous return of the long-term bond, which is equal to the short-term
real rate.
    Intuitively, financing a purchase is more expensive if qt falls as the household then has
to issue more bonds and commit to more coupon payments. A low expected return on the
bond then implies the cost of financing the purchase is expected to rise. Moreover, as the
bond price qt is inversely related to the long-term rate, a low expected return also implies the
long-term rate is expected to rise. In this manner, the model captures the desire to lock-in
a low long-term financing cost when long-term rates are expected to rise.
    Intuitively, financing a purchase becomes more expensive if qt falls as the household then
has to issue more bonds and commit to more coupon payments. If households expect such
an increase in the cost of financing, then the expected return on the long-term bond is low,
all else equal, and households will find it beneficial to make adjustments sooner. Moreover,
as the bond price qt is inversely related to the long-term rate, an expected decrease in qt
implies that the long-term rate is expected to rise. In this manner, the model captures the
desire to lock-in a low long-term financing cost when long-term rates are expected to rise.
    While the partial equilibrium decision problem is unaffected by long-term debt, the equi-
librium of the economy will reflect a valuation effect on ai0 as the asset price q0 jumps upon
news of the real interest rate path. Moreover, the government budget constraint is similarly
affected by valuation effects yielding a different path for taxes. In Supplementary Appendix
F we quantify the importance of these valuation effects and show that they slightly reduce
the power of contemporaneous interest rates but overall our results are little changed.



7     Conclusion
In recent years, forward guidance policies have received considerable attention not only be-
cause of their relevance to unconventional monetary policy strategies but also because they
raise questions about the plausibility of the strongly forward-looking behavior in workhorse
macroeconomic models. We show that incorporating durables goods demand subject to
fixed adjustment costs substantially reduces the power of forward guidance. We view this
as an attractive approach for modeling forward guidance because durable goods are partic-

                                              18
ularly sensitive to monetary policy and because fixed adjustment costs are supported by the
microeconomic lumpiness of durable adjustments.




                                            19
References
Acharya, S. and K. Dogra (2020): "Understanding HANK: Insights from a PRANK,"
 Econometrica, 88, 1113­1158.
Achdou, Y., J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2017): "Income and
 wealth distribution in macroeconomics: A continuous-time approach," Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Albouy, D., G. Ehrlich, and Y. Liu (2016): "Housing demand, cost-of-living inequality,
 and the affordability crisis," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Angeletos, G.-M. and C. Lian (2018): "Forward guidance without common knowledge,"
 American Economic Review, 108, 2477­2512.
Auclert, A. (2019): "Monetary policy and the redistribution channel," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 109, 2333­67.
Auclert, A., B. Bardo  ´ czy, M. Rognlie, and L. Straub (2019): "Using the sequence-
 space Jacobian to solve and estimate heterogeneous-agent models," Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Barsky, R. B., C. L. House, and M. S. Kimball (2007): "Sticky-price models and
 durable goods," American Economic Review, 97, 984­998.
Berger, D. and J. Vavra (2015): "Consumption dynamics during recessions," Econo-
 metrica, 83, 101­154.
Bernanke, B. S. (2020): "The new tools of monetary policy," American Economic Review,
 110, 943­83.
Best, M. C., J. S. Cloyne, E. Ilzetzki, and H. J. Kleven (2020): "Estimating the
 elasticity of intertemporal substitution using mortgage notches," The Review of Economic
 Studies, 87, 656­690.
Campbell, J. R., J. D. Fisher, A. Justiniano, and L. Melosi (2017): "Forward
 guidance and macroeconomic outcomes since the financial crisis," NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual, 31, 283­357.
Campbell, J. Y. and N. G. Mankiw (1989): "Consumption, income, and interest rates:
 Reinterpreting the time series evidence," NBER macroeconomics annual, 4, 185­216.
Carlstrom, C. T., T. S. Fuerst, and M. Paustian (2015): "Inflation and output
 in New Keynesian models with a transient interest rate peg," Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 76, 230­243.
Davidoff, T. and J. Yoshida (2013): "Estimating consumption substitution between
 housing and non-housing goods using macro data," Tech. rep., Working paper.
Davis, M. A. and J. Heathcote (2007): "The price and quantity of residential land in
 the United States," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2595­2620.
Davis, M. A. and F. Ortalo-Magne      ´ (2011): "Household expenditures, wages, rents,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 248­261.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2015): "The Forward Guidance
 Puzzle," Working paper.

                                           20
Doepke, M. and M. Schneider (2006): "Inflation and the redistribution of nominal
 wealth," Journal of Political Economy, 114, 1069­1097.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2019): "Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete
  markets," American Economic Review, 109, 3887­3928.
Floden, M. and J. Linde     ´ (2001): "Idiosyncratic risk in the United States and Sweden:
  Is there a role for government insurance?" Review of Economic dynamics, 4, 406­437.
Gabaix, X. (2020): "A behavioral New Keynesian model," American Economic Review,
 110, 2271­2327.
Goolsbee, A. (1998): "Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital
 Goods*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 121­148.
Hagedorn, M., J. Luo, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2019): "Forward guidance,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 102, 1­23.
Hall, R. E. (1988): "Intertemporal substitution in consumption," Journal of political
 economy, 96, 339­357.
House, C. L. and M. D. Shapiro (2008): "Temporary investment tax incentives: Theory
 with evidence from bonus depreciation," American Economic Review, 98, 737­68.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016): "The power of forward guidance
 revisited," American Economic Review, 106, 3133­58.
McKay, A. and J. F. Wieland (2020): "Lumpy Durable Consumption Demand and the
 Limited Ammunition of Monetary Policy," U.C.S.D. Working Paper.
Michaillat, P. and E. Saez (2019): "Resolving New Keynesian anomalies with wealth
 in the utility function," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1­46.
Mishkin, F. S. (1995): "Symposium on the monetary transmission mechanism," Journal
 of Economic perspectives, 9, 3­10.
Ogaki, M. and C. M. Reinhart (1998): "Measuring intertemporal substitution: The
  role of durable goods," Journal of political Economy, 106, 1078­1098.
Pako  s, M. (2011): "Estimating intertemporal and intratemporal substitutions when both
  income and substitution effects are present: the role of durable goods," Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics, 29, 439­454.
Sterk, V. and S. Tenreyro (2018): "The transmission of monetary policy through
  redistributions and durable purchases," Journal of Monetary Economics, 99, 124­137.
Werning, I. (2015): "Incomplete markets and aggregate demand," Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Yogo, M. (2004): "Estimating the elasticity of intertemporal substitution when instruments
 are weak," Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 797­810.




                                             21
A       Derivation of Equation (11)
Starting with the smooth-pasting condition

                              d                                             d
                         Et      Vt (a - pt (d                 
                                              t - (1 - f )d), dt , z ) = Et    Vt (a, d, z )
                              dt                                            dt

and substituting the evolution of the value function conditional on not adjusting yields,

                           d
                      Et      Vt (a - pt (d                 
                                           t - (1 - f )d), dt , z ) = Vt (a, d) - u(ct , d)
                           dt

    Using Ito's Lemma, we determine the evolution of the left-hand-side,

                 .                 .    .                               .          .              .  z 2
Va,t (a                                                                                     
       t , dt , z )[a + (1 - f )pt d - pt (dt - (1 - f )d) - pt (dt + dx,t x + dz,t Et z + dzz,t         )]
                                                                                                      2
                      .  .  .  z                      2
                                                                                .                       z 2 .
+ Vd,t (at , dt , z )(dt + dx,t x + dz,t Et z + dzz,t ) + Vz,t (at , dt , z )Et z + Vzz,t (at , dt , z ) + Vt (a
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                t , dt , z )
                                                     2                                                   2
= Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d).

    Conditional on adjusting, the optimal choice of d is given by

                                 pt Va,t (a                             
                                           t , dt (x, z ), z )  Vd,t (at , dt (x, z ), z ),


with equality if the LTV constraint, dt (x, z ) 
                                                                   1      x
                                                                 1-(1-f ) pt
                                                                             ,   is not binding.


A.1       LTV constraint not binding

If the household is not borrowing constrained in making a durable adjustment, then the
terms involving the optimal choice of d drop out (envelope condition),

                 .                 .    .                                                 .                    z2   .
Va,t (a                                                                                          
       t , dt , z )[a + (1 - f )pt d - pt (dt - (1 - f )d)] + Vz,t (at , dt , z )Et z + Vzz,t (at , dt , z )      + Vt (a     
                                                                                                                         t , dt , z )
                                                                                                               2
= Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d).

    Next, we substitute the HJB equation post-adjusting,

                 .                 .    .                           .                         .
Va,t (a                                                                                                             
       t , dt , z )[a + (1 - f )pt d - pt (dt - (1 - f )d) - at ] - Vd,t (at , dt , z )dt + Vt (at , dt , z ) - u(ct , dt )

= Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d).


                                                            22
     Using the value-matching condition, first-order condition for adjustment, and dividing
by Va,t yields,

      .                   .        .                       .          .               1
      a + (1 - f )pt d - pt (d                          
                              t - (1 - f )d) - at - pt dt =                                        u(c     
                                                                                                      t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
                                                                             Va,t (a     
                                                                                    t , dt , z )

     Substituting the evolution of liquid assets and the durable stock yields,

               (rt pt + pt + pt - pt ) (d
                                             .                                                 .
                                         t - d) + f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + (ct - ct )
                               1
                =                          u(c     
                                              t , dt ) - u(ct , d)                                                           (17)
                     Va,t (a     
                            t , dt , z )

                                                                         d
     Finally, we plug in the definition of the instantaneous user cost, rt = rt pt + pt + pt - pt .
                                                                                                                              .
This yields equation (11) for the unconstrained case, pt Va,t = Vd,t .


A.2        LTV constraint binding

If the household is LTV-constrained, then dt =
                                                                       1      xt
                                                                     1-(1-f ) pt
                                                                                 ,   and the smooth pasting condition
is

                           d
                              Vt (a - pt (d
                               Et                           
                                           t - (1 - f )d), dt , z ) = Vt (a, d) - u(ct , d)
                           dt
                                              d
                                           Et Vt (xt - pt d t , z ) = Vt (a, d) - u(ct , d)
                                             dt
                  d        (1 - f )               1        xt
                Et Vt (-                xt ,                  , z ) = Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d).
                  dt     1 - (1 - f ) 1 - (1 - f ) pt

     Using Ito's Lemma,

                                   (1 - f ) .                  1                              1 .       pt
                                                                                                               .
           -   Va,t (a     
                      t , dt , z )              xt +                     Vd,t (a       
                                                                                  t , dt , z ) (xt - xt    )
                                1 - (1 - f )            1 - (1 - f )                          pt        pt
                                   .                        z2   .
           + Vz,t (a                            
                    t , dt , z )Et z + Vzz,t (at , dt , z )    + Vt (a     
                                                                      t , dt , z ) = Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d)
                                                            2

     In the instant after an adjustment takes place, the value function satisfies u(c     
                                                                                     t , dt ) +
                 .                          .                         .                    z  2    .
Va,t (a                                                                                                                  
       t , dt , z )at +Vd,t (at , dt , z )dt +Vz,t (at , dt , z )Et z +Vzz,t (at , dt , z ) 2 +Vt (at , dt , z ) = Vt (at , dt , z ).

Substituting this into our previous equation yields,

                                         (1 - f ) .
                                                                                                                         .
            Va,t (a                                       . +
                                                    x t - a
                                                                  1
                                                                           Vd,t (a            1 .       pt
                   t , dt , z ) -                          t                      t , dt , z ) (xt - xt    )
                                       1 - (1 - f )           1 - (1 - f )                    pt        pt
                           .
     -Vd,t (a                                     
             t , dt , z )dt - u(ct , dt ) + Vt (at , dt , z ) = Vt (a, d, z ) - u(ct , d)

                                                               23
                                                                              .
                                                                               (1-) xt
     Next we substitute the value-matching condition and d             
                                                          t = - (1 - )dt = - 1-(1-f ) pt

to further simplify,
                          (1 - f ) .
                                                                                                      .
Va,t (a     
                      -
                                           . +
                                     x t - a
                                                   1
                                                            Vd,t (a            1 .                   pt
       t , dt , z )                         t                      t , dt , z ) (xt +  (1 - )xt - xt    )
                        1 - (1 - f )           1 - (1 - f )                    pt                    pt
                                                 = u(c     
                                                      t , dt ) - u(ct , d)


     The evolution of cash on hand conditional on not adjusting is given by,
              .       .               .           .
              xt = a + (1 - f )pt d + (1 - f )pt dt
                                                                          .           .
                  = rt a - ( +  )pt d - ct + zyt + (1 - f )pt d + (1 - f )pt d
                                                                  .                       .
                  = rt xt - ct + zyt - [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d,
                                                                   (1-f )
where we use yt as compact notation for (1 - t )Yt . Since a                       
                                                            t = - 1-(1-f ) xt and dt =
  1      xt
1-(1-f ) pt
            ,     we then get
                            (1 - f )                                   .                           .
Va,t (a     
       t , dt , z ) -                  {-ct + zyt - [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d}
                          1 - (1 - f )
- {-c                    
     t + zyt - ( +  )pt dt }

      1                           1 .                   pt
                                                                      .
+              Vd,t (a     
                      t , dt , z ) (xt +  (1 - )xt - xt    ) = u(c     
                                                                  t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
  1 - (1 - f )                    pt                    pt
     Next we distribute terms into distinct benefits and costs of adjusting,

Va,t (a                                      .                                    .    
       t , dt , z ) -[rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d + ( +  )pt dt
        1                                                           .                           .
+                Va,t (a     
                        t , dt , z ) -zyt + ct + [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d
    1 - (1 - f )
+ Va,t (a              
         t , dt , z )(ct - ct )

      1                           1 .                   pt
                                                                      .
+              Vd,t (a     
                      t , dt , z ) (xt +  (1 - )xt - xt    ) = u(c     
                                                                  t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
  1 - (1 - f )                    pt                    pt
     Substituting the evolution of cash-on-hand,

Va,t (a                                      .                                    .    
       t , dt , z ) -[rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d + ( +  )pt dt
        1                                                           .                           .
+                Va,t (a     
                        t , dt , z ) -zyt + ct + [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d
    1 - (1 - f )
+ Va,t (a              
         t , dt , z )(ct - ct )

      1                           1                 pt
                                                              .
               Vd,t (a                                                                 .
+                     t , dt , z ) ([rt +  (1 - ) -    ]xt - ct + zyt - [rt pt +  +  - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - ) -
  1 - (1 - f )                    pt                pt
= u(c     
     t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
                                                         24
     Collecting terms again,

    Vd,t (a     
           t , dt , z )                                               .
                       dt - Va,t (a     
                                   t , dt , z )d (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )
           pt
+ Va,t (a                                               .       
         t , dt , z ) f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + ( +  )pt (dt - d)

        1                              Vd,t (a     
                                              t , dt , z )                                               .
+                Va,t (at , d
                             t , z ) -                              -zyt + ct + [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt -
    1 - (1 - f )                              pt
+ Va,t (a              
         t , dt , z )(ct - ct )

= u(c     
     t , dt ) - u(ct , d)


     Divide by the post-adjustment marginal utility of wealth Va,t (a     
                                                                     t , dt , z )


     Vd,t (a      
             t , dt , z )                              .
                
                           dt - d (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )
    pt Va,t (at , dt , z )
                                    .
+ f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + ( +  )pt (dt - d)

        1         Vd,t (a       
                          t , dt , z )                                                      .                    .
+                                        -1             zyt - ct - [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - ) - pt )]d
    1 - (1 - f ) pt Va,t (a      
                            t , dt , z )

+ (ct - ct )
             1
=                          u(c     
                              t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
     Va,t (a     
            t , dt , z )

     Next we separate the first term into a component that is present for all household and
one that is only present for constrained households,

                              .                       Vd,t (a       
                                                              t , dt , z )                            .
(rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt ) (dt - d) +                                         - 1 (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )dt
                                                     pt Va,t (a t , dt
                                                                     
                                                                       , z )
                                    .
+ f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + ( +  )pt (dt - d)

        1         Vd,t (a       
                          t , dt , z )                                                      .                        .
+                                        -1             zyt - ct - [rt pt + pt + pt - pt - f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )]d
    1 - (1 - f ) pt Va,t (a      
                            t , dt , z )

+ (ct - ct )
             1
=                          u(c     
                              t , dt ) - u(ct , d) ,
     Va,t (a     
            t , dt , z )




                                                              25
which we can then combine with the other term affecting constrained households only,

      (rt pt + pt + pt - pt ) (d
                                      .                                                           .
                                t - d) + f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + (ct - ct )

                 1         Vd,t (a       
                                   t , dt , z )                                 xt - (1 - f )pt dt                      .
         +                                        -1                                               (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )
             1 - (1 - f ) pt Va,t (a      
                                     t , dt , z )                                      pt
                                                                    1
         +zyt - ct - ( + )pt d =                                                   u(c     
                                                                                      t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
                                                      Va,t (a     
                                                             t , dt , z )

    Last, we substitute out cash on hand for liquid assets,

               (rt pt + pt + pt - pt ) (d
                                                  .                                                       .
                                         t - d) + f (rt pt +  (1 - )pt - pt )d + (ct - ct )

                       1         Vd,t (a                                                                            .
                                         t , dt , z )                                .                             pt
               +                                        -1                           at + at  (1 - ) -
                   1 - (1 - f ) pt Va,t (a      
                                           t , dt , z )                                                            pt
                              1
               =                             u(c     
                                                t , dt ) - u(ct , d)
                   Va,t (a     
                          t , dt , z )

                                                                                                   Vd,t (a     
                                                                                                           t ,dt ,z )
    When the household is not borrowing constrained, then                                         pt Va,t (a            = 1, and this first
                                                                                                             t t ,z )
                                                                                                              ,d

order condition coincides with our earlier derivation (17). Thus our derivation given the
borrowing constrained nests the unconstrained optimality condition as a special case.
    To obtain equation (11), we plug in the definition of the instantaneous user cost (10)
 d
rt
                                  .
   = rt pt + pt + pt - pt and the evolution of liquid assets (4).



B        Derivation of Equation (12)
Assume that an adjustment is optimal today. Then the integrated HJB equation (9) is
                                          
Vtadj (x, z ) = max E                        e-s [u(ct+s , e-(1-)s d)] ds + e- Vtadj
                                                                                 + (at+ + pt+ (1 - f )e
                                                                                                        - (1-)
                                                                                                               d, zt+ )
                 {ct+s },,d           0

where  is the optimal stopping time. If between t and t + s no further adjustment takes
place, then liquid assets accumulate as
                                                          s
                                  s                               s
     at+s = (x - pt d)e           0 rt+u     du
                                                  +           e   k rt+u   du
                                                                                [yt+k - ct+k - ( + )pt+k e-(1-)k d] dk.
                                                      0

which we substitute into the integrated HJB above equation and the borrowing constraint
below,

                                                  at+s  -(1 - f )e-(1-)s pt+s d

                                                                            26
     Letting the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint be t+s , then we can rewrite
value function as

Vtadj (x, z ) =
                                
                                                                                                                         
  max Et                           e-s [u(ct+s , e-(1-)s d)] ds + e- Vtadj
                                                                       + (x - pt d)e
                                                                                                                         0   rt+u du
                                                                                                                                       +
{ct+s },,d                  0
       
                    
+            e      s   rt+u du
                                   [yt+s - ct+s - ( + )pt+s e-(1-)s d] ds + pt+ (1 - f )e-(1-) d, zt+                                          +
     0
                                                                                    s
                                                          s                                 s
+ Et                e-s t+s (x - pt d)e                   0 rt+u   du
                                                                        +               e   k rt+u   du
                                                                                                          [yt+k - ct+k - ( + )pt+k e-(1-)k d]dk
             0                                                                  0

+(1 - f )e-(1-)k pt+s d ds

     The first order condition for the durable stock is,
         
Et          e-(+(1-))s ud (ct+s , e-(1-)s d) ds =
     0
                                                                                
                                                                                        
          adj
+ Et e- Vx,t + pt e
                                       0   rt+u du
                                                     + ( + )                        e   k   rt+u du- (1-)k
                                                                                                                pt+k dk - (1 - f )e-(1-) pt+
                                                                            0
                                                                                        s
                                            s                                                   s
+ Et                e-s t+s pt e            0 rt+u   du
                                                          + ( + )                           e   k rt+u   du- (1-)k
                                                                                                                     pt+k dk - (1 - f )e-(1-)s pt+s ds
             0                                                                      0
                                                              d
     Substituting the definition of the cumulative user cost rt,t+s yields the equation (12) in

the text.



C            Derivation of Equation (14)
Linearizing equations (6) through (13) yields the following system of equations,
         .     ¯            ¯           ¯
         Dt - D       Dt - D      Xt - X
            ¯    = -     ¯     +     ¯
           D            D           X
              .           ¯                                          ¯                ¯
              Xt    Xt - X                              ¯ +  +  Dt - D
                                                        r                ¯ +  +  Ct - C
                                                                         r
             ¯ =       ¯    (¯
                             r +  +   ) + ( r t - ¯
                                                  r ) +            ¯   -            ¯ .
              X        X                                          D                 C
     In matrix form using the definitions of percent deviations
                .
                  ^         -                    ^t
                                                 d                0
                d .t  = r  ¯+ +                      + 1                                                                  r
                                                                                                                          ¯+ +             .
                  ^t
                  x          
                                   r
                                   ¯+  +        x^t       (r - r
                                                          t
                                                                ¯) -                                                        
                                                                                                                               ^t
                                                                                                                               c

     The eigenvalues this system are,

                                              r
                                              ¯+                    r +  )2  [¯
                                                                   (¯         r +  + ]
                                    1,2 =         ±                        +           +  (¯
                                                                                           r +  +  ),
                                                2                     4          
                                                                                        27
and the corresponding eigenvectors,

                                                               
                                            =
                                                         + 1  + 2

   The diagonalized system is,
           .
           z1t         1 0        z1t               1               -1            r
                                                                                  ¯+  +                        -1
           .      =                        +                           (rt - r
                                                                             ¯) -                                 c
                                                                                                                  ^t .
           z2t         0 2        z2t            (2 - 1 )           1              (2 - 1 )                    1

We solving z1 backward:
                                                t                                                    t
                                 1                                           r
                                                                             ¯+  + 
          z1t = z10 e1 t -                          e1 (t-s) (rs - r
                                                                   ¯) ds +                               e1 (t-s) c
                                                                                                                  ^s ds,
                              (2 - 1 )      0                                 (2 - 1 )           0

and z2 forward,
                                                                                            
                          1                                             r
                                                                        ¯+  + 
           z2t = -                        e-2 (s-t) (rs - r
                                                          ¯) ds +                              e-2 (s-t) c
                                                                                                         ^s ds
                       (2 - 1 )    t                                     (2 - 1 )       t

   Rotating the system back into is original plane yields,

                                        ^t =  (z1t + z2t )
                                        d

                                        x
                                        ^t = ( + 1 )z1t + ( + 2 )z2t

                                           ^0 =  (z10 + z20 ),
The initial condition z10 is determined by d
                                                                                                 
                      ^0 +                           -2 s                  (¯
                                                                            r +  + )
               z10   =d                             e       (rs - r
                                                                  ¯) ds -                                e-2 s c
                                                                                                               ^s ds
                              (2 - 1 )      0                              (2 - 1 )          0

which we use to derive the solution for the durable stock,
                                                     
      ^t = d
           ^0 e1 t + e1 t                               -2 s       r +  +  )  -2 s
                                                                  (¯
      d                                      e     (rs - r
                                                         ¯) ds -                   e   c
                                                                                       ^s ds
                                (2 - 1 )0                         (2 - 1 ) 0
                        t
                                                    (¯r +  +  ) t 1 (t-s)
          -               e1 (t-s) (rs - r¯) ds +                   e     c
                                                                          ^s ds
             (2 - 1 ) 0                              (2 - 1 ) 0
                        
                                                        r +  +  )  -2 (s-t)
                                                       (¯
          -                e-2 (s-t) (rs - r ¯) ds +                   e        c
                                                                                ^s ds.
             (2 - 1 ) t                                 (2 - 1 ) t
   Plugging the solution for the durable stock into the equation for durable expenditure
yields,
                    + 1 ^
               x
               ^t =    dt + (2 - 1 )z2t
                     
                    + 1 ^ 1  -2 (s-t)                 r
                                                      ¯+  +                             
                 =     dt -      e      (rs - r
                                              ¯) ds +                                       e-2 (s-t) c
                                                                                                      ^s ds,
                             t                                                      t

and setting t = 0 gives equation (14) in the text.
                                                               28
D        Forward Guidance Decomposition: Durable Expen-
         diture and Extensive Margin
In Section 5 we noted that 73 percent of the weaker effects of forward guidance at a one-year
horizon reflect a weaker extensive margin response and the intensive margin accounts for 21
percent.
      Figure A.1 breaks down the total output response from Figure 1 into the durable contribu-
tion (dashed red line), the contribution coming only from the extensive margin (dash-dotted
black line), and the contribution coming only from the intensive margin contributions (dash-
dotted purple line). A key take-away from this figure is that the weaker output response of
forward guidance is almost entirely accounted for by a weaker response of durable spending,
which parallels the total output response.
      Figure A.1 also shows that both the extensive margin and the intensive margin are
less responsive to forward guidance than to contemporaneous interest rate changes. The
sensitivity of the extensive margin declines from a 0.479% contribution to output for a
contemporaenous interest rate change to a 0.156% contribution to output for a real rate
cut one year from now. For the intensive margin the contribution drops from 0.159% to
0.067%. Since the overall responsiveness of output falls from 0.744% for a contemporaenous
real rate cut to 0.303% for a real rate cut one year from now, the extensive margin accounts
      0.156-0.479                                          0.067-0.159
for   0.303-0.744
                    = 73.2% and the intensive margin for   0.303-0.744
                                                                         = 20.8%.



E        Forward Guidance and the Durable Supply Elastic-
         ity 
In Section 4 we argued that an upward sloping supply curve for durables makes durables
demand more forward looking through movements in the relative price of durables. In
this section we show that reasonable variation in the durable supply elasticity does not
significantly change the discounting of future real interest rates. In our calibration the
supply elasticity is  -1 = 20. Supplementary Appendix Figure A.2 plots the response of


                                                 29
Figure A.1: Contemporaneous output response to promises of interest rate cuts at different
horizons decomposed by contributions to durable expenditure. At each horizon the real
interest rate drops by 1 percentage point for one quarter. The solid blue line represents the
output response in the durables model shown in Figure 1. The dashed red line shows the
contribution from total durable expenditure. The dash-dot black line shows the contribution
from the change in the extensive margin of durable adjustment. The dash-dot purple line
shows the contribution from the intensive margin of durable adjustment.




                                             30
Figure A.2: Contemporaneous durable expenditure response to promises of interest rate cuts
at different horizons for various choices of the supply elasticity. In each case, the response
is normalized to 100% for a contemporaneous interest rate cut. At each horizon the real
interest rate drops by 1 percentage point for one quarter. The solid blue line represents our
main model from Section 2, calibrated according to Section 5.1 with  -1 = 20. The dashed
red line is the same model with the supply elasticity equal to  -1 = 14. The dash-dotted
yellow line is the same model with the supply elasticity equal to  -1 = 6.

durable expenditure to forward guidance expressed as a fraction of the response of durable
expenditure to contemporaneous interest rates. For example, a value of 0.5 on the vertical
axis indicates that forward guidance is half as effective as contemporaneous interest rates.
We consider two alternative values of  ;  -1 = 14 and  -1 = 6, which straddle the range
of estimates in House and Shapiro (2008). We again normalize durable expenditure by its
response to a contemporaneous interest rate change.7 As Figure A.2 shows, the relative
strength of forward guidance on durable demand is similar to our baseline calibration for
these choices.
    7
      With less elastic supply, equilibrium durable expenditure responds less strongly to monetary policy at
all horizons. This is why we normalize by the response to contemporaneous interest rates in the figure.




                                                    31
F      Forward Guidance and Long-term Debt
In Section 6 we argued that the partial equilibrium decision problem is unaffected by long-
term financing of durables conditional on initial wealth, but long-term assets create valuation
effects so the equilibrium with long-term debt is not identical to the one with short-term
debt only. In this appendix we investigate how our results are affected by these valuation
effects.
    We assume that household portfolios consist entirely of long-term debt, i.e. it = 1. The
total value of assets for each household is then ait = qit bit . Like Farhi and Werning (2019)
we then introduce short-term debt at the margin and make sure that households are not
better off by including it in their portfolio. This implies that the return on both assets must
                    b
be equalized, rt = rt . The budget constraint conditional on not adjusting then evolves as in
the baseline model (equation (4)).
    We normalize dividend payments  = r +  such that the steady state price of debt is
      
q=   r+
           = 1. The valuation effect on assets at time 0 is then
                                               qi0
                                       ai0 =       bi0 = qi0 bi0
                                                q
with bi0 given and the path for qit determined by the no-arbitrage equation
                                           .
                                           qt +       b
                                      rt =       -   rt .
                                              qt
    To ensure that the valuation effects do not immediately cause households to violate the
borrowing constraint, we specify it in terms of the number of long-term bonds held,
                                      q
                                         ait = bit  -pit dit .
                                     qit
Thus, a household that is initially at the borrowing constraint with qbi0 = bi0 = -pit dit will
continue to satisfy it after the valuation effects take place.
                                                         ¯ . This implies that there are
    The government maintains a constant quantity of debt B
no discontinuous changes in tax policy from valuation effects. As in our baseline model, the
government balances its budget. This requires raising taxes to finance dividend payments
¯ net of debt issuance qt B
B                         ¯ each instant. Thus, the aggregate tax rate is
                                        ( - qt )B¯
                                   t =             .
                                            Yt
                                                  32
   Relative to our baseline model, there is one additional parameter  governing the duration
of the long-term asset (or debt). Setting the duration to -1  0 yields the baseline model
as a special case. Next, we calibrate the duration to -1 = 4.5 years based on Doepke and
Schneider (2006), Figure 3.
   Figure A.3 compares the effectiveness of forward guidance in the model with long-term
debt with our baseline model. The output responses are very similar and contemporaneous
interest rate reductions remain substantially more powerful at stimulating contemporeanous
output than are expected future interest rate reductions.
   There are, however, some small difference in the results. First, contemporaneous interest
rates are slightly less powerful in the long-term debt model. A lower real rate increases
the asset price q0 , which redistributes from debtors to creditors and partially offsets the
redistribution from creditros to debtors from lower interest rate payments (Auclert, 2019).
The asset price q0 responds more strongly for more immediate interest rate reductions.
Thus, contemporaneous interest rate changes lead to a larger redistribution from debtors to
creditors than do future changes. This depresses the expansionary effects of contemporaneous
interest rate changes relatively more than forward guidance.
   Second, forward guidance is slightly more powerful with long-term debt. With long-term
debt, 0 falls in response to future interest rate cuts because the revenue the government
raises from issuing a unit of bond rises. In contrast, taxes react only to contemporaneous
interest rate changes with short-term debt. The reduction in 0 in response to future interest
rate changes makes forward guidance more powerful.




                                             33
Figure A.3: Contemporaneous output response to promises of interest rate cuts at different
horizons in the baseline model with short-term debt (blue line) and the model with long-term
debt (red line). At each horizon the real interest rate drops by 1 percentage point for one
quarter.




                                            34
