                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ECONOMIC STUDIES ON THE OPIOID CRISIS:
                                   A REVIEW

                                   Johanna Catherine Maclean
                                         Justine Mallatt
                                      Christopher J. Ruhm
                                          Kosali Simon

                                      Working Paper 28067
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28067


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2020, Revised November 2020




The authors would like to acknowledge helpful comments from Abby Alpert, Janet Currie,
Dhaval Dave, Ethan Lieber, David Powell, Molly Schnell, and Bradley Stein. Ruhm thanks the
University of Virginia Bankard fund for nancial support for this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Johanna Catherine Maclean, Justine Mallatt, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Studies on the Opioid Crisis: A Review
Johanna Catherine Maclean, Justine Mallatt, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 28067
November 2020
JEL No. I1,J01
                                           ABSTRACT

The United States has experienced an unprecedented crisis related to the misuse of and addiction
to opioids. As of 2018, 128 Americans die each day of an opioid overdose, and total economic
costs associated with opioid misuse are estimated to be more than $500 billion annually. The
crisis has evolved in three phases, starting in the 1990s and continuing through 2010 with a
massive increase in use of prescribed opioids associated with lax prescribing regulations and
aggressive marketing efforts by the pharmaceutical industry. A second phase included tightening
restrictions on prescribed opioids, reformulation of some commonly misused prescription
medications, and a shift to heroin consumption over the period 2010 to 2013. Since 2013, the
third phase of the crisis has included a movement towards synthetic opioids, especially fentanyl,
and a continued tightening of opioid prescribing regulations, along with the growth of both harm
reduction and addiction treatment access policies.

Economic research, using innovative frameworks, causal methods, and rich data, has added to our
understanding of the causes and consequences of the crisis. This body of research also identifies
intended and unintended impacts of policies designed to address the crisis. Although there is
general agreement that the causes of the crisis include a combination of supply- and demand-side
factors, and interactions between them, there is less consensus regarding the relative importance
of each. Studies show that regulations can reduce opioid prescribing but may have less impact on
root causes of the crisis and, in some cases, have spillover effects resulting in greater use of more
harmful substances obtained in illicit markets, where regulation is less possible. There are
effective opioid use disorder treatments available, but access, stigma, and cost hurdles have stifled
utilization, resulting in a large degree of under-treatment in the U.S.

How challenges brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic may intersect with the opioid crisis is
unclear. Emerging areas for future research include understanding how societal and healthcare
systems disruptions affect opioid use, as well as which regulations and policies most effectively
reduce potentially inappropriate prescription opioid use and illicit opioid sources without
unintended negative consequences.

Johanna Catherine Maclean                    Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics                      Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
Temple University                            University of Virginia
Ritter Annex 869                             235 McCormick Rd.
Philadelphia, PA 19122                       P.O. Box 400893
and NBER                                     Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
catherine.maclean@temple.edu                 and NBER
                                             ruhm@virginia.edu
Justine Mallatt
Bureau of Economic Analysis                  Kosali Simon
U.S. Department of Commerce                  O'Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Justine.Mallatt@bea.gov                      Indiana University
                                             1315 East Tenth Street
                                             Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
                                             and NBER
                                             simonkos@indiana.edu
1       Introduction
The opioid crisis in the United States imposes challenges to population health, and a range of
social and economic outcomes. An argument can be made that the misuse of opioids reflects
one of the most substantial public health crises that the U.S. has faced in modern times.
While the origins of the crisis are reasonably well understood, there are competing theories
on why an initial period of opioid misuse developed into a crisis that has persisted for over
two decades, has lead to more deaths than any previous drug epidemic, and shows no signs of
abating. Moreover, the policy efforts to address the crisis have achieved only mixed success
to date. In 2020, public health attention in the U.S. and elsewhere shifted abruptly to the
COVID-19 pandemic, but as a grim reminder that the opioid crisis has not become any less
severe, preliminary evidence indicates increasing rates of opioid mortality. According to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 12-month counts of drug overdose deaths rose
9.1 percent from March 2019 to March 2020 or 67,726 to 73,860 (Ahmad, 2020).
     During the last decade, a sizable body of economic research has emerged studying the
origins of the opioid crisis, the factors that shaped its transformation from prescription to
illicit sources, and the impact of policies and regulations that have been implemented. Our
review focuses on economic studies that we located through searches of standard sources and
soliciting feedback from economists working on opioid-related issues. These studies add to
large literatures outside of economics that have made, and continue to make, contributions of
utmost importance to understanding the opioid crisis.1 Further, this review mainly examines
the opioid crisis within the U.S. We note that opioids have imposed substantial costs on other
countries, however the U.S. ­ to date ­ has arguably been hardest hit by the opioid crisis.
For this reason, we predominantly examine the U.S. experience. Future work could more
closely review how this crisis has developed in other countries.
     Four broad conclusions emerge from the economic literature to date. (1) Estimates of
economic costs of opioids on society are high, but the estimates of costs vary widely, largely
depending on how lost life is factored into the calculations. (2) Labor markets are both
affected by the opioid crisis and may play a role in explaining its origins. Most evidence
indicates that worse economic times are associated with higher opioid use, although some
studies suggest that this relationship may be spurious (resulting from confounding factors)
and or with reverse causation (where increased opioid use depresses employment and labor
force participation). Origins of the opioid crisis are likely to have roots in both supply-side
    1
     See Barry and Frank (2019) for an eloquent discussion of the importance of incorporating evidence from
fields beyond economics.




                                                    1
and demand-side factors, but with feedback loops and many different mechanisms at play in
the complicated relationship between opioids and economic climate. Regardless, collectively
the economic studies to date imply that labor market factors explain at most a small portion
of the opioid crisis. (3) Healthcare providers and the pharmaceutical industry played a
critically important role in the origins of the crisis. In particular, aggressive marketing of
new prescription opioids with high potential for addiction towards physicians pre-disposed
to liberal prescribing of medications provided an ideal setting for the emergence of a crisis.
Indeed, the literature suggests that the healthcare sector played a larger role contributing
to the crisis than economic factors. This finding implies a more direct route for policies
designed to mitigate the crisis than if the primary origins of the crisis resulted from the
economic climate and changes in social institutions. However, policies that simply `turn off'
the supply of prescription opioids, without addressing existing addiction to these drugs, risk
failure by driving substitution towards other, difficult to regulate, and riskier substances.
(4) Supply-side policies that restrict access to prescription opioids have been aggressively
adopted by governments, and on the demand-side there has substantial movement towards
increasing treatment access, through relaxing regulations and insurance expansions. Some
economists have also emphasized marijuana legalization as a policy that may have benefits in
the form of reducing opioid use.
    Going forward, research is needed to resolve remaining uncertainty on the effectiveness of
existing policies, to evaluate policies that are only beginning to be implemented such as those
focusing on harm reduction rather than abstinence, and to better understand interactions
between the opioid crisis and other types of substance use disorder harms, such as the recent
and rapid increase in deaths involving stimulants.


2     Three Waves of the Opioid Crisis
The ongoing opioid crisis in the U.S. can be viewed as having occurred in three waves. The
first stage reflected massive increases in the use of prescribed opioids and dates from the
mid-1990s through 2010. This wave occurred during a period of loosening restrictions on the
prescribing of opioid painkillers and extensive marketing of them to both healthcare providers
and consumers. The second wave, from 2010 to 2013, was distinguished by extensive growth
in heroin use and associated deaths, although problems related to prescribed opioids remained
substantial during this period. The current wave (through the time of writing), beginning in
2013, has been characterized by surging deaths and problems related to the use of synthetic
opioids, particularly fentanyl and its analogs.


                                              2
    The first wave of the opioid crisis is thought to have begun shortly after the 1996 approval
and release of Purdue Pharma's soon-to-be blockbuster drug OxyContin. Prior to the mid-
1990s, opioid prescribing was surrounded by a culture of `opia-phobia,' as opioid painkillers
have a long history of misuse in the U.S. reaching back to the Civil War (Macy, 2018).
Through most of the 20th century, physicians were reluctant to prescribe opioids for pain
management, even to cancer patients and to the terminally ill (Quinones, 2016; Hill Jr, 1993;
Paice et al., 1998; Weissman, 1993). In 1996, Purdue Pharma introduced a new generation
of opioids with the launch of OxyContin, an oxycodone product with an extended-release
mechanism that was originally designed to reduce addiction. Purdue Pharma's marketing
approach was remarkable: the firm's promotional budget was magnitudes larger than those of
competitor firms, and far higher than any previous opioid marketing campaign. In addition,
the campaign specifically targeted healthcare providers who already displayed high rates of
opioid prescribing despite the prevailing culture of opia-phobia (Alpert et al., 2019).
    To further change prescribers' attitudes, Purdue Pharma and other opioid manufacturers
funded the American Pain Society, which lobbied the Joint Commission to prioritize the
treatment of pain (McGreal, 2018). The Joint Commission is a non-profit accreditation
organization whose certification is used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) to determine the reimbursement status of medical facilities nationwide. In 2001, the
Joint Commission implemented a pain scale, with pain being assessed as the `fifth vital
sign,' along with pulse, temperature, respiration rate, and blood pressure. More specifically,
healthcare providers were required to incorporate pain into patient assessments and, where
appropriate, encouraged to treat pain symptoms medically, including through the use of
prescription opioids. These actions played an important role in the emerging lax culture
of opioid prescribing that characterized the first decade of the 2000s: by 2012, 259 million
prescriptions for opioids were dispensed and approximately one in four Americans were
prescribed an opioid medication each year (Kilby, 2016; Mallatt, 2019).
    There were an estimated 3,442 deaths involving prescription opioid poisoning (not counting
synthetic opioids or heroin) in 1999; this number increased to approximately 15,000 overdoses
at the beginning of the second wave of the crisis in 2011.2 Similarly, rates of substance use
disorder (SUD) grew by a factor of six between 1999 and 2009 (Paulozzi et al., 2011). Opioid
prescribing peaked between 2010 and 2012 (Pacula and Powell, 2018a; Schuchat et al., 2017).
    The crisis then evolved to a second wave where deaths and other adverse consequences
   2
    All figures on drug deaths cited in this chapter are based on information contained on death certificates.
These certificates understate the actual death numbers by 20 to 25 percent because of incomplete reporting
of drug involvement (Ruhm, 2018).




                                                      3
associated with heroin use dramatically increased. Alpert et al. (2018), and Evans et al.
(2018) show that this transition was, in part, fueled by a reformulation of OxyContin in
August of 2010. The reformulated medication was crush-resistant and therefore harder to
snort or inject. Additional government policies targeting the supply of opioid prescriptions
(discussed below) also led to rising heroin use (Mallatt, 2020b). Heroin overdoses tripled
between 2010 and 2013, whereas prescription opioid overdoses not involving heroin plateaued
or subsided slightly. The overall effect of these market and policy changes was to increase the
total number of fatal opioid overdoses.
    There are differences across the U.S. in terms of the source of heroin. This heterogeneity
in source has important implications for policy efforts aimed at curbing use of this substance,
and suggests that there are disparities in the type, and potentially harmfulness, of heroin
consumed across the country. On the East coast, heroin has historically been imported in
white powder form from South Asia while consumers on the West coast generally obtained
black tar heroin sourced from Mexico (Abouk et al., 2019). Cutting agents and fentanyl are
more easily incorporated into powdered heroin in the East and are more dangerous than
pure heroin. Subsequently the East coast has suffered disproportionately from a large spike
in synthetic opioid overdoses beginning in 2014. While the source of heroin has remained
relatively stable on the West Coast over the various stages of the crisis, East Coast consumers
experienced a change in the source of heroin in 2015 when Mexican cartels became the major
suppliers of heroin in this area, effectively pushing South Asian suppliers out of the market
(United States Department of Justice, 2018b).
    In 2013, during the third wave which witnessed the shift towards fentanyl, the U.S.
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) began reporting the presence of this substance and its
analogues in seized heroin.3 Fentanyl is an extremely potent synthetic opioid that offers
several advantages over heroin to suppliers. In particular, fentanyl is relatively cheap to
produce, and easier to transport and smuggle since smaller quantities are required. The
production of heroin necessitates the relatively expensive, time-intensive, and conspicuous
growth of opium poppies. In contrast, fentanyl and its chemical analogues are completely
synthesized from ingredients in a lab. Many input components are imported from China
to Mexico, where the drug is then synthesized in labs and smuggled across the U.S. border
(United States Department of Justice, 2018b). An experienced opioid user may require one
or two grams of heroin per day (depending on purity), but equivalent dosages of fentanyl
are measured in micrograms (mcg), which saves distributors the costs and detection risks of
   3
     There was a spike in fentanyl deaths between 2005 and 2007 in Chicago, Detroit, and Philadelphia related
to a single lab in Mexico that was shutdown in 2006 (Pardo et al., 2019).



                                                     4
transporting many kilograms of heroin through border checkpoints.
    Data from the `darknet' (i.e., the non-trackable internet) suggest that the wholesale
price of fentanyl and its analogues is much lower than heroin, with a 100 mcg dose costing
about four cents in a wholesale setting. A wholesale kilogram of heroin (typically 50 percent
pure at this stage in the production process) costs between $33,000 and $100,000 (United
States Department of Justice, 2018a), while an equivalent ten grams of fentanyl costs
approximately $8,060 to $10,400 online, with prices falling rapidly from 2014 to 2016 (Miller,
2020). Distributors began cutting relatively expensive heroin with relatively cheap fentanyl to
lower production costs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that early-adopting dealers temporarily
captured market share, after which other dealers also began adding fentanyl to their product
to remain competitive. According to the DEA the addition of fentanyl to heroin poses `...a
higher risk of overdose to even the most experienced opioid users.' Fentanyl is also available
in diverted prescription form (such as Actiq and Duragesic), but is relatively expensive and
thus rarely a source of illicitly traded fentanyl (Lamy et al., 2020).
    Fentanyl was involved in 5,544 overdose deaths in 2014; compared with 9,580 and 19,410
deaths in 2015 and 2016 respectively. By 2017 this drug was associated with 28,466 deaths.
The fentanyl fatal overdose rate temporarily plateaued at around that level over the period
2018 to 2019, but rose again in the early months of 2020 suggesting that the crisis continues
to worsen (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b).


3     Background on the Opioid Crisis: Costs and Causes
3.1    Overall Prevalence and Costs
Data from the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) ­ the official government
source for substance use statistics in the U.S. ­ indicate that in 2018, 1.7 million Americans
met diagnostic criteria for prescription opioid use disorder (OUD) and over 500,000 for
heroin-related OUD (McCance-Katz, 2018). These numbers represent a lower bound on the
true prevalence of OUD as individuals are likely to under-report this condition in survey
settings and since the NSDUH excludes groups likely to have disproportionately high rates
of OUD (e.g., institutionalized and homeless individuals). Between 1999 and 2018, nearly
450,000 Americans died from an opioid overdose (McCance-Katz, 2020). Opioid misuse
and overdoses impose additional costs on the healthcare system in the form of emergency
department visits, direct treatment costs, and expenses associated with neonatal abstinence
syndrome (NAS). Nonmedical costs include those related to the criminal justice system, lost


                                              5
worker productivity, and many others. Economists have studied ways to estimate total costs,
using insights from economic cost studies in other contexts. Total societal costs of opioid
misuse had been calculated at $55 billion in 2007 and $78 billion in 2013 (Birnbaum et al.,
2011; Florence et al., 2016), but these estimates exclude the costs of premature mortality.
Taking premature mortality into account, as well as some other costs, yields much higher
estimates of $504 billion in 2015 from the Council of Economic Advisers (White House Council
of Economic Advisers, 2017), $179 billion in 2018 from the Society of Actuaries (Davenport
et al., 2019) and, most recently, over $1 trillion in 2017 (Florence et al., 2020).


3.2     Demographic Trends in Overdose Mortality
The opioid crisis has not affected socioeconomic and demographic groups equally. Here we
summarize some broad patterns related to gender, race, and age. Overall drug overdose
death rates are higher among men than women; about two thirds of opioid overdoses occur
among males. However, women are relatively more heavily represented among prescription
opioid deaths, with men making up only 59 percent of these fatalities. Non-Hispanic white
Americans suffer disproportionately from prescription overdoses, with a death rate of 17.5
deaths per 100,000 population in 2016 (Scholl et al., 2019). American Indians and Alaska
Natives have the second highest rate of opioid overdose deaths, but data on these demographic
groups are sparse (Scholl et al., 2019; Rudd et al., 2014). Black and Hispanic Americans have
traditionally been somewhat less affected by the crisis, perhaps due to under-treatment of
pain within these groups, which may have inadvertently protected them from opioid initiation
and overuse (Alexander et al., 2018; Frankt and Monkovic, 2019). However, fatal overdose
rates are rising among Blacks in more recent years as fentanyl is increasingly concentrated in
urban areas, where Black Americans are disproportionately likely to reside. From 2015 to
2017, opioid mortality rates rose especially quickly among Blacks aged 45 to 64 years in large
metro areas (Lippold, 2019). From 2011 to 2016, the age-adjusted rate of overdose deaths
involving fentanyl grew the most in the Black population, reaching 140.6 percent per year,
while this rate rose 108.8 and 118.3 percent annually for non-Hispanic whites and Hispanics
(Spencer et al., 2019).4 Older populations report far less opioid misuse (McCance-Katz,
2018) and lower rates of opioid overdose deaths corroborate these survey responses, whereas
individuals aged 18 to 59 suffer relatively higher opioid fatality rates (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020a).
    The risk of opioid overdose is also positively correlated with a myriad of other demographic
   4
    For further studies on age and race dimensions of the crisis, please see Rudd et al. (2014), Martins et al.
(2015), Ihongbe and Masho (2016), Hedegaard et al. (2017), Pouget et al. (2018), and Scholl et al. (2019).


                                                      6
characteristics, including being disabled, unmarried or widowed, unemployed, uninsured,
incarcerated, having low education, being a citizen (in comparison to a non-citizen), renting
rather than owning a home, residing in a non-rural area, and having a low income. Residents
of South Atlantic states and Mountain states have relatively high rates of overdose.5 This
heterogeneity in prevalence rates across population subgroups provides important context for
understanding hypotheses related to origins of the crisis and potential impacts of policies.


3.3       Labor Market Impacts
In theory, opioids could improve labor markets through better management of chronic pain
symptoms and, in turn, enhanced work capacity. However, labor market outcomes could
worsen if addiction or other prescription opioid-related problems ­ for example dizziness,
nausea, and sedation ­ reduce work capacity. Most studies to date indicate that, on net,
expanded use of opioids worsens labor market outcomes in the form of lowered labor force
participation and additional expenses for employers. Opioid use also raises health insurance
costs due to direct expenditures on prescriptions for this medication, and other (indirect)
increases in healthcare costs. In this section, we review studies where the direction of causality
operates from the overuse of opioids to labor market outcomes; later in discussing the origins
of the crisis, we review studies where causation runs in the opposite direction.
    The labor force participation rate for prime working aged men (25 to 54 years) has been
declining since the 1970s, and opioids have potentially exacerbated this trend. Nearly half of
prime working aged men who are out of the labor force report using pain medication on any
given day, and about one third take prescription opioids (Krueger, 2017). Several studies using
aggregate measures corroborate the finding that opioid misuse causes labor market problems.
Harris (2017) demonstrates that the prevalence of high rates of opioid prescribing decrease
labor force participation rates, while Deiana and Giua (2018) show that restricting access
to opioids has the potential to increase them. Similarly, Aliprantis et al. (2019) find that
higher prescribing rates predict lower labor force participation for prime working aged men
and women, with particularly large reductions for persons without a four-year college degree.
Beheshti (2019b) shows that restrictions on hydrocodone prescribing, implemented in 2014,
led to improvements in labor market outcomes. Park and Powell (2020) find that the crisis's
transition to illicit opioids led to reduced labor market engagement, and to rising rates of
disability applications and enrollment. Rietveld and Patel (2020) demonstrate that additional
opioid exposure is negatively associated with measures of entrepreneurship and small business
  5
      Relative risk factors are taken from Altekruse et al. (2020).



                                                        7
formation. However, Currie et al. (2018) uncover a positive relationship between prescribing
and employment-to-population rates among women, but no association among men.
    Studies using individual-level data yield more mixed results. Using firm-worker matched
data from Denmark, Laird and Nielsen (2017) find that additional opioid prescribing decreases
labor force participation and income. Similarly, Savych et al. (2018) demonstrate that longer-
term opioid prescribing increases the duration of temporary disability spells among those
receiving Workers Compensation benefits in the U.S. However, some analyses of survey data
on individuals indicate that SUDs are not associated with transitions from full- to part-time
work, or with on-the-job problems with coworkers, or financial strain (Baldwin and Marcus,
2014; Maclean et al., 2015). Evidence from Norway suggests that treatment using Cox-2
Inhibitors decreased sickness days among workers with joint pain (B¨   utikofer and Skira, 2018)
and, in the U.S., Garthwaite (2012) finds that removal of Vioxx (a particularly effective Cox-2
Inhibitor) from the market in 2004 led to a 0.35 percentage point reduction in overall labor
force participation and $19 billion in lost wages in the year following removal. These findings
point to a possibility that proper use of opioids for pain treatment may help workers remain
on the job or return to work. Insuring individuals with opioid use disorder is also expensive,
costing employers an extra $10,000 per a year in medical expenses and $1,200 annually in
work losses (Rice et al., 2014).


3.4    Costs to Families
There is also evidence of the opioid crisis imposing costs in the sphere of family structure
and child well-being. The number of children living with an adult with an opioid use disorder
increased 30 percent, and those with an adult using heroin rose 200 percent, between 2002
and 2017 (Bullinger and Wing, 2019). Buckles et al. (2020) find that as a result of the opioid
crisis, the fraction of children living away from a parent and in a household headed by a
grandparent increased. Gihleb et al. (2020), and Gihleb et al. (2019b) document rising rates
of child removals and NAS over the course of the opioid crisis. From 2000 to 2015, the number
of foster care cases related to drug misuse increased 66 percent, and foster care costs rose by
$20,000 per case. The rate of NAS, where infants experience opioid withdrawal symptoms
due to in-utero exposure to opioids, has grown by 500 percent since 1999. The U.S. spends
$1.5 billion in treating NAS-related complications each year. Evans et al. (2019) illustrate
rising rates of child maltreatment cases due to increased opioid misuse.




                                               8
3.5       Crime
The opioid crisis seems to be less associated with crime, in the popular press, than the heroin
crisis of the 1970s, the crack and cocaine crisis of the 1980s and early 1990s (Fryer et al.,
2005; Pollack and Reuter, 2014), or the methamphetamine crisis that occurred in the 2000s
(Dobkin and Nicosia, 2009; Pl¨ uddemann et al., 2010). Nevertheless, there is evidence linking
both violent and property crimes with opioid prescriptions (some of which are diverted to
other users) and heroin use. In line with this hypothesis, Bondurant et al. (2018) and Wen
et al. (2017) find that expanding access to SUD treatment during the opioid crisis decreases
both violent and financially-motivated crimes.6 Dave et al. (2018) document that reducing
the supply of prescription opioids decreases violent crime.


3.6       Origins of the Crisis
Famously documented in Case and Deaton (2015), `deaths of despair' ­ i.e. deaths from
drug overdoses, suicides, and chronic liver disease (often inaccurately referred to as alcohol
deaths)­drove a surprising reversal in the decline of mid-life mortality among non-Hispanic
white Americans in the early 21st century. White mortality patterns began to reverse (from
a declining trend to an increasing trend) around the year 2000. This pattern is unique
to the U.S., as other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries continued to experience midlife mortality rate reductions during the same time
period. Drug deaths are by far the most important contributor relative to suicides and liver
disease, accounting for at least three-quarters of the overall effect. Among white men aged 25
to 55 years without a college education, the death rate from drugs, suicides, and chronic liver
disease was 125 to 150 deaths per 100,000 population in 2017, a 250 percent increase over
1992 rates (Leonhardt and Thompson, 2020).
    In the past 40 years, the U.S. experienced wage stagnation among less educated workers
due to automation, import competition, outsourcing, weakening unions, increased market
concentration, and productivity clusters in abstract tasks which benefit cities and the highly
educated, while posing a disadvantage to less connected geographies and the less educated.
The U.S. has also seen declines in the labor force participation rate, increases in mental
illness, disability, and chronic pain, as well as falling family and community engagement.
Some scholars contend that these changing economic factors have negatively impacted specific
groups of society, leaving them without hope of re-gaining economic stability and their
position in society. In response, members of these groups have turned to substances as a
  6
      Swensen (2015) shows that fatal drug overdoses also decrease as treatment access increases.



                                                      9
means to self-medicate their pain. Deaton argued in his 2017 testimony to Congress: `[Deaths
of despair] respond more to prolonged economic conditions than to short-term fluctuations,
and especially to the social dysfunctions, such as loss of meaning in the interconnected worlds
of work and family life, that come with prolonged economic distress' (Deaton, 2020).
    Recent research supports the hypothesis that economic factors have an impact on opioid
overdoses. Declines in local manufacturing employment depress wages and employment,
and increase opioid overdose deaths (Charles et al., 2019). Trade liberalization with China
has caused higher rates by suicide and fatal drug overdoses, especially among white males
(Pierce and Schott, 2020). Opioid overdoses are also impacted by short-term labor market
shocks such as a rise in the unemployment rate and plant closures: a worsening economic
climate appears to increase overdoses (Hollingsworth et al., 2017; Venkataramani et al.,
2020). Maclean et al. (2020) show that heroin-related admissions to SUD treatment decline
during economic downturns, but the authors find no evidence that prescription opioid-related
treatment admissions vary with changes in the business cycle. Minimum wage policies have
been shown to reduce suicides, although there is less clear evidence for opioids (Dow et al.,
2020). Similarly, counties that experience growth in industries that employ white males
experience fewer opioid overdoses, implying protective effects of industry-specific growth for
them. Dow et al. (2020) find that increases in the federal minimum wage and increases in the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) decrease rates of suicide (but not fatal drug overdose)
among Americans without a college education, implying that economic assistance may assuage
some forms of despair. Although multiple studies indicate a role for economic indicators
in determining adverse opioid outcomes, the magnitudes of the predicted effects are small
relative to the overall increases in opioid prescribing and overdoses, and are therefore unlikely
to be key determinants of the crisis.
    Few studies examine how changes in culture or social cohesion affect opioid outcomes,
which implies an substantial gap in the literature. In large part, the paucity of research
on these conceptually important factors may reflect the difficulty in obtaining detailed and
well-measured data on them. Identification using standard econometric methods may be
challenging. In particular, since measurements of both economic and cultural well-being have
deteriorated for some groups since the early 1970s, separating the causal effects of each may
be difficult. In addition, underlying forces may influence both economic and cultural factors,
further raising the difficulty of isolating causal effects from spurious correlations. Finally,
there is plausible endogeneity in the relationship of worsening economic conditions, declining
family stability, and decreasing civic engagement for whites without a college degree. These
phenomena have no single clear cause, but econometric identification requires that researchers


                                               10
use believably exogenous shocks to well-measured variables. Research identifying the effect of
economic change using small temporary economic shocks (typically by including time fixed
effects that account for macro trends) and the resulting local average treatment effects may
not be capturing the pervasive influence of these more opaque generational trends.7
    While several studies, mentioned above, suggest a causal relationship between economic
conditions and opioid overdoses, other research indicates that economic factors have only
limited effects on drug, suicide, and chronic liver disease deaths. Although counties that expe-
rience relative economic decline also had higher growth in drug mortality, Ruhm (2019a) finds
that the relationship is greatly mitigated (sometimes to zero) by controlling for confounding
factors and for allowing for selection on unobservables.
    In other words, economic conditions are correlated with population patterns of behavior,
and short-run and medium-run economic woes alone do not explain the bulk of the variation
in opioid overdose across the U.S. Similarly, Currie et al. (2018) argue that there is little or
mixed connection between counties' employment-to-population ratio and opioid prescriptions.
In particular, the authors find a weak link among women and no relationship among men.
Currie and Schwandt (2020) further illustrate that current labor market opportunities do not
explain a substantial part of the opioid crisis, and urge attention towards policies aimed at
addressing the opioid epidemic itself.
    Other research finds results that run contrary to the hypothesis that poor economic
outcomes cause more opioid misuse or other negative health outcomes. Metcalf and Wang
(2019) show that mining employment is actually positively correlated with opioid misuse ­
that is, counties realizing a decrease in this type of employment experience lower rates of
opioid overdose than those that are also reliant on mining but do not experience the negative
economic shock. Evidence from Denmark shows that industry export growth increases on-
the-job injury and elevates stress levels and rates of depression, heart attacks, and strokes
(Hummels et al., 2016); this finding conforms with other evidence of health benefits during
economic downturns (Ruhm, 2000). Furthermore, workers in more injury-prone industries
which experience employment growth receive more opioid prescriptions as their industry
expands (Musse, 2020). Therefore, even industries that gain from trade in the form of export
or overall economic growth more generally may see increased rates of opioid use through the
channel of rising rates of injury or illness incurred while working.
    To summarize, the opioid crisis can be viewed through an economic lens as resulting from
an interaction between supply-side and demand-side factors, and feedback between the two.
   7
    See Case and Deaton (2020) for a detailed discussion of these issues and for their arguments for why they
believe that declines in social capital are the key factor explaining increases in `deaths of despair.'



                                                     11
At the most fundamental level, supply-side factors related to the increased production and
marketing of opioids, combined with changes in prescribing patterns and policies (e.g., the Joint
Commission listing pain as the fifth vital sign) were the proximate cause. These factors explain
why the crisis began, fairly suddenly, in the late 1990s, after the approval of OxyContin
and pharmaceutical industry efforts to normalize the prescribing of opioids. Conversely,
demand-side factors such as skill-biased technological change and import competition are
unable to account for the timing of the increase in opioid prescriptions and the resulting
adverse consequences. However, demand-side factors play an important role (albeit abetted by
the pharmaceutical industry's targeted marketing efforts to healthcare providers most likely
to prescribe opioids on the part of suppliers) in determining who was most affected. Moreover,
the mutually reinforcing relationships between economic conditions and opioid use may create
a feedback loop of economic and personal despair. In this regard, the crisis can usefully be
viewed as a cyclical, reinforcing model of despair and self-medication through opioid misuse
which was acted upon by outside forces from public policy, the changing prescribing culture,
and possibly other factors that have not yet been examined in the literature.


3.7    Healthcare Institutions
Particularly important are the effects of additional exposure to opioids and to physicians who
prescribe opioids more aggressively. Finkelstein et al. (2019) study those who move between
U.S. counties to assess the effect of the local prescribing environment on opioid use. The
authors show that moving from a county that has a relatively low rate of top-prescribing
physicians to one with a relatively high rate is associated with additional overdoses for
migrating individuals. The results imply that 30 percent of the variation in opioid deaths
across counties is explained by place-specific effects, namely physician prescribing behavior.
More directly, Schnell and Currie (2018) find that physician education plays a role in opioid
prescribing styles. In particular, those physicians with medical degrees from low-ranked
schools prescribe at higher rates than otherwise similar physicians. Schnell (2018)'s finding
that physicians differ dramatically in their response to the reformulation of OxyContin further
serves to underline the role played by physician prescribing in the crisis. Opioid marketing
to doctors also has an impact on how different states experience the opioid crisis. Alpert
et al. (2019), and Nguyen et al. (2019a) find that pharmaceutical company marketing efforts
increased prescribing by physicians. More generally, Lin et al. (2020) demonstrate that
geographic area variations in the intensity of medical care provided are positively associated
with opioid death rates.



                                               12
4     Policy Responses to Prescription Opioid Misuse
Governments at all levels have undertaken a range of policy approaches in attempts to curb
the opioid crisis. The nature of these policies has changed over time, corresponding to some
extent with the types of opioids targeted, and as the character of the crisis has shifted from
prescription to illicit opioids. While some localities have departed from the general trend,
early policies tended to focus on interventions designed to curtail the supply of prescription
opioids, or raise the financial or time costs of accessing these substances. More recent policies
have typically emphasized demand-side factors, such as the ability to obtain prescriptions
from multiple healthcare providers, and harm reduction efforts, such as naloxone access laws.
Which type of policy response is more likely to be more effective is unclear ex ante. There
are also potentially synergies between policies, suggesting gains to implementing multiple
complementary efforts.
    A rapidly growing literature in economics and policy evaluates several of these regulations.
This research suggests the desirability of both supply-side and demand-side policies, as well
as the importance of considering relevant local factors that may interact with both types of
policies; e.g., see Pacula and Powell (2018b), and Saloner and Barry (2018) for an excellent
discussion on this topic, and Barry and Frank (2019), Mauri et al. (2020), and Schuler
et al. (2020) for comprehensive recent reviews of state and federal policy studies related to
opioid outcomes. Of note, most supply-side policies to date have focused on reducing opioid
prescribing, opening the door to possible substitution towards illicit drugs (such as heroin)
that are harder to regulate and, arguably, more harmful. Conversely, demand-side policies
often address outcomes that may impact underlying addiction to opioids. For example, OUD
treatment access (discussed later in this chapter).


4.1    Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs
One of the earliest policies implemented by states, and currently by far the most common,
is the prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP). PDMPs were adopted as early as
1939, in California, and were designed to reduce the misuse of prescription medications
generally, not specifically opioids (Holmgren et al., 2020). A PDMP is a centralized database
containing patient scheduled prescription medications. PDMPs are designed to increase
information available to healthcare providers related to patients' history with medically-
obtained prescription opioids. By 2017, all states had a PDMP in operation (Holmgren




                                               13
et al., 2020).8 Conceptually, healthcare providers (e.g., physicians who prescribe medications
and pharmacists who dispense them) enter information into the database when patients are
prescribed or dispensed prescription medications, including opioids. Healthcare providers
then have the ability to access the patient's historical use of opioids and other controlled
substances. The hope is that healthcare providers will then identify individuals who are
potentially misusing opioids and limit access of the drugs to these individuals, thereby curbing
misuse without reducing access to medications for legitimate patients. For example, doctor
shopping can be identified and prevented by reviewing patient histories. Similarly, and ideally,
implementation of a PDMP should not curtail access to prescription opioids for patients who
use the medication appropriately (e.g., to manage acute pain).
    For PDMPs to reduce opioid misuse, healthcare providers must actually use the database,
both by entering information after they prescribe or dispense controlled substances and by
checking the patient's history before doing so. Several features of the earliest PDMPs may
have stifled their effectiveness. Importantly, these PDMPs were voluntary: pharmacists were
required to enter controlled substance histories into the centralized database but healthcare
providers were not required to check the database at the time of prescribing or dispensing
medications. Since many healthcare providers contend that the act of checking or entering
information in the database is burdensome, prescribing providers often did not engage with
PDMPs. Early PDMPs were not electronic, adding to the administrative burden of using the
system. Given this backdrop, some healthcare providers have pushed back on PDMP adoption
because of the hassle of utilizing them, such as difficulty in obtaining logins, the database
not being accessible (i.e., the platform being `down'), and incomplete data (Haffajee et al.,
2015; Young et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2017). Beginning in 2007, several states adopted arguably
stronger PDMPs. In particular, this more robust policy approach often involved adding
`mandatory access' provisions requiring prescribers to use the database. Conceptually, such
mandatory access PDMPs should have more impact than voluntary systems as healthcare
providers are legally bound to query the system.
    A number of economic studies have examined the impact of PDMPs on opioid misuse.
Those examining broad measures of a PDMP, that do not distinguish between voluntary
and mandatory access programs, generally suggest they have a limited impact. For example,
using a sample of disabled non-elderly Medicare beneficiaries, Meara et al. (2016) do not
observe changes in various opioid misuse outcomes following adoption of a PDMP. Similarly,
Buchmueller and Carey (2018) find that among Medicare enrollees, voluntary PDMPs are
   8
     Missouri was the last state to implement a PDMP, and the law has been contested since its effective date,
so many studies consider Missouri to not have an operating PDMP.



                                                     14
not effective in reducing patterns of harmful opioid behavior, whereas mandatory-access
PDMPs are effective. However, Kilby (2016) shows a 12 percent reduction in opioid-related
mortality post-PDMP, and a 10 percent decline in prescribing among patients with employer-
sponsored insurance. Other studies, suggest that optional-use PDMPs have larger effects on
the Medicaid population (Bao et al., 2016) and on users with previous patterns of behavior
indicative of opioid misuse (Mallatt, 2019). The limited impact of many voluntary PDMPs is
not surprising as database use is often relatively infrequent among healthcare providers. For
example, in states where PDMP use is not mandatory, roughly 14 to 25 percent of healthcare
providers utilize the system (Alexander et al., 2015).
    More recent studies distinguish between voluntary and mandatory access PDMPs, and
provide more definitive evidence that the latter reduced prescription opioid misuse (Ali et al.,
2017; Buchmueller and Carey, 2018; Deiana and Giua, 2018; Bao et al., 2018; Grecu et al.,
2019; Mallatt, 2019, 2020b; Kaestner and Ziedan, 2019; Wen et al., 2019; Ziedan and Kaestner,
2020). For example, Grecu et al. (2019) show that, following adoption of a mandatory PDMP,
the number of admissions to substance use disorder treatment related to opioid use decreases
by 20 to 25 percent, although reductions only emerge two years post-policy. The authors also
document an age-gradient in the estimated treatment effects with admissions rates decreasing
by 32, 17, and 12 percent among those aged 18 to 24, 25 to 44, and 45 years or older.
    In addition to changes in direct effects on opioid use, recent research suggests that
mandatory PDMPs reduce crime (Dave et al., 2018; Deiana and Giua, 2018), improve
children's birth outcomes and decrease NAS (Gihleb et al., 2020; Ziedan and Kaestner, 2020),
and reduce foster care admissions (Gihleb et al., 2019a). The assumed mechanism is that
reduced opioid use leads to these improvements. A full consensus has not yet been reached,
with some studies showing opposing findings. For example, Mallatt (2018) finds that PDMP
adoption leads to increased heroin-related crime in counties with high rates of opioid use.
    There may be a feedback loop induced by PDMPs whereby pharmaceutical companies
reduce prescription opioid promotions following a mandatory PDMP which, in turn, lowers
demand for these medications (Nguyen et al., 2019b). PDMPs also appear to directly decrease
healthcare provider prescribing of opioids. Using rich health insurance claims data, Sacks
et al. (2019) show that opioids dispensed to opioid-naive users decline post-PDMP. Since
the databases will contain relatively little information on new users, these results suggest
that PDMPs instead reduce prescribing for other reasons, the most likely being hassle costs
of using the system (Bachhuber et al., 2018).9 Using unique data from Kentucky, Alpert
   9
     Note, however that some states are able to provide risk scores of all patients in PDMPs; e.g., see
https://apprisshealth.com/solutions/narxcare/ (last accessed November 9th, 2020).



                                                  15
et al. (2020) similarly suggest that reductions in physician opioid prescribing may be at least
partially attributable to the hassle costs associated with using the PDMP. Using claims data,
Mallatt (2019) shows that PDMPs target users displaying signs of opioid misuse.
    While studies establish that mandatory PDMPs reduce prescription opioid use and improve
some associated outcomes, there could be positive or negative spillover effects on the use
of other prescription medications, addictive substances, or non-drug pain therapies. For
instance, if prescription opioids and other addictive substances are economic complements,
then PDMP-attributable reductions in opioid prescribing should decrease the use of other
substances.10 However, if prescription opioids and other drugs instead are instead economic
substitutes, then consumers will switch to the substitute drug as new obstacles to obtaining
prescription opioids emerge. Cawley and Ruhm (2011) provide a careful discussion of the
relationships between substances. Whether substitution improves or worsens public health
will be determined by the relative harms of the involved drugs. Several studies provide
evidence of such substitution. For example, Grecu et al. (2019) show that opioid-related
admissions to SUD treatment programs decline following adoption of a mandatory PDMP,
and that there are also decreases in admissions for cocaine and marijuana use, which could be
economic complements to opioids. However, Mallatt (2020b) finds that consumers substitute
to heroin following the establishment of PDMPs, with particularly strong evidence in localities
with high prior levels of prescription opioid use. This result is concerning if heroin use is
more harmful than the consumption of prescription opioids; we may expect heroin to be more
dangerous because of the method of consumption (e.g., injection rather than swallowing pills)
or if users are less able to monitor the potency of the dose they are ingesting.
    Some researchers argue that PDMPs need not be mandatory to reduce prescription opioid
use. Wang (2020) shows that PDMPs (whether voluntary or mandatory) reduce opioid misuse
when they are adopted in combination with a state-level health integration technology policy
that promotes the sharing of health records electronically. Kaestner and Ziedan (2019) find
that adoption of a mandatory PDMP reduces sales of scheduled prescription drugs. However,
when also controlling for whether the PDMP is electronic, the authors find that the coefficient
estimate on the mandatory PDMP variable becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero.
They interpret these results to imply that the salient feature of the PDMP is whether the
database is electronic, not whether healthcare providers are mandated to check it.
    Overall, we note that while there are many studies on PDMPs, the literature has not
yet reached full consensus on the importance of PDMP implementation and design, leaving
  10
    The PDMP may also have a direct effect by reducing the prescribing of other scheduled drugs, such as
sedatives or stimulants.



                                                  16
scope for future work in this area. There is also opportunity for new research studying how
supply-side restrictions affect substitution towards other non-drug medical therapies and
and how to ensure that policies do not pose undue burdens on underrepresented minority
populations (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2020).


4.2     Other Supply-side Policies
There are a number of less studied state-level supply-side interventions. One important
category is pain management clinics laws (PMCL), which establish minimum requirements
that pain management clinics must meet in order to dispense prescription drugs. Broadly,
PMCLs are organized to prevent the emergence or operation of `pill mills' ­ medical clinics
that knowingly and willingly dispense prescription drugs, including to illegitimate consumers.
Pill mills were especially notorious in Florida, which was considered the epicenter of the
opioid crisis in the early 2000s. By preventing the ability of nefarious clinics from emerging
or allowing authorities to shutter such clinics, the PMCLs reduce both the overall supply of
prescription opioids and the extent of diversion to illegitimate users.
    PMCLs involve many separate requirements for clinics and doctors' offices, with variation
in the specific stipulations across states. Each set of laws specifies which facilities are classified
as pain management clinics, typically citing prescribing patterns or advertising practices that
are characteristic of pill mills. The packages of laws then add more requirements aimed at
reducing prescribing within these clinics or shutting them down altogether.
    Twelve states have passed legislation targeting pill mills. These policies appear to be
effective in reducing prescription opioid use. Using government data on sales of scheduled
prescription medications, Ziedan and Kaestner (2020) document 15 to 50 percent declines in
prescription opioid sales after implementation of a PMCL. Early evidence from Florida and
Texas suggest these targeted efforts are effective at curbing prescribing and reducing harmful
secondary outcomes like overdoses (Chang et al., 2016; Lyapustina et al., 2016; Mallatt,
2020b; Meinhofer, 2016; Rutkow et al., 2015). Meinhofer (2016) shows that the substantial
crackdown in Florida caused the number of active pain clinic licenses to fall from 988 in
2010 to 407 in 2012. Additionally, quantities of prescribed opioids decreased by 59 percent,
opioid-related admissions to drug treatment facilities increased by 33 percent and overdose
rates declined. Florida was also unique in that the DEA arrested many offending prescribers
during that state's crackdown on pain clinics, whereas pill mill laws in other states did not
include a substantial law enforcement component.
    Chang et al. (2016) find that, prior to the pill mill legislation, the top four percent of



                                                 17
opioid prescribers in Florida were responsible for 67 percent of total opioid prescriptions
in the state. After the pill mill legislation and law enforcement efforts were implemented,
the high risk providers saw fewer patients and prescribed fewer opioids. Lyapustina et al.
(2016) indicate that the Texas pill mill law reduced opioid prescribing by between eight and
24 percent. Using nationwide data on business establishment counts, Mallatt (2020a) shows
that the laws cause ten to 15 percent of establishments within a certain class of specialty
clinics (including pain clinics) to exit, equivalent to 23 fewer pain clinics for each treated
state. These studies reveal that pill mill laws operate at both the extensive margin, driving
pain clinics to exit treated counties and states, as well as on the intensive margin, as top
prescribers prescribe fewer opioids and see fewer patients.
    PMCL adoption appaers to have positive spillovers to labor market and crime outcomes.
Kaestner and Ziedan (2019) find that employment and earnings improve modestly post-law,
while Deiana and Giua (2018) demonstrate that labor market participation rates increase
and unemployment rates decline. Further, Mallatt (2020b) shows that PMCLs are negatively
associated with crime rates related to heroin possession and dealing.
    Many states have recently passed laws limiting the length of initial prescriptions for
opioids (typically to seven days). In considering the impact of these policies, Sacks et al.
(2019) unexpectedly show that such policies increase the overall amount of opioids prescribed
to new users. This contrary result is driven by the reduction in the length of prescriptions
that is more than offset by increases in the frequency of short prescriptions. Determining
whether the net effect is harmful or beneficial depends on the relative risks of growth at
the extensive margin (frequency of prescriptions) versus reductions at the intensive margin
(length of prescriptions).
    An important private policy that substantially altered the supply of prescription opioids
within the U.S. was the August 2010 reformation of OxyContin by Purdue Pharma. From its
introduction to the market in 1996 through early August 2010, OxyContin, an extended release
version of oxycodone that was often prescribed in high doses, was one of the most commonly
misused prescription opioids (Cicero et al., 2005). One problem with the original formulation
was that consumers often crushed or dissolved the pills and then inhaled or injected the drug
an a more intoxicating form, thereby circumventing the extended release mechanism occurring
with oral ingestion. Under pressure from the Food and Drug Administration, Purdue Pharma
released a re-formulated version of Oxycontin that was more difficult to crush or dissolve.
The company also quickly (within days) discontinued the original version, thereby abruptly
shutting off access to the previous, easy-to-abuse formulation of OxyContin. There were high
hopes for the potential of misuse-deterrent reformulations to reduce the injection, snorting,


                                             18
crushing, or chewing of prescription opioids (White et al., 2009).
    However, the Oxycontin reformulation had unintended spillovers into markets for illicit
drugs. While the exogenous and sudden supply shock markedly reduced the use of this opioid,
there was substantial and rapid substitution to heroin by consumers. Alpert et al. (2018)
conclude that areas with high underlying rates of OxyContin misuse realized large increases
in heroin deaths after the reformulation, and that the reformulation explains up to 80 percent
of the rise in fatal heroin overdoses after 2010. Similarly Evans et al. (2018) find that each
foregone prescription overdose death prevented by the OxyContin reformulation was offset by
an additional death from heroin overdose. Further, because heroin is commonly injected and
consumers often share needles, this drug-to-drug substitution led to increased transmission of
hepatitis B and C (Powell et al., 2019; Beheshti, 2019a). Evans et al. (2020) find additional
negative spillovers taking the form of increased child removals in areas with worse opioid
outcomes, and Park and Powell (2020) find negative spillovers to labor force participation,
finding increases in disability claiming.
    The longer-term effects of these policies are not yet well understood. For instance, new
initiation into medications for opioid use disorder might decline such that, in steady state,
there would be fewer individuals who misuse opioids under the reformulation than there would
have been in its absence. However, recent research by Powell and Pacula (2020) suggests the
opposite outcome. In particular, the authors uncover evidence of more deleterious effects in
the long-run because the reformulation spurred development of illicit drug markets.
    States and the federal government have also used the Controlled Substance Act (CSA)
as a tool for addressing the opioid crisis.11 Two changes in CSA, targeting rival products
and introduced separately, have allowed economists to study whether there are competitive
spillovers to prescription products when one but not another product is regulated. In August
2014, the U.S. federal government added tramadol, the second most popular opioid medication
at the time, to the CSA (entering this medication at level V, which involves restrictions on
refills). Twelve states implemented the identical policy prior to federal action, providing an
opportunity to compare effectiveness of the same opioid policy at state versus federal levels.
Seven weeks after tramadol's scheduling, the leading opioid form on the market, hydrocodone
combination products, was moved from level III to the more restricted level II (where no refills
are allowed). Gupta et al. (2020) find that the tightening of these prescribing restrictions
decreased their use, but also caused some increases in prescriptions of close competitors. As
a result, there was no statistically detectable short-run reduction in total number of opioid
prescriptions. In addition to supply-side policies, states adopted doctor-shopping laws (DSL)
 11
      This represents one of the few policies that have been used at a federal level.



                                                       19
requiring patients to report to their healthcare professional previous prescriptions and, in
a broad manner, prohibiting patients from obtaining medications through fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation. Popovici et al. (2018) show that DSLs reduce opioid overdose deaths and
opioid-related admissions to SUD treatment.
    Prescription opioids and marijuana may be substitutes along at least some dimensions. For
instance, marijuana may sometimes serve as an alternative treatment for chronic pain. Several
studies suggest that patients substitute marijuana for opioids following the adoption of a state
medical marijuana law (MML). In particular, these studies use health insurance claims data
and show that prescriptions for opioids decline post-law (Bradford and Bradford (2017, 2018);
Bradford et al. (2018); McMichael et al. (2020)). Recent work suggests that recreational
marijuana laws (RMLs) may have a similar impact on the utilization of prescription opoids
(Wen and Hockenberry, 2018). Moreover, reported chronic pain among older adults (Nicholas
and Maclean, 2019), and both health-related work absences (Ullman, 2017) and Workers'
Compensation benefit receipt (Ghimire and Maclean, 2020) decline (chronic pain is a common
ailment among those receiving Workers Compensation benefits), suggesting that the use of
marijuana may sometimes be effective in reducing chronic pain and other work-impeding
ailments. Dispensaries, venues in which consumers can legally purchase marijuana, appear
to be particularly important in the relationship between marijuana and opioids. Powell
et al. (2018) show that the opening of legal medical marijuana dispensaries reduces opioid-
related admissions to SUD treatment facilities by 15 percent and opioid fatalities by 16
percent. Similarly, Smith (2020) indicates that deaths from prescription opioid overdose fall
11 percent after a medical marijuana dispensary opens. These effects are concentrated among
non-Hispanic white males.
    However, the benefits of expanded access to marijuana through state laws on chronic pain
do not appear to extend to all populations. For example, Maclean et al. (2020) show that
applications for Social Security Disability Income and Supplemental Security Income increase
following adoption of an MML or RML. The authors hypothesize that individuals applying
for disability post-law may have weak labor market attachment or marginal disabilities that
are not improved by marijuana use.


4.3    Enforcement of Illicit Drug Prohibitions
Now that the crisis has transitioned towards illicit drugs such as heroin and fentanyl, a
discussion of the literature on law enforcement crackdowns during past illicit drug crises is
potentially useful. A 2014 review by Pollack and Reuter (2014) summarizes many studies



                                              20
of the effect of such enforcement efforts on drug prices; they do not find solid evidence
that raising the risk of arrest or the increasing the length of drug sentences affects street
prices. Cunningham and Finlay (2016), and Dobkin and Nicosia (2009) examine the effects of
government efforts to make the precursors of methamphetamine less available. Both studies
find only temporary effects on price, purity, and harmful outcomes, each outcome returning
to its pre-intervention level within a few months to two years. Reuter (1986) similarly finds
that cracking down on the importation and high level distribution of cocaine and marijuana
in the 1980s had little effect on street-level drug prices.
    In contrast, a study of Australia's 2001 effort to reduce the importation of heroin uncovers
a large impact on both purity and price (Moore and Schnepel, 2019). The authors also find
a short-term increase in violent and financially-motivated crime, as well as longer-lasting
decreases in overdoses and property crime. Australia may present a unique case for the
enforcement of illegal heroin shipments due to its island geography, which allows greater
success in targeting suppliers. Applying Australia's approach to the U.S. may therefore not
realize the same efficacy, as the land border with Mexico is more porous and there is evidence
that fentanyl is often shipped to the U.S. by mail.12
    Using web scrapes of darknet drug markets from 2014 to 2016, Miller (2020) documents
that wholesale fentanyl is priced 90 percent below equivalent doses of heroin on the black
market. Moreover, as fentanyl became more prevalent over this period, its price fell. In 2014,
the international law enforcement initiative `Operation Onymous' shut down darknet drug
markets and resulted in the arrests of darknet market administrators, sellers, and customers.
However, this intervention caused only a small and temporary price increase in fentanyl
which was overwhelmed by the general downward trend during the same time period. Miller
(2020) shows that while Chinese efforts to limit the illegal manufacture and export of various
fentanyl analogues did flatten the downward time trend in fentanyl prices, the resulting
prices remained strikingly low at the wholesale level. On the other hand, Mulligan (2020)
argues that reduced law enforcement efforts after 2013, due to the `Holder memo,' played an
important role in the emergence of illicit fentanyl.13
  12
     See Griswold et al. (2018), and Peiper et al. (2019) for examples of fentanyl precursors sourced abroad
and mailed to the U.S.
  13
     In the Holder memo, then Attorney General Eric Holder directed federal lawyers to stop prosecuting
nonviolent drug crimes. However, the reformulation of Oxycontin and other regulatory measures, noted above,
over this time period may preclude clean identification of Holder memo effects.




                                                    21
4.4     Harm Reduction Policies
Since there is little evidence that intensifying enforcement has significant potential for
decreasing misuse or raising street prices of illicit or diverted drugs, much of the recent
policy response emphasizes harm reduction strategies aimed at reducing fatal overdoses and
other problems related to the misuse of opioids. Harm reduction policies include, but are
not limited to, naloxone access laws (NALs), Good Samaritan Laws (GSL), and syringe
exchange programs (SEP). NALs provide legal immunity to healthcare providers prescribing
or administering naloxone, a medication used to reverse opioid overdoses;14 GSLs grant
immunity or mitigated sentencing to individuals who call 911 in the case of an overdose; and
SEPs simplify the act of obtaining new, clean syringes for injection drug users, and may
include the availability of supervised injection sites or other safety measures (e.g., test strips
used to determine if heroin contains fentanyl).15
    Evidence on the effectiveness of NALs is mixed. Doleac and Mukherjee (2018), emphasizing
concerns about possible moral hazard, find that online searches for naloxone increase by seven
percent and for opioid-treatment fall one percent post-NAL; opioid-related possession arrests,
sales, and emergency department visits increase by 17 percent, 27 percent, and 15 percent,
respectively, with no change in opioid-related mortality. Conversely, Rees et al. (2019) show
that NAL adoption leads to a nine to ten percent reduction in opioid-related mortality and
with consistently negative, but less statistically significant, reductions associated with the
passage of GSLs. Abouk et al. (2019) highlight the importance of the specific features of NALs,
finding that those granting direct authority to pharmacists to distribute naloxone reduce
fatal overdoses, whereas other types of NALs do not. An important challenge for all research
on this topic is that the enactment of NALs has occurred over a short time period that
coincides with the explosion of fentanyl. This confluence of rapid policy adoption and changes
in substances used implies that uncovering causal effects using standard quasi-experimental
methods is difficult, and even more so if the exact timing of when these policies become
effective (which may differ from formally legislated dates) is not well understood.


4.5     Price Elasticities, Health Insurance, and Treatment
Even though they are addictive substances, the demand for drugs such as opioids is responsive
to economic factors such as time and financial prices (Becker et al., 1991). Therefore, when
  14
    See Smart et al. (2020) for a recent review of NALs
  15
    Generally, SEPs allow individuals to return used syringes for safe disposal (which also minimizes exposure
to discarded `dirty' syringes for non-users) and receive clean syringes without risk of legal consequences or
financial costs.


                                                     22
examining the evolution of the opioid crisis from prescription to primarily illicit drugs, the role
of the price elasticity of demand for opioids is important to consider. Factors that reduce the
price of opioids, including insurance expansions such as those due to Medicare Part D, could
increase their use (Powell et al., 2018). Soni (2019) uses price variations in Medicare Part D
to identify important heterogeneity in elasticity of demand for prescription opioids. Focusing
on 55 to 74 year olds, she uncovers an overall elasticity of -0.89; however, almost all of the
response is concentrated among new users. Soni also presents evidence that non-prescription
pain killers are substitutes for prescribed opioids. Einav et al. (2018) use identifying variation
from the design of the Medicare Part D `donut hole' in prescription drug coverage to show
that the demand for prescription opioids is rather price inelastic, with an elasticity estimate
of -0.04. However, the local average treatment effect is identified off of individuals at the
spending margin of the donut hole; these patients are likely sicker than the typical Medicare
Part D beneficiary or younger opioid user. Some evidence suggests that heroin may have a
relatively high demand elasticity, when compared with other drugs. For example, Saffer and
Chaloupka (1999) estimate price elasticities for alcohol, cocaine and heroin of -0.30, -0.28,
and -0.94, respectively, although it is unclear how applicable these findings are to the present
day. However, a more recent study that combines experimental and longitudinal survey data
shows that the conditional demand price elasticity for heroin is -0.80, suggesting that demand
for illicit drugs continues to respond to price changes in a manner predicted by economic
theory (Olmstead et al., 2015).
    A related issue relevant for this discussion is insurance coverage for drug treatment. This
coverage is often incorporated with broader changes in the healthcare delivery system, rather
than specifically targeting the opioid crisis. While numerous treatment options are available ­
including medications such as methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone, alongside behavioral
interventions like counselling (Murphy and Polsky, 2016) ­ most SUDs, including opioid use
disorder, remain untreated. Recent estimates suggest that only one in ten individuals with
OUD receive medication for treating it in a given year (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2019), although there have been recent expansions in availability
of DEA-waivered providers of buprenorphine (Dick et al., 2015). While there are many
reasons why individuals do not receive treatment ­ including strong psychological barriers
to treatment and stigma ­ commonly stated causes include inability to pay and lack of
insurance coverage (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2019).
Thus, increasing the generosity of insurance, both in terms the number of individuals eligible
and the services included in plans, may facilitate treatment uptake and health improvements.
    Research on the effects of health insurance on opioid use disorder frequently uses legal


                                                23
changes resulting from the Affordable Care Act (ACA) as a source of identifying variation.
One important modification under the ACA is that SUD treatment (including for OUD)
became listed as an essential benefit that must be covered by most plans (McLellan and
Woodworth, 2014). In addition, Medicaid, the primarly public health insurance system for
low income Americans, jointly funded by the states and federal government, is the largest
insurance payer for SUD treatment (McLellan and Woodworth, 2014). Under the ACA,
Medicaid coverage was expanded to include all adults with incomes up to 138 percent of the
federal poverty line. However, in 2012 the Supreme Court ruled that the federal government
could not compel states to expand Medicaid and not all states elected to do so. Several
studies have exploited this variation across states to test the impact of expanding Medicaid
and show that this had important implications for opioid use disorder treatment access and
outcomes.
    For instance, Meinhofer and Witman (2018) find that ACA Medicaid expansion increased
prescriptions for medications used to treat opioid use disorder by over 100 percent, raised
admissions to specialty drug treatment, and increased the probability that opioid use disorder
treatment providers accepted Medicaid as a form of payment. Cher et al. (2019) corroborate
this finding for OUD treatment medications. This latter finding is particularly important as
insurance has historically played a minor role in financing SUD treatment Mark et al. (2016).
To date there is limited evidence that this expansion has led to changes in opioid-related
deaths (Averett et al., 2019; Abouk et al., 2019). However, the dependent coverage mandate
in the ACA (which guarantees that children can remain on their parent's health insurance
plans up to age 26) is associated with reductions in opioid fatalities among young adults
impacted by the policy (Wettstein, 2019).
    A concern with any insurance expansion is its potential to induce moral hazard. In
the context of the opioid use crisis, this would take the form of insurance reducing the
out-of-pocket prices of prescription opioids, and potentially spurring misuse and opioid use
disorder within the population. The research described in the previous paragraph suggests
that this concern is largely unwarranted; however, a clear consensus has not yet emerged.
For instance, Powell et al. (2020) leverage the plausibly exogenous variation in prescription
drug coverage offered by the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006 and find that a ten
percent increase in the supply of medical opioids leads to a seven percent increase opioid
deaths among individuals likely ineligible for Medicare. This finding suggests that some of
these prescribed opioids are diverted to other users.




                                             24
5     Conclusions and Directions for Future Research
As the opioid crisis has emerged as a major public health concern, so has a large and rapidly
growing body of economic research analyzing this crisis. These studies use the concepts of
supply and demand; habit-forming consumption; substitution, complementarity, and spillovers;
and interactions with labor markets and family level outcomes. The studies leverage a variety
of data sources, with their respective strengths and weaknesses (Smart et al., 2020). Some
analyses are purely descriptive; others attempt to determine causal effects. The research has
increased our understanding over a variety of important dimensions. For example, supply-side
factors (e.g., aggressive pharmaceutical industry promotion of prescription opioids) were a
primary cause of the epidemic, but with demands-side factors determining which groups
have been most adversely affected. Regulatory and policy approaches have played a role
in mitigating these initial harms but have been less successful in addressing the underlying
addictions, resulting in spillover effects to the consumption of illicit opioids and the expansion
of those markets. Generally, states have played a more active role than the federal government
in these policy efforts, although sometimes with federal grant support (e.g., Comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016) and advisory statements (e.g., CSA).
    Going forward, while PDMPs have been extensively studied, there is room for better
understanding the circumstances in which these programs are most beneficial and their
long-run impacts. Other policy approaches (e.g., day limits to prescribing, CSA advisories,
and most harm reduction policies) have received much less attention. In all opioid policy
areas, researchers can benefit from the creation of taxonomies that reduce barriers to studying
impacts of the policies (Grant et al., 2020), and from considering the power and appropriateness
of the statistical methods chosen (Griffin et al., 2020). There also remains uncertainty about
the fundamental causes of the opioid crisis and its relationship with other drug problems,
such as the frequency of deaths involving poly-drug use, the rapidly emerging crisis of
stimulant use and deaths, and the broader history of rising drug mortality in the U.S. (Ruhm,
2017, 2019b; Jalal et al., 2018). In addition, the rapid changes in circumstances (like the
emergence of fentanyl) and policies (such as NAL implementation) provides severe challenges
to the standard quasi-experimental methods economists typically use to study these issues.
Considerably flexibility and comprehensive understanding of the literatures outside economics
will be needed in determining the best approaches to provide credible estimates in future
research.
    As of this writing, the U.S. and many other countries are in the midst of the COVID-19
pandemic which has lead to over 200,000 American deaths. Although its implications for the



                                               25
opioid crisis are unclear, preliminary data indicates that COVID-19 is being accompanied
by another increase in opioid-related mortality (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2020b). Therefore, assessing the causal toll of the pandemic for opioid use and opioid use
disorder will be important. In particular, we need to better understand how opioid problems
have been affected by other changes related to COVID-19 such as: reduced willingness to
seek healthcare, the growth in telehealth, and other non-medical factors such as isolation,
strain, uncertainty, economic recession, a large-scale but short-lived government stimulus
package, loss of friends and family members to COVID-19, and general disruptions in daily
life. Finally, efforts will be needed to determine the most effective policies to address opioid
outcomes in the post-COVID19 setting.
     While contributions from many disciplines outside economics play enormous roles in
answering the questions addressed above, the particular concerns of economists ­ in areas
such as the roles of incentives, opportunity costs and spillovers, causal identification, and of
health as a production process ­ provide useful complementary insights.




                                              26
References
Abouk, R., L. Helmchen, A. Moghtaderi, and J. Pines (2019). The aca medicaid expansions and
 opioid mortality: Is there a link? Medical Care Research and Review , 1077558720967227.

Abouk, R., R. L. Pacula, and D. Powell (2019, June). Association Between State Laws
 Facilitating Pharmacy Distribution of Naloxone and Risk of Fatal Overdose. JAMA Internal
 Medicine 179 (6), 805­811.

Ahmad, F. R. L. S. (2020). Provisional drug overdose death counts. NVSS Vital Statistics
 Rapid Release Report, National Center for Health Statistics.

Alexander, G. C., S. Frattaroli, and e. . Gielen, AC (2015). The Prescription Opioid Epidemic:
  An Evidence-Based Approach. Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

Alexander, M. J., M. V. Kiang, and M. Barbieri (2018). Trends in black and white opioid
  mortality in the united states, 1979­2015. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.) 29 (5), 707.

Ali, M. M., W. N. Dowd, T. Classen, R. Mutter, and S. P. Novak (2017). Prescription drug
  monitoring programs, nonmedical use of prescription drugs, and heroin use: Evidence from
  the national survey of drug use and health. Addictive Behaviors 69, 65­77.

Aliprantis, D., K. Fee, and M. Schweitzer (2019). Opioids and the Labor Market. SSRN
  Scholarly Paper ID 3179068, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Alpert, A., S. Dykstra, and M. Jacobson (2020). How do prescription drug monitoring
  programs reduce opioid prescribing? the role of hassle costs versus information. Working
  Paper 27584, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alpert, A., D. Powell, and R. L. Pacula (2018). Supply-side drug policy in the presence of
  substitutes: Evidence from the introduction of abuse-deterrent opioids. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy 10 (4), 1­35.

Alpert, A. E., W. N. Evans, E. M. Lieber, and D. Powell (2019). Origins of the Opioid Crisis
  and Its Enduring Impacts. Working Paper 26500, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Altekruse, S. F., C. M. Cosgrove, W. C. Altekruse, R. A. Jenkins, and C. Blanco (2020).
  Socioeconomic risk factors for fatal opioid overdoses in the united states: Findings from the
  mortality disparities in american communities study (mdac). PloS One 15 (1), e0227966.



                                              27
Averett, S. L., J. K. Smith, and Y. Wang (2019). Medicaid expansion and opioid deaths.
 Health Economics 28 (12), 1491­1496.

Bachhuber, M. A., B. Saloner, M. LaRochelle, J. S. Merlin, B. C. Maughan, D. Polsky,
  N. Shaparin, and S. M. Murphy (2018, 03). Physician Time Burden Associated with
  Querying Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs. Pain Medicine 19 (10), 1952­1960.

Baldwin, M. L. and S. C. Marcus (2014). The impact of mental and substance-use disorders
  on employment transitions. Health Economics 23 (3), 332­344.

Bao, Y., Y. Pan, A. Taylor, S. Radakrishnan, F. Luo, H. A. Pincus, and B. R. Schackman
 (2016). Prescription drug monitoring programs are associated with sustained reductions in
  opioid prescribing by physicians. Health Affairs 35 (6), 1045­1051.

Bao, Y., K. Wen, P. Johnson, P. J. Jeng, Z. F. Meisel, and B. R. Schackman (2018). Assessing
  the impact of state policies for prescription drug monitoring programs on high-risk opioid
  prescriptions. Health Affairs 37 (10), 1596­1604.

Barry, C. and R. Frank (2019). Evidence for addressing the opioid epidemic: Rounding out
  the picture. Brookings.edu .

Becker, G. S., M. Grossman, and K. M. Murphy (1991). Rational addiction and the effect of
  price on consumption. The American Economic Review 81 (2), 237­241.

Beheshti, D. (2019a). Adverse health effects of abuse-deterrent opioids: Evidence from the
  reformulation of oxycontin. Health Economics 28 (12), 1449­1461.

Beheshti, D. (2019b). The Impact of Opioids on the Labor Market: Evidence from Drug
  Rescheduling. Technical report.

Birnbaum, H. G., A. G. White, M. Schiller, T. Waldman, J. M. Cleveland, and C. L. Roland
  (2011). Societal costs of prescription opioid abuse, dependence, and misuse in the united
  states. Pain Medicine 12 (4), 657­667.

Bondurant, S. R., J. M. Lindo, and I. D. Swensen (2018, March). Substance abuse treatment
  centers and local crime. Journal of Urban Economics 104, 124­133.

Bradford, A. C. and W. D. Bradford (2017). Medical Marijuana Laws May Be Associated With
  A Decline In The Number Of Prescriptions For Medicaid Enrollees. Health Affairs 36 (5),
  945­951.


                                            28
Bradford, A. C. and W. D. Bradford (2018). The Impact of Medical Cannabis Legalization
  on Prescription Medication Use and Costs under Medicare Part D. The Journal of Law
  and Economics 61 (3), 461­487.

Bradford, A. C., W. D. Bradford, A. Abraham, and G. Bagwell Adams (2018). Association
  Between US State Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Prescribing in the Medicare Part D
  Population | Adolescent Medicine | JAMA Internal Medicine | JAMA Network.

Buchmueller, T. C. and C. Carey (2018). The effect of prescription drug monitoring programs
  on opioid utilization in medicare. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1),
  77­112.

Buckles, K., W. N. Evans, and E. M. Lieber (2020). The drug crisis and the living arrangements
  of children. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bullinger, L. R. and C. Wing (2019). How many children live with adults with opioid use
 disorder? Children and Youth Services Review 104, 104381.

B¨
 utikofer, A. and M. M. Skira (2018). Missing Work Is a Pain: The Effect of Cox-2 Inhibitors
  on Sickness Absence and Disability Pension Receipt. Journal of Human Resources 53 (1),
  71­122.

Case, A. and A. Deaton (2015, December). Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among
  white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences 112 (49), 15078­15083.

Case, A. and A. Deaton (2020). Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism. Princeton
  University Press.

Cawley, J. and C. J. Ruhm (2011). The economics of risky health behaviors. In Handbook of
  Health Economics, Volume 2, pp. 95­199. Elsevier.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020a). Multiple cause of death, 1999-2018.
  Technical report, National Center for Health Statistics.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020b). Vital statistics rapid release: Provisional
  drug overdose death counts.

Chang, H.-Y., T. Lyapustina, L. Rutkow, M. Daubresse, M. Richey, M. Faul, E. A. Stuart,
 and G. C. Alexander (2016). Impact of prescription drug monitoring programs and pill


                                              29
  mill laws on high-risk opioid prescribers: a comparative interrupted time series analysis.
  Drug and Alcohol Dependence 165, 1­8.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. Schwartz (2019). The Transformation of Manufacturing
 and the Decline in US Employment. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 33, 307­372.

Cher, B. A., N. E. Morden, and E. Meara (2019). Medicaid expansion and prescription trends:
  opioids, addiction therapies, and other drugs. Medical Care 57 (3), 208.

Cicero, T. J., J. A. Inciardi, and A. Mu~
                                        noz (2005). Trends in abuse of oxycontin R and other
  opioid analgesics in the united states: 2002-2004. The Journal of Pain 6 (10), 662­672.

Cunningham, S. and K. Finlay (2016). Identifying Demand Responses to Illegal Drug Supply
  Interdictions. Health Economics 25 (10), 1268­1290.

Currie, J., J. Y. Jin, and M. Schnell (2018). U.S. Employment and Opioids: Is There a
 Connection? Working Paper 24440, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Currie, J. and H. Schwandt (2020). The opioid epidemic was not caused by economic distress
  but by factors that could be more rapidly addressed. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Dave, D., M. Deza, and B. P. Horn (2018). Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs, Opioid
 Abuse, and Crime. Working Paper 24975, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Davenport, S., A. Weaver, and M. Caverly (2019). Economic impact of non-medical opioid
 use in the united states.

Deaton, A. (2020). Health and wealth inequality in america: how covid-19 makes clear the
  need for change. Congressional Testimony to House Budget Committee, Virtual Hearing
  on June 23, 2020.

Deiana, C. and L. Giua (2018). The US Opidemic: Prescription Opioids, Labour Market
 Conditions and Crime. MPRA Paper, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Dick, A. W., R. L. Pacula, A. J. Gordon, M. Sorbero, R. M. Burns, D. Leslie, and B. D. Stein
  (2015, June). Growth In Buprenorphine Waivers For Physicians Increased Potential Access
  To Opioid Agonist Treatment, 2002^  a"11. Health Affairs 34 (6), 1028­1034.

Dobkin, C. and N. Nicosia (2009, March). The War on Drugs: Methamphetamine, Public
 Health, and Crime. American Economic Review 99 (1), 324­349.


                                            30
Doleac, J. L. and A. Mukherjee (2018). The Moral Hazard of Lifesaving Innovations:
 Naloxone Access, Opioid Abuse, and Crime. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3135264, Social
 Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Dow, W. H., A. Godøy, C. Lowenstein, and M. Reich (2020). Can labor market policies
 reduce deaths of despair? Journal of Health Economics 74, 102372.

Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and M. Polyakova (2018). Private provision of social insurance:
  drug-specific price elasticities and cost sharing in medicare part d. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy 10 (3), 122­53.

Evans, M., M. Harris, and L. Kessler (2020, April). The hazards of unwinding the prescription
  opioid epidemic: Implications for child abuse and neglect. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
  3582060, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Evans, W. N., E. M. Lieber, and P. Power (2019). How the reformulation of oxycontin ignited
  the heroin epidemic. Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 1­15.

Evans, W. N., E. M. J. Lieber, and P. Power (2018, July). How the Reformulation of
  OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic. The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1),
  1­15.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, and H. L. Williams (2019). Place-Based Drivers of Mortality:
  Evidence from Migration. Working Paper 25975, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Florence, C., F. Luo, and K. Rice (2020). The economic burden of opioid use disorder and
  fatal opioid overdose in the united states, 2017. Drug and Alcohol Dependence , 108350.

Florence, C., F. Luo, L. Xu, and C. Zhou (2016). The economic burden of prescription opioid
  overdose, abuse and dependence in the united states, 2013. Medical Care 54 (10), 901.

Frankt, A. and T. Monkovic (2019). A `rare case where racial biases' protected african-
  americans.

Fryer, R. G., P. S. Heaton, S. D. Levitt, and K. M. Murphy (2005). Measuring the impact of
  crack cocaine. Working Paper 11318, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Garthwaite, C. L. (2012). The economic benefits of pharmaceutical innovations: The case of
 cox-2 inhibitors. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (3), 116­37.




                                             31
Ghimire, K. M. and J. C. Maclean (2020). Medical marijuana and workers' compensation
 claiming. Health Economics 29 (4), 419­434.

Gihleb, R., O. Giuntella, and N. Zhang (2019a). The effect of mandatory access prescription
  drug monitoring programs on foster care admissions. Journal of Human Resources , 0918­
  9729R2.

Gihleb, R., O. Giuntella, and N. Zhang (2019b). Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs and
  Neonatal Outcomes. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3495773, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY.

Gihleb, R., O. Giuntella, and N. Zhang (2020). Prescription drug monitoring programs and
  neonatal outcomes. Regional Science and Urban Economics 81, 103497.

Grant, S., R. Smart, and B. D. Stein (2020). We need a taxonomy of state-level opioid policies.
  In JAMA Health Forum, Volume 1, pp. e200050­e200050. American Medical Association.

Grecu, A. M., D. M. Dave, and H. Saffer (2019). Mandatory access prescription drug
  monitoring programs and prescription drug abuse. Journal of Policy Analysis and Man-
 agement 38 (1), 181­209.

Griffin, B. A., M. S. Schuler, E. A. Stuart, S. Patrick, E. McNeer, R. Smart, D. Powell,
  B. Stein, T. Schell, and R. L. Pacula (2020). Variation in performance of commonly used
  statistical methods for estimating effectiveness of state-level opioid policies on opioid-related
  mortality. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Griswold, M. K., B. P. Chapman, A. J. Krotulski, M. Friscia, E. W. Boyer, B. K. Logan, and
  K. M. Babu (2018). Cryptomarket drug acquisition leading to furanyl fentanyl overdose.
 Forensic Toxicology 36 (2), 534­536.

Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, P. R. Freeman, and K. I. Simon (2020). Competitive Effects of
 Federal and State Opioid Restrictions: Evidence from the Controlled Substance Laws.
 Working Paper 27520, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haffajee, R. L., A. B. Jena, and S. G. Weiner (2015). Mandatory use of prescription drug
 monitoring programs. JAMA 313 (9), 891­892.

Harris, K. (2017). The Effect of State Parity Laws on How Providers Treat Substance Use
 Disorder. Monthly Labor Review , 1b.



                                                32
Hedegaard, H., M. Warner, and A. M. Mini~
                                        no (2017). Drug overdose deaths in the united
  states, 1999­2015.

Hill Jr, C. S. (1993). The barriers to adequate pain management with opioid analgesics. In
  Seminars in Oncology, Volume 20, pp. 1.

Hollingsworth, A., C. J. Ruhm, and K. Simon (2017). Macroeconomic conditions and opioid
  abuse. Journal of Health Economics 56, 222­233.

Holmgren, A. J., A. Botelho, and A. M. Brandt (2020). A History of Prescription Drug
 Monitoring Programs in the United States: Political Appeal and Public Health Efficacy.
 American Journal of Public Health 110 (8), 1191­1197.

Hummels, D., J. Munch, and C. Xiang (2016). No Pain, No Gain: The Effects of Exports on
 Effort, Injury, and Illness. Working Paper 22365, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ihongbe, T. O. and S. W. Masho (2016). Prevalence, correlates and patterns of heroin use
  among young adults in the united states. Addictive Behaviors 63, 74­81.

Jalal, H., J. M. Buchanich, M. S. Roberts, L. C. Balmert, K. Zhang, and D. S. Burke (2018).
  Changing dynamics of the drug overdose epidemic in the united states from 1979 through
  2016. Science 361 (6408).

Kaestner, R. and E. Ziedan (2019). Mortality and socioeconomic consequences of prescription
 opioids: Evidence from state policies. Working Paper 26135, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Kilby, A. (2016). Opioids for the masses: welfare tradeoffs in the regulation of narcotic pain
  medications. In The Role of Research in Making Government More Effective.

Krueger, A. B. (2017). Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of
  the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017 (2),
 1­87.

Laird, J. and T. Nielsen (2017). Physician Prescribing Behaviors on Prescription Drug Use
  and Labor Supply : Evidence from Movers in Denmark . Harvard University Job Market
  Paper https://scholar.harvard. edu/files/lairdja/files/Laird JMP 1.pdf.

Lamy, F. R., R. Daniulaityte, M. J. Barratt, U. Lokala, A. Sheth, and R. G. Carlson (2020).
  Listed for sale: analyzing data on fentanyl, fentanyl analogs and other novel synthetic
  opioids on one cryptomarket. Drug and Alcohol Dependence , 108115.


                                             33
Leonhardt, D. and S. A. Thompson (2020, March). Is the Rise in Illicit Opioids Af-
  fecting Labor Supply and Disability Claiming Rates?     New York Times Opinion
  Article https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/03/06/opinion/working-class-death-
  rate.html, New York Times.

Lin, D., S. Liu, and C. J. Ruhm (2020). Opioid deaths and local healthcare intensity: A
  longitudinal analysis of the us population, 2003­2014. American Journal of Preventive
  Medicine 58 (1), 50­58.

Lin, D. H., E. Lucas, I. B. Murimi, K. Jackson, M. Baier, S. Frattaroli, A. C. Gielen, P. Moyo,
  L. Simoni-Wastila, and G. C. Alexander (2017). Physician attitudes and experiences with
  maryland's prescription drug monitoring program (pdmp). Addiction 112 (2), 311­319.

Lippold, K. M. (2019). Racial/Ethnic and Age Group Differences in Opioid and Synthetic
  Opioid­Involved Overdose Deaths Among Adults Aged 18 Years in Metropolitan Areas --
  United States, 2015­2017. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 68.

Lyapustina, T., L. Rutkow, H.-Y. Chang, M. Daubresse, A. F. Ramji, M. Faul, E. A. Stuart,
  and G. C. Alexander (2016). Effect of a "pill mill" law on opioid prescribing and utilization:
  the case of texas. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 159, 190­197.

Maclean, J. C., K. M. Ghimire, and L. H. Nicholas (2020). Marijuana legalization and
 disability claiming. Health Economics Forthcoming.

Maclean, J. C., B. P. Horn, and J. H. Cantor (2020). Business Cycles and Admissions to
 Substance Abuse Treatment. Contemporary Economic Policy 38 (1), 139­154.

Maclean, J. C., D. Webber, and M. T. French (2015). Workplace problems, mental health
 and substance use. Applied Economics 47 (9), 883­905.

Macy, B. (2018). Dopesick. Little, Brown and Company.

Mallatt, J. (2018). The effect of prescription drug monitoring programs on opioid prescriptions
 and heroin crime rates. Available at SSRN 3050692 .

Mallatt, J. (2019). Individual Effects of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs: How Pre-
 scriber Information Targets Misusers While Preserving Access for Treatment of Legitimate
 Pain. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3411199, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.




                                              34
Mallatt, J. (2020a). The effect of opioid supply-side interventions on opioid-related business
 establishments. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3697626, Social Science Research Network,
 Rochester, NY.

Mallatt, J. (2020b). Policy-induced substitution to illicit drugs and implications for law
 enforcement activity. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3418615, Social Science Research Network,
 Rochester, NY.

Mark, T. L., T. Yee, K. R. Levit, J. Camacho-Cook, E. Cutler, and C. D. Carroll (2016).
 Insurance financing increased for mental health conditions but not for substance use
 disorders, 1986­2014. Health Affairs 35 (6), 958­965.

Martins, S. S., J. Santaella-Tenorio, B. D. Marshall, A. Maldonado, and M. Cerd´   a (2015).
 Racial/ethnic differences in trends in heroin use and heroin-related risk behaviors among
 nonmedical prescription opioid users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 151, 278­283.

Mauri, A. I., T. N. Townsend, and R. L. Haffajee (2020). The association of state opioid
 misuse prevention policies with patient-and provider-related outcomes: A scoping review.
 The Milbank Quarterly 98 (1), 57­105.

McCance-Katz, E. F. (2018).      Presentation: The national survey on drug use
 and health 2018.      Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administra-
 tion (SAMHSA) Presentation, Center of Behavioral Health Statistics and Qual-
 ity. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/cbhsq-reports/Assistant-Secretary-
 nsduh2018 presentation.pdf.

McCance-Katz, E. F. (2020). Death certificate files. Wide-ranging online data for epidemiologic
 research (WONDER). Atlanta, GA: CDC, National Center for Health Statistics; 2020.
 http://wonder.cdc.gov.

McGreal, C. (2018). The making of an opioid epidemic.

McLellan, A. T. and A. M. Woodworth (2014). The affordable care act and treatment for
 "substance use disorders:" implications of ending segregated behavioral healthcare. Journal
 of Substance Abuse Treatment 46 (5), 541­545.

McMichael, B. J., R. L. Van Horn, and W. K. Viscusi (2020). The impact of cannabis access
 laws on opioid prescribing. Journal of Health Economics 69, 102273.




                                              35
Meara, E., J. R. Horwitz, W. Powell, L. McClelland, W. Zhou, A. J. O'malley, and N. E.
 Morden (2016). State legal restrictions and prescription-opioid use among disabled adults.
 New England Journal of Medicine 375 (1), 44­53.

Meinhofer, A. (2016). The war on drugs: Estimating the effect of prescription drug supply-
 side interventions. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2716974, Social Science Research Network,
 Rochester, NY.

Meinhofer, A. and A. E. Witman (2018, July). The role of health insurance on treatment for
 opioid use disorders: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion. Journal
 of Health Economics 60, 177­197.

Metcalf, G. E. and Q. Wang (2019). Abandoned by Coal, Swallowed by Opioids? Working
 Paper 26551, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Miller, J. N. (2020). The war on drugs 2.0: Darknet fentanyl's rise and the effects of regulatory
 and law enforcement action. Contemporary Economic Policy 38 (2), 246­257.

Moore, T. J. and K. Schnepel (2019). Opioid use, health and crime: Insights from a rapid
 reduction in heroin supply.

Mulligan, C. B. (2020). Prices and Federal Policies in Opioid Markets. Working Paper 26812,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Murphy, S. M. and D. Polsky (2016). Economic evaluations of opioid use disorder interventions.
 Pharmacoeconomics 34 (9), 863­887.

Musse, I. (2020). Employment shocks and demand for pain medication. SSRN Scholarly
 Paper ID 3646543, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Nguyen, T. D., W. D. Bradford, and K. I. Simon (2019a). How do Opioid Prescribing
 Restrictions Affect Pharmaceutical Promotion? Lessons from the Mandatory Access
 Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs. Working Paper 26356, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Nguyen, T. D., W. D. Bradford, and K. I. Simon (2019b). How do opioid prescribing restric-
  tions affect pharmaceutical promotion? lessons from the mandatory access prescription
  drug monitoring programs. Working Paper 26356, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                               36
Nicholas, L. H. and J. C. Maclean (2019). The effect of medical marijuana laws on the health
  and labor supply of older adults: Evidence from the health and retirement study. Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management 38 (2), 455­480.

Olmstead, T. A., S. M. Alessi, B. Kline, R. L. Pacula, and N. M. Petry (2015). The price
  elasticity of demand for heroin: Matched longitudinal and experimental evidence. Journal
 of Health Economics 41, 59­71.

Pacula, R. L. and D. Powell (2018a). A supply-side perspective on the opioid crisis. Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management 37 (2), 438­446.

Pacula, R. L. and D. Powell (2018b). A Supply-Side Perspective on the Opioid Crisis. Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management 37 (2), 438­446.

Paice, J. A., C. Toy, and S. Shott (1998). Barriers to cancer pain relief: fear of tolerance and
  addiction. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 16 (1), 1­9.

Pardo, B., J. Taylor, J. P. Caulkins, B. Kilmer, P. Reuter, and B. D. Stein (2019). Future of
  fentanyl.

Park, S. and D. Powell (2020). Is the rise in illicit opioids affecting labor supply and disability
  claiming rates? NBER Working Paper (w27804).

Paulozzi, L. J., E. M. Kilbourne, and H. A. Desai (2011, May). Prescription drug monitoring
  programs and death rates from drug overdose. Pain Medicine 12 (5), 747­754.

Peiper, N. C., S. D. Clarke, L. B. Vincent, D. Ciccarone, A. H. Kral, and J. E. Zibbell
 (2019). Fentanyl test strips as an opioid overdose prevention strategy: findings from a
  syringe services program in the southeastern united states. International Journal of Drug
  Policy 63, 122­128.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2020). Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from US
  Counties. American Economic Review: Insights 2 (1), 47­64.

Pl¨
  uddemann, A., A. J. Flisher, R. McKetin, C. Parry, and C. Lombard (2010). Metham-
  phetamine use, aggressive behavior and other mental health issues among high-school
  students in cape town, south africa. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 109 (1-3), 14­19.

Pollack, H. A. and P. Reuter (2014). Does tougher enforcement make drugs more expensive?
  Addiction 109 (12), 1959­1966.


                                                37
Popovici, I., J. C. Maclean, B. Hijazi, and S. Radakrishnan (2018). The effect of state laws
  designed to prevent nonmedical prescription opioid use on overdose deaths and treatment.
  Health Economics 27 (2), 294­305.

Pouget, E. R., C. Fong, and A. Rosenblum (2018). Racial/ethnic differences in prevalence
  trends for heroin use and non-medical use of prescription opioids among entrants to opioid
  treatment programs, 2005­2016. Substance Use & Misuse 53 (2), 290­300.

Powell, D., A. Alpert, and R. L. Pacula (2019). A transitioning epidemic: how the opioid
  crisis is driving the rise in hepatitis c. Health Affairs 38 (2), 287­294.

Powell, D. and R. L. Pacula (2020). The evolving consequences of oxycontin reformulation
  on drug overdoses. Working Paper 26988, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Powell, D., R. L. Pacula, and M. Jacobson (2018, March). Do medical marijuana laws reduce
  addictions and deaths related to pain killers? Journal of Health Economics 58, 29­42.

Powell, D., R. L. Pacula, and E. Taylor (2020). How increasing medical access to opioids
  contributes to the opioid epidemic: evidence from medicare part d. Journal of Health
  Economics , 102286.

Quinones, S. (2016). Dreamland. Bloomsbury Press.

Rees, D. I., J. J. Sabia, L. M. Argys, D. Dave, and J. Latshaw (2019). With a little help
  from my friends: The effects of good samaritan and naloxone access laws on opioid-related
  deaths. The Journal of Law and Economics 62 (1), 1­27.

Reuter, P. (1986, January). Risks and Prices: An Economic Analysis of Drug Enforcement.
 Crime and Justice 7, 289­340.

Rice, J. B., N. Y. Kirson, A. Shei, A. K. G. Cummings, K. Bodnar, H. G. Birnbaum, and
  R. Ben-Joseph (2014, August). Estimating the costs of opioid abuse and dependence from
  an employer perspective: a retrospective analysis using administrative claims data. Applied
  Health Economics and Health Policy 12 (4), 435­446.

Rietveld, C. A. and P. C. Patel (2020). Prescription opioids and new business establishments.
  Small Business Economics , 1­25.

Rudd, R. A., L. J. Paulozzi, M. J. Bauer, R. W. Burleson, R. E. Carlson, D. Dao, J. W.
 Davis, J. Dudek, B. A. Eichler, J. C. Fernandes, et al. (2014). Increases in heroin overdose


                                             38
  deaths--28 states, 2010 to 2012. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 63 (39),
  849.

Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Are recessions good for your health?           The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 115 (2), 617­650.

Ruhm, C. J. (2017). Drug involvement in fatal overdoses. SSM-Population Health 3, 219­226.

Ruhm, C. J. (2018). Corrected us opioid-involved drug poisoning deaths and mortality rates,
 1999­2015. Addiction 113 (7), 1339­1344.

Ruhm, C. J. (2019a). Drivers of the fatal drug epidemic. Journal of Health Economics 64,
 25­42.

Ruhm, C. J. (2019b). Nonopioid overdose death rates rose almost as fast as those involving
 opioids, 1999­2016. Health Affairs 38 (7), 1216­1224.

Rutkow, L., H.-Y. Chang, M. Daubresse, D. W. Webster, E. A. Stuart, and G. C. Alexander
 (2015). Effect of florida's prescription drug monitoring program and pill mill laws on opioid
  prescribing and use. JAMA Internal Medicine 175 (10), 1642­1649.

Sacks, D. W., A. Hollingsworth, T. D. Nguyen, and K. I. Simon (2019). Can policy affect
  initiation of addictive substance use? evidence from opioid prescribing. Working Paper
  25974, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Saffer, H. and F. Chaloupka (1999). THE DEMAND for ILLICIT DRUGS. Economic
  Inquiry 37 (3), 401­411.

Saloner, B. and C. L. Barry (2018). Ending the Opioid Epidemic Requires a Historic Investment
  in Medication-Assisted Treatment. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 37 (2),
  431­438.

Savych, B., D. Neumark, and R. Lea (2018). Do Opioids Help Injured Workers Recover
  and Get Back to Work? The Impact of Opioid Prescriptions on Duration of Temporary
  Disability. Working Paper 24528, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schnell, M. (2018). Physician behavior in the presence of a secondary market: The case of
  prescription opioids.

Schnell, M. and J. Currie (2018). Addressing the opioid epidemic: is there a role for physician
  education? American Journal of Health Economics 4 (3), 383­410.


                                              39
Scholl, L., P. Seth, M. Kariisa, N. Wilson, and G. Baldwin (2019). Drug and opioid-involved
  overdose deaths--united states, 2013­2017. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 67 (51-
  52), 1419.

Schuchat, A., D. Houry, and G. P. Guy (2017). New data on opioid use and prescribing in
  the united states. Jama 318 (5), 425­426.

Schuler, M. S., S. E. Heins, R. Smart, B. A. Griffin, D. Powell, E. A. Stuart, B. Pardo,
  S. Smucker, S. W. Patrick, R. L. Pacula, et al. (2020). The state of the science in opioid
  policy research. Drug and Alcohol Dependence , 108137.

Smart, R., C. A. Kase, E. A. Taylor, S. Lumsden, S. R. Smith, and B. D. Stein (2020).
  Strengths and weaknesses of existing data sources to support research to address the opioids
  crisis. Preventive Medicine Reports 17, 101015.

Smart, R., B. Pardo, and C. S. Davis (2020). Systematic review of the emerging literature on
  the effectiveness of naloxone access laws in the united states. Addiction .

Smith, R. A. (2020). The Effects of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries on Adverse Opioid
  Outcomes. Economic Inquiry 58 (2), 569­588.

Soni, A. (2019, July). Health Insurance, Price Changes, and the Demand for Pain Relief
  Drugs: Evidence from Medicare Part D. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3268968, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Spencer, M., M. Warner, B. A. Bastian, J. P. Trinidad, and H. Hedegaard (2019). Drug
  overdose deaths involving fentanyl, 2011­2016.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2019). Substance abuse and
  mental health services administration (samhsa).(2019). 2018 national survey of drug use
  and health (nsduh) detailed tables.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2020). The opioid crisis and
  the black/african american population: An urgent issue. Working Paper.

Swensen, I. D. (2015). Substance-abuse treatment and mortality. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 122, 13­30.

Ullman, D. F. (2017). The effect of medical marijuana on sickness absence. Health Eco-
  nomics 26 (10), 1322­1327.


                                             40
United States Department of Justice (2018a). 2016 heroin domestic monitor program. DEA
 Intelligence Report .

United States Department of Justice (2018b). 2018 national drug threat assessment. DEA
 Intelligence Report .

Venkataramani, A. S., E. F. Bair, R. L. O'Brien, and A. C. Tsai (2020). Association between
  automotive assembly plant closures and opioid overdose mortality in the united states: a
  difference-in-differences analysis. JAMA Internal Medicine 180 (2), 254­262.

Wang, L. X. (2020, April). The Complementarity of Health Information and Health IT for
 Reducing Opioid-Related Mortality and Morbidity. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3176809,
 Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Weissman, D. E. (1993). Doctors, opioids, and the law: the effect of controlled substances
 regulations on cancer pain management. In Seminars in Oncology, Volume 20, pp. 53.

Wen, H. and J. M. Hockenberry (2018). Association of medical and adult-use marijuana laws
 with opioid prescribing for medicaid enrollees. JAMA Internal Medicine 178 (5), 673­679.

Wen, H., J. M. Hockenberry, and J. R. Cummings (2017). The effect of Medicaid expansion on
 crime reduction: Evidence from HIFA-waiver expansions. Journal of Public Economics 154,
 67­94.

Wen, H., J. M. Hockenberry, P. J. Jeng, and Y. Bao (2019, September). Prescription Drug
 Monitoring Program Mandates: Impact On Opioid Prescribing And Related Hospital Use.
 Health Affairs 38 (9), 1550­1556.

Wettstein, G. (2019). Health insurance and opioid deaths: Evidence from the affordable care
 act young adult provision. Health Economics 28 (5), 666­677.

White, A. G., H. G. Birnbaum, D. B. Rothman, and N. Katz (2009). Development of a
 budget-impact model to quantify potential cost savings from prescription opioids designed
 to deter abuse or ease of extraction. Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 7 (1),
 61­70.

White House Council of Economic Advisers (2017). The underestimated cost of the opioid
 crisis.




                                            41
Young, H. W., J. A. Tyndall, and L. B. Cottler (2017). The current utilization and perceptions
  of prescription drug monitoring programs among emergency medicine providers in florida.
  International Journal of Emergency Medicine 10 (1), 16.

Ziedan, E. and R. Kaestner (2020). Effect of Prescription Opioids and Prescription Opioid
  Control Policies on Infant Health. Working Paper 26749, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.




                                             42
