                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             AUTOMATION AND THE FATE OF YOUNG WORKERS:
     EVIDENCE FROM TELEPHONE OPERATION IN THE EARLY 20TH CENTURY

                                       James Feigenbaum
                                         Daniel P. Gross

                                      Working Paper 28061
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28061


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Ed Glaeser, Shane Greenstein, Bill Kerr, Frank Levy,
and Bob Margo for feedback; Brian Beach, Walker Hanlon, and Pascual Restrepo for comments
on an early draft; and especially Claudia Goldin for her continuous support. We also thank
seminar audiences at Duke Fuqua, Florida State University, Georgia Tech Scheller, Harvard
(Economics), Harvard Business School, Southern Denmark University, Stanford University, UC
Davis, the U.S. Census Bureau, and the Boston University Technology & Policy Research
Initiative; participants at the World Economic History Congress (2018) and Southern Economic
Association annual meeting (2018); and discussant Dan Rees for helpful comments. We thank
Senan Hogan-Hennessy, Greg Saldutte, and Thomas Pearson for outstanding research assistance;
and Elizabeth Crowley, Jesse Benedict, Yves Kertesz, and Amanda LaFauci for help collecting
the data, as well as Harvard Business School for financial support. We especially would like to
thank Sheldon Hochheiser and the AT&T Archives and History Center for access to AT&T
archival records, feedback, and fact-checking. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James Feigenbaum and Daniel P. Gross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Automation and the Fate of Young Workers: Evidence from Telephone Operation in the Early
20th Century
James Feigenbaum and Daniel P. Gross
NBER Working Paper No. 28061
November 2020
JEL No. J21,J24,J62,J63,M51,M54,N32,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

Telephone operation, one of the most common jobs for young American women in the early
1900s, provided hundreds of thousands of female workers a pathway into the labor force.
Between 1920 and 1940, AT&T adopted mechanical switching technology in more than half of
the U.S. telephone network, replacing manual operation. We show that although automation
eliminated most of these jobs, it did not affect future cohorts' overall employment: the decline in
demand for operators was counteracted by growth in both middle-skill jobs like secretarial work
and lower-skill service jobs, which absorbed future generations. Using a new genealogy-based
census linking method, we show that incumbent telephone operators were most impacted by
automation, and a decade later were more likely to be in lower-paying occupations or have left
the labor force entirely.


James Feigenbaum
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
jamesf@bu.edu

Daniel P. Gross
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
daniel.gross@duke.edu
Automation anxiety is surging in the U.S. and other developed economies, fueled by warnings of
an impending, sweeping, and permanent reduction in labor demand. Especially concerning is that
automation often replaces routine, entry-level jobs which provide young adults a pathway into the
workforce (OECD 2018). The elimination of these jobs not only risks increasing unemployment, but
may also erode chances of upward mobility and could give rise to employment sclerosis, long-term
labor force detachment, or even political dislocation and social unrest. Rising entry-level workers
may also be an especially vulnerable subset of the labor force, lacking the employment protections,
unions, or job transfers available to many incumbent workers. How the next generation of young
adults entering the labor force adjusts to automation may bear even greater economic consequence
than technology's effects on existing, incumbent workers.

We study one of the largest youth-specific automation shocks in modern history: the automation of
telephone operation. In the 1920s, telephone operator was among the most common jobs for young
women, at its peak accounting for around 4% of the nearly three million young, white, American-
born women in the workforce. But between 1920 and 1940, telephone exchanges serving more than
half of the U.S. telephone network were mechanized, replacing most functions of local operators.
The fraction of U.S. female employment exposed to this shock was comparable to the fraction of
the modern U.S. workforce employed as cashiers, office clerks, or customer service workers today--
common entry-level jobs which the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects will decline over the
next decade due to automation (BLS 2019a), and similar to the recent decline in executive assistant
employment, which exceeds that of U.S. manufacturing (Feintzeig 2020).1

Using census data on the complete U.S. population, a longitudinally-linked sample of women, and
a newly-constructed dataset measuring local adoption of mechanical call switching, we document
its effects on both incumbent operators and future generations of young women. We begin by
showing that after a city's initial "cutover" to mechanical operation, the number of 16 to 25
year old women employed as telephone operators immediately and permanently fell by 50 to 80%.
These jobs comprised around 2% of total employment for these women, and even more for those
under age 20--and given the relatively high turnover of telephone operators, this shock may have
foreclosed entry-level job opportunities for as much as 10-15% of women in affected cohorts. Next,
we show that, despite its magnitude, the shock did not reduce future cohorts' employment rates.
It was instead offset by growth of other middle-skill jobs with a similar wage profile (e.g., typists
and secretaries) and lower-skill, lower-paying service jobs, which absorbed future generations. In
contrast, incumbent operators appear to have borne the brunt of the shock. We show that telephone
1
    Telephone operation accounted for roughly 1.9% of female employment in 1920 and 2.1% in 1930. For comparison,
    in May 2017, cashiers, office clerks, and customer service representatives comprised 2.3%, 1.9%, and 1.7% of U.S.
    employment, respectively (BLS Occupational Employment Statistics for SOC 41-2011 (Cashiers), 43-9061 (Office
    Clerks, General), and 43-4051 (Customer Service Representatives)).


                                                           1
operators in cities with cutovers were subsequently less likely to be working the next decade we
observe them, and conditional on working, these women were more likely to have switched to lower-
paying occupations, though a few became operators at private switchboards or took other jobs in
the telephone industry. The magnitudes of these effects are tempered by the fact that many women
exited the workforce as they aged, but because telephone operation--despite high turnover--was
one of the few opportunities for women with the potential to be a career, the loss of these jobs was
costly for those who would have otherwise chosen to keep them.2

From AT&T's founding in the mid-1870s to the late 1910s, telephone calls were manually connected
by operators working the switchboards at telephone exchanges around the country. Though initially
male, by the early 1900s, operators were almost entirely young women. By 1920, not only was AT&T
the largest U.S. employer--at roughly one percent of the U.S. workforce--but telephone operation
in the telephone industry was the third-largest occupation-industry pair for white, American-born
women under age 25, and the single largest for those under 20. Around this time, however, AT&T
began advising its operating companies to automate telephone operation, beginning in large cities.
Under the automatic technology, telephone sets were given rotary dials, and each turn of the dial
actuated switching equipment at the telephone exchange, allowing users to place their own calls. In
a parallel paper (Feigenbaum and Gross 2020), we combine a rich historical record with quantitative
evidence to study AT&T's impetus for automation, which included the increasing complexity of
manual operation in large markets, and AT&T's view that the limited supply of qualified operators
was rapidly being exhausted as the network grew. Quantitatively, network size (city population)
explains the bulk of the variation in cutover timing. The effect of adopting mechanical switching
was to nearly eliminate an entire major category of entry-level work, one city or exchange at a
time. By 1940, 60% of telephone exchanges in the AT&T system were dial.

We combine individual-level census data for the complete U.S. population from 1910 to 1940 with
a new, hand-collected dataset of cutovers to mechanical switching to study the effects of this shock.
Complete count census data provide the information recorded by census enumerators, including
occupation and industry, which we (i) aggregate to a fine-grained city-demographic group panel
for population studies, and (ii) link across censuses for longitudinal analysis of existing operators.
Because traditional census record-linking techniques are not capable of following young women over
time (due to name changes prompted by marriage), we introduce a new, generalizable approach
to census linking: to build our linked sample, we use public genealogical data from the genealogy

2
    Because telephone operation was a high turnover occupation, as we discuss in Section 1, many more women were
    ever operators than we see in any single year working as operators. This also means that the effects of automation
    on incumbent operators are intrinsically likely to be muted, whereas future cohorts who use telephone operation as a
    springboard into the labor force may be much more at risk. The same reasoning would apply to modern entry-level
    occupations like clerks and customer service representatives today.


                                                            2
platform FamilySearch, match to complete count census records, and reweight to account for the
representativeness of FamilySearch data and our linking procedure.3

We measure cutovers across the continental U.S. using AT&T archival records and data collected
from thousands of newspaper articles. Of roughly 3,000 cities reported as a city of residence in all
years from 1910 to 1940 with at least 2,000 people in 1920, 332 have their first cutover by 1940.
Throughout the paper, we focus our attention on the subset of these with less than 100,000 people
in 1920, where subscribers were typically converted to dial all at once.

Our goal is to provide a unified view of the effects of automation on both existing workers and future
generations of workers who might have been likely to enter this occupation were it not automated
away (an even larger at-risk population). The analysis is thus organized around two complementary
but distinct questions, data structures, and empirical designs. To study the effects of dial on future
generations of young women who might have been operators were it not for mechanization, we use
an event study design, comparing outcomes for successive cohorts before versus after a city's first
cutover. To trace the effects on incumbent operators, we link women in 1920 and 1930 to the next
decennial census and compare operators to (extremely) similar working women--matched on age,
race, nativity, marital status, fertility, and neighborhood--initially living in cities where telephone
operation was or was not automated over the following decade.

We find that the automation of telephone operation led to a large, swift, and permanent decline in
the number of young, white, American-born women working as operators, of around two-thirds in
levels--roughly 2% of total employment for the group (in any job). As it was for many women a
transitory job (often, a first job), far more were exposed. For an automation shock, we consider this
large, especially for a vulnerable subset of the labor supply. Our question is: what happened after
these jobs disappeared? Did the elimination of a major entry-level job cut off future generations
from entering the workforce? After accounting for concurrent trends taking place in cities of similar
size around the country independent of cutovers, we do not find that the shock reduced later cohorts'
employment. We also see no substitution into marriage or childbearing. The negative shock to labor
demand was instead counteracted by growth in other occupations, especially secretarial work and
restaurant work, which absorbed the women who might have otherwise been telephone operators.
On average, working women age 19 to 22 were employed in similar-paying jobs after cutovers, while
those 16 to 18 were more likely to be in lower-paying jobs.

What became of incumbent operators after cutovers? Comparing telephone industry operators to
3
    Linking already-married telephone operators in 1920 or 1930 to their census record ten years later may be feasible,
    but it would restrict our analysis to a small, non-modal population of operators. In addition, women who change their
    name with divorce or remarriage would be systematically not linked, leading to unknown bias. A similar systematic
    bias may affect a linked sample of only the single telephone operators who remain single in future censuses, as links
    would be conditioned on an endogenous outcome (marital status).


                                                             3
demographically-similar women in cities with and without cutovers to dial, we show that operators
in treated cities were significantly less likely to be telephone operators ten years later. While
some became operators at private switchboards, others left the workforce, and those who remained
employed were more likely to have switched to lower-paying occupations. Though the effects are
large relative to the control group's outcomes, the absolute magnitudes are modest, possibly because
telephone operation was already a high-turnover occupation, and at this time many young women
organically exited the labor market as they aged (and married).

Collectively, our results suggest local economies can adjust to automation shocks over relatively
short horizons and continue to absorb the steady stream of young workers entering the labor market,
consistent with arguments made by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018). In the 1920s and 1930s, much
like now, contemporaries feared these opportunities were gone and never coming back--and those
fears proved to be misplaced, as other jobs grew to take their place. Yet in contrast to, e.g., Bessen
(2015), our finding that incumbent operators were affected also demonstrates that automation is
not entirely benign to the workers whose functions it performs.

Public concern about automation has powered a recent surge of academic research on the effects
of labor-saving innovation. Much of the recent literature focuses on the effects of industrial robots
on labor productivity and employment (e.g. Graetz and Michaels 2018, Acemoglu and Restrepo
2020, Humlum 2019), although robots are only a subset of the automating technologies used in
manufacturing, and are even less common in the service sector.4 The challenge is that in most
settings, automation is hard to measure directly, to the level of what machinery was purchased,
how it was used, and what (if any) jobs were displaced. Even when adoption is well-measured, it is
often difficult to ex-ante specify whether, when, or for whom a given technology is labor-augmenting
or replacing, and scholars can at best infer net effects from changes in wages or labor intensity.
An advantage of our setting is that we can measure adoption precisely and that the technology is
well-understood. We thus have a unique opportunity to study what happens when firms automate
an entire class of entry-level jobs away, especially a firm as big as AT&T in the 20th century, or in
service industries which comprise a majority of U.S. employment today.

Our results also contribute to the wider literature on skill-biased technical change (SBTC). Much
of the SBTC scholarship has focused on the computerization of routine jobs, wage inequality, and
the hollowing out of middle-skill employment in advanced economies (e.g., see Autor 2019), but
scholars have documented a history of SBTC throughout the 20th century (most notably Goldin
and Katz 2008). In contrast to the modern literature, our evidence suggests that the elimination of
telephone operation (a middle-skill job) had only modest effects on wage inequality among young
4
    Also see Dauth et al. (2018), Dixon et al. (2019), and Koch et al. (2019). For research on more general automation
    investments see Bessen et al. (2019), Bennett (2019), or Zator (2019).


                                                           4
women, primarily because other middle-skill jobs were growing to take its place.

The historical context could play a role in explaining why the shock was well-absorbed by future
generations. Whether this is true remains an open question. The first half of the twentieth cen-
tury was a time of major growth in high school completion and labor force participation among
unmarried white women (Goldin 2006, Goldin and Katz 2008), accompanied by increasing demand
for women workers in white-collar occupations (Goldin 1984). Had the demand for workers who
would have otherwise become operators--but for automation--been stagnant or falling or the had
the educational investments of the following generations not been made, it is possible the effects of
automating such an ubiquitous job might have been more severe.

We are thus careful in advocating generalized inference based on one episode alone: in other con-
texts, adjustments may not be as swift or smooth. The individual and social costs of both transitory
and long-term youth unemployment are well-documented: a large literature has documented long-
term earnings losses for displaced workers (e.g., Couch and Placzek 2010), and young adults who
graduate into weak labor markets are especially at risk of long-term earnings penalties (Kahn 2010,
Oreopoulos et al. 2012). A sobering difference from these settings is that whereas labor demand
can rebound after recessions, jobs lost to automation may never come back.

We proceed as follows. Section 1 reviews the history of the U.S. telephone industry, the automation
of telephone operation, and concurrent trends in education and work for young women. Section 2
introduces our data on telephone operators, local labor markets, and mechanical switching. Section
3 describes characteristics of telephone operators and cities with cutovers. In Section 4, we confirm
that cutovers significantly reduced the number of telephone operators in a city. In Section 5, we
examine what happened to subsequent generations of young women after these jobs were automated
away. In Section 6 we contrast these results with the outcomes of incumbent telephone operators.
Section 7 concludes with lessons and remaining questions.



1     Historical Background

1.1   AT&T and the U.S. telephone industry

The history of the U.S. telephone industry is largely the history of AT&T, the dominant service
provider in the U.S. for most of the 20th century. Bell Telephone (AT&T's predecessor) was founded
in 1877, a year after Alexander Graham Bell's successful demonstration of the telephone. One year
later it opened its first telephone exchange in New Haven, CT, and within a few years it had licensed
exchanges in all major U.S. cities, begun building long-distance connections between them (under
its AT&T subsidiary), and acquired a manufacturing company (Western Electric). In 1899, AT&T

                                                 5
became the parent of the Bell system, which eventually comprised dozens of subsidiary operating
companies serving different geographic territories around the country.

For its first 17 years, AT&T was a patent-protected monopolist, but the expiration of the original
Bell patents in 1894 attracted entry by thousands of "independent" operating companies, which
built competing networks in large cities and entered markets (especially rural areas) where AT&T
had not. By the 1920s, the U.S. telephone industry employed over 300,000 people, served nearly 15
million telephones, and connected more than 65 million calls per day (Appendix Table A.1). AT&T
served around half of telephones in the early 1900s, after which it began acquiring independents
across the U.S. in a drive to provide coast-to-coast universal service, and its national share was
back up to 79% by the early 1930s. AT&T market shares were even higher in urban markets, where
Bell companies were typically the sole telephone service provider.


1.2       Telephone operators and manual call switching

The functional units of each operating company were individual telephone exchanges, each typically
connecting to up to 10,000 subscribers in its immediate vicinity. These exchanges in turn connected
to each other via trunk lines. All subscribers' lines fed into a switchboard at their local telephone
exchange, where human telephone operators physically connected calls by plugging wires into and
out of jacks on the board--a task referred to as "call switching". Their work was fast-paced and
labor-intensive, with millions of calls connected across the U.S. telephone network each day. It was
also costly to scale: every N th subscriber created N -1 new possible connections, requiring operators
to learn more switchboard positions and calls to pass through more operators and switchboards.
In large cities, the number of users implied billions of potential connections. As the network grew,
the number of operators needed to keep up with call volume swelled.5

Although the first generation of telephone operators was mostly male, AT&T decided early on that
young women were more likely to have the qualities it sought in operators. By 1910, operators were
almost exclusively women. Based on its employment criteria and position in the wage distribution
for young women, telephone operation was effectively middle-skill work. The U.S. Department of
Labor (1946) summarized the job requirements as follows:

         [T]o be considered for employment as a student operator, an applicant was expected to
         be a high school graduate, at least 18 but not much older, in good physical condition, and
         living at home or with close relatives. Good eyesight and good hearing are always specific
5
    During this period, demand for operators was also growing in other industries, especially at large organizations that
    sought operators to work private switchboards (e.g., large firms, hospitals, hotels). These switchboards connected
    telephones within an organization to each other as well as to an outside line of the local telephone company, through
    which external calls (incoming or outgoing) could be routed.


                                                             6
         physical requirements and are carefully checked in the general examination for physical
         soundness. Some companies further screen applicants by means of mental and aptitude
         tests. A pleasing voice, alertness, manual dexterity for handling equipment and tools of
         the job, legible penmanship, ability to make simple calculations rapidly and accurately,
         a sense of teamwork for cooperating with other operators in establishing connections, a
         stable disposition not easily ruffled by irritable customers, and courteousness are among
         the personal characteristics listed as qualifications for the job of operator.


Besides the minimum age requirements, most of these qualifications appear to have applied through-
out the 1910 to 1940 period we study in this paper. Contemporary accounts from former operators
suggest it was seen as a desirable job, offering higher wages, greater challenge, and more human in-
teraction than alternatives like factory work (Best 1933), though the physical and mental demands
of rapid-fire call switching for hours at a time were also high, and internal AT&T memos describe
operator turnover rates as high as 40% per year (O'Connor 1930).

In 1920, telephone operators were roughly 2% of the U.S. female workforce and 4% of nearly three
million young, white, American-born working women. With 40% turnover rates, as much as 15% of
cohorts born at the turn of the century might have ever been an operator.6 Among those age 16 to
20, "telephone operator" was the fifth largest job (Appendix Table C.1), and given its concentration
in one industry, "telephone operator in the telephone industry" was the most common occupation-
industry pair (Appendix Table C.2). AT&T as a whole was the largest U.S. employer of women in
the 1910s, and by the mid 1920s was by far the country's largest employer overall (Appendix Table
A.2), with telephone operators comprising around half its workforce.


1.3       Transition to mechanical switching

The first mechanical switching system was invented and refined in the early 1890s. The "automatic"
system added a rotary dial to telephone sets and mechanical switching equipment at telephone
exchanges. Each turn of the dial transmitted an electrical pulse, which actuated a sequence of
selectors at the exchange until a circuit was completed between the caller and the telephone dialed,
without manual intervention. Over the next 25 years, mechanical switching was adopted by only a
handful of independents. Though AT&T began experimenting with mechanical equipment in 1902,
the technology did not compare favorably to manual operation on cost or performance, and AT&T
continued with manual operation until improvements in the technology and rising costs of manual
operation made automation more attractive (Feigenbaum and Gross 2020).
6
    Taking the population and age distribution of operators in the 1910 to 1940 censuses, interpolating the intercensal
    years, and imputing the number of incumbent versus new operators each year, we estimate that 13.7% of white,
    American-born women in cohorts born circa 1900 was a telephone operator at some point between 1910 and 1940.
    The basic logic is that for a telephone company to maintain a set of 100 operators, 40 new operators must be hired
    each year, and over the course of ten years, 400 unique women might be employed.


                                                            7
In 1917, AT&T's engineering department began recommending that its operating companies adopt
mechanical switching for local service in large, multi-exchange cities and continue with manual op-
eration in smaller, single-exchange cities (Gherardi 1917), though ultimately operating companies'
management decided whether and when to automate every individual exchange. The automation
of telephone operation thus took place gradually, one or two exchanges at a time. Preparing an
exchange for mechanical switching typically required 2-3 years of preparation--e.g., to get regu-
latory approval, prepare the mechanical equipment, distribute dial telephone sets, and draw up
new telephone numbering plans and directories. Operationally, however, cutovers from manual
to dial (when the wires were cut from the manual switchboards and connected to the mechanical
equipment) were discrete events which took only a few minutes.

Mechanical switching specifically replaced operators in connecting local calls, and AT&T records
from the 1910s projected that the automatic equipment would reduce the number of operators in
large cities by up to 70 to 80% (Gherardi 1917). But even after automation, operators were still
needed for long distance calling, information and emergency services, and any remaining subscribers
with manual service. Because these were more complex tasks, the residual operating needs required
better trained, more experienced operators, who tended to be older. Automatic switching also
increased demand for technicians to maintain the automatic equipment, who tended to be men.
Technological change in this instance was thus not only skill-biased, but also age and gender-biased,
due to occupational sorting by both AT&T and its workforce.7

In Figure 1 we illustrate the aggregate diffusion of mechanical switching across the Bell system,
using administrative data from AT&T records. Adoption began in the late 1910s and accelerated
rapidly--with 32% of Bell telephones on dial by 1930 and 60% by 1940--but it took almost 60 years
(to 1978) to diffuse through the entire network, by which time AT&T had already begun adopting
digital switching. Our focus for this paper is the 1910 to 1940 period.8 In Section 2 we document
cross-sectional variation, and in Section 3 we will return to discussing the drivers of automation,
vis-`
    a-vis both narrative and empirical evidence, in more detail.

                                               [Figure 1 about here]

By 1940, telephone operation in the telephone industry comprised <1.5% of employment for young,
white, American-born women (down from its peak of 4%) and had fallen to the 11th most common
7
  Contemporary reports from the Bureau of Labor Statistics provide detailed studies on the effects of dial on local
  telephone industry employment, which document significant reductions in the number of operators. Across 18 such
  examples, BLS (1932) reports an average reduction in Bell System operators of over 60% relative to a counterfactual
  in which labor productivity (operators per call) had remained at 1921 levels.
8
  We use complete count census data to measure local population outcomes, which at the time of writing were only
  available through 1940. But even with data from later years, 1940 is also a natural stopping point, since World War
  II brought cutovers to a standstill due to restrictions on the use of copper wire for telephone installations, and also
  presented a distinct shock to female labor demand (e.g., Goldin and Olivetti 2013, Jaworski 2014).


                                                           8
occupation-industry for those under age 20. The demise of the telephone operator continued for the
rest of the twentieth century, and only 5,000 operators remain in the U.S. today, for information
services and collect or emergency calling (BLS 2019b).


1.4       Broader context: Trends in female labor force participation and education

Early in our period, the stigma of being a working woman was quite high, and income effects
dominated; few married white women worked and those who did were on average less educated
and in poorer households than the rest of the population. Even among unmarried women, work
was relatively uncommon, as just over one-third of unmarried white women were working in 1880.
Goldin (2006) stresses the unappealing nature of the work as the reason why so few white women--
married or unmarried--were working in the first decade of the twentieth century: "jobs were often
dirty, dangerous, repetitive, and long in hours per day and days per week."

Over the following decades, the environment changed steadily in the labor market for unmarried
women. From the 1900s to mid-century, there was a large, steady increase in demand for clerical
and office workers (Goldin 1984).9 Office work was "nicer, cleaner, shorter-hour, and thus more
`respectable' " (Goldin 2006), though it could be repetitive, and turnover was still high and returns
to experience low. Telephone operation was clearly part of this trend. With the rise in demand for
these new jobs came an increase in the share of unmarried white women working. More than half
of unmarried white women were working in 1910, rising steadily to 60% in 1940.

Our study period also covers the era when the graduates of America's High School Movement
hit the labor market (Goldin 1998). Across women born from 1890 to 1925, average educational
attainment grew rapidly: from just over 8 years (common school) for the 1890 birth cohort to nearly
11 years for the 1925 cohort (Goldin and Katz 2008). For much of this period, women's education
was on average a bit higher than men's, at least prior to the cohorts born around 1920. This
growth in education was primarily driven by increasing rates of high school completion; though
college attendance was close to parity in this period, 3% of women in the 1890 cohort graduated
from college, increasing only to 5% for the 1925 cohort (Goldin 2006).



2       Data and Geographic Coverage

In this section, we describe our new, hand-collected dataset on local cutovers to mechanical switch-
ing compiled from AT&T archival records and historical newspaper articles, data aggregated from
9
    In 1900, only around 20% of non-farm working women were in occupations we approximate as white-collar jobs.
    This group rose to around 35% of working women by 1920 and nearly 50% by 1950.


                                                        9
the complete count decennial censuses that allow us to measure populations in precise demographic
cells from 1910 to 1940, and a longitudinally-linked sample of women telephone operators which
we use to study individual adjustments.


2.1    Data on local adoption of mechanical switching

Telephone operation was mechanized one exchange at a time. Because these investments were made
independently by AT&T's local operating companies, there is no consolidated, administrative list of
cutovers across the AT&T system (Hochheiser 2017). However, we located in the AT&T corporate
archives a single document from 1937 which lists the earliest cutover and percent of subscribers on
dial service for 164 U.S. cities (and seven Canadian cities) with a population of over 50,000, 120 of
which were partially or fully dial by the end of that year (AT&T 1937).10

To expand the sample to more cities, we turn to historical newspapers. Dial cutovers were nearly al-
ways locally reported, due to the public's need to know when to begin using their dial telephones and
public interest in the technology and in the fate of displaced operators. We developed two targeted
search terms and searched for reports of cutovers between 1917 and 1940 in three online, search-
able repositories of digitized historical newspapers--Newspapers.com, NewspaperArchive.com, and
GenealogyBank.com--with the goal of maximizing our geographic coverage. Appendix B describes
the data collection in detail, including maps of our newspaper locations. In total, we reviewed over
26,000 newspaper pages to locate articles describing cutovers and record three pieces of informa-
tion: (i) when each took place, (ii) the cities affected, and (iii) whether it was a telephone company
exchange or private branch exchange (a.k.a. PBX, or private switchboard).11,12

Combining these data sources, our final sample contains 688 U.S. cities that were cut over to dial
before the 1940 census. The vast majority of cutovers are in the Bell system, although a few are
by independents, including a handful before 1919, the year AT&T first began adopting mechanical
switching. Figure 2 maps the cities with cutovers in the AT&T and newspapers data (Panels A and
10
   We extend these data to 1940 with manual research, after which we have 126 U.S. cities in this list with cutovers
   by the 1940 Census. We use these data for "large-city" robustness checks in Appendix E.
11
   Although many articles provide the exact date of a cutover, some only provide an approximate (or anticipated) date,
   week, month, season, or year. To smooth over approximation error, we measure cutovers at a monthly frequency,
   recording the exact month when known and inferring approximate month where otherwise possible (see Appendix
   B). Because our outcomes are measured at decadal frequency (using census data), our analysis will not be sensitive
   to small measurement error. Most cutovers are reported multiple times, either in multiple newspapers or in multiple
   issues of the same newspaper, such that the data are largely internally-validated; in all such cases, we review and
   harmonize the collected information, using duplicate reports to fill in gaps.
12
   This search effort is centered around Boolean search terms which return a list of candidate articles on dial cutovers,
   which were then read by research assistants, who were instructed to determine whether the article does in fact
   describe a cutover, the city or cities affected and timing, whether it affects local telephone service (versus long-
   distance, or private branch exchanges), and any other pertinent details. This search is powered by two search terms
   chosen after extensive testing, one of which is very targeted and designed to minimize false positives, the other of
   which is broad and designed to minimize false negatives. See Appendix B for details.


                                                           10
B, respectively). Merging these data with 1940 city populations from the census (see Appendix B),
we find that by 1940, 86 of the largest 100 U.S. cities, and 40% of the largest 500, had at least one
cutover in our data. 53.8% of the U.S. urban population lived in cities where telephone service was
partially or fully mechanical. The fraction of the urban population exposed to dial was greatest in
the Northeast (at 58.9%) and lowest in the South (47.8%).


                                                 [Figure 2 about here]


Using the AT&T administrative data, we verify that our newspaper-derived cutover dating is
accurate and that cutovers in small- and medium-sized cities were typically one-shot events. As
Appendix Figure B.8 shows, for cities in both the AT&T and newspaper datasets, the earliest
cutover we identify in newspapers is nearly always the same as that reported in the AT&T data
(the few cases where a newspaper-reported cutover preceded an AT&T cutover were independents).
Appendix Figures B.2 and B.3 provide evidence that cities of under 100,000 people in 1920 typically
had one cutover in which the entire service area was converted to dial, whereas larger cities were
converted in a more piecemeal fashion.


2.2       Data on local outcomes

We use IPUMS complete count U.S. census data (Ruggles et al. 2019) to measure local outcomes
between 1910 and 1940. Throughout this paper, we restrict attention to the adult (16+) non-farm
population in the continental U.S. only. We aggregate this population up into a fine-grained panel,
measuring city-level outcomes by sex, age, race, ethnicity, birthplace (U.S. or foreign), occupation,
and industry. Importantly for our purposes, telephone operator is one of 283 coded occupations
in the IPUMS data (code 370), and the telephone industry is one of 162 coded industries (code
578), making it possible for us to measure the precise size of the local operating force and identify
workers directly exposed to cutovers. For each of these subgroups, we measure several outcomes,
including employment, educational status, marriage, and fertility.13

The IPUMS data report individuals' state and county, a raw city string (as it was transcribed
from the original manuscripts), and an IPUMS-standardized city name, where applicable. Because
standardized city names are not always provided or fully consistent, we undertake an independent,
manual effort to harmonize city spellings (see Appendix B). We then identify the cities that (i)
are observed in each census from 1910 to 1940, and (ii) have at least 2,000 people in the complete
13
     In preparing these data, we create a new occupation code that identifies individuals who are reported as either (i)
     not being in the labor force or (ii) having a non-working occupation (e.g., housewives, students, retirees, disabled
     persons, inmates) or unknown occupation, and we define the working population as all others, i.e., all persons who
     both (i) report as being in the labor force, and (ii) have a working occupation.


                                                            11
count data in 1920. We drop 31 cities with ambiguous cutover timing and all five New York City
boroughs, yielding a final balanced panel of 2,992 cities, of which 332 are in our data as having
their first cutover by April 1, 1940 (the date of the 1940 Census).14


2.3    Linked sample of female telephone operators

To understand the long-run effects of telephone cutovers on the operators themselves, we have to
follow the operators over time. However, linking women across censuses is extremely challenging.
Census linking--whether automated or manual--is based on "stable" features recorded in the census
like first name, last name, year of birth, and place of birth (Abramitzky et al. 2020). Because most
women changed their names at marriage, these features are only stable for men, and most studies
following individuals over time in the early twentieth century therefore focus only on men.15 To
link the women in our sample, we develop and implement a novel linking procedure, making use of a
popular genealogy platform and the "work" of many expert family historians linking the women in
their family trees across censuses and marriage; in effect, we rely on genealogists and descendants,
rather than prediction, to tell us which records belong to the same person.

We link in four steps. First, we identify all women working as telephone operators in the telephone
industry in the 1920 and 1930 complete count census data (Ruggles 2002). After limiting to women
in our focal cities, we have 96,264 women in 1920 and 61,229 women in 1930.16 Second, we look for
each of these women on FamilySearch, a public genealogy platform with an open wiki-style family
tree (Price et al. 2019), where users create pages for deceased individuals--usually their own ances-
tors but not always--and attach links to historical records, including entries from Federal Censuses,
marriage records, and birth certificates. We search FamilySearch in our base years by name, age,
sex, location, and state of birth. Because the 1920 and 1930 census transcriptions in the IPUMS
complete count data are based on the same original manuscripts as those on FamilySearch and
we can use names, addresses, and other characteristics to link them, matching is straightforward.
However, not all telephone operators have a page on FamilySearch. We are able to find 30.4% of
operators in 1920 and 32.3% in 1930 with a FamilySearch page.17

14
   We exclude New York City because it is difficult to discern cutovers in different boroughs in newspaper articles and
   because there were many more cutovers in the very large New York City system than in other cities.
15
   A few papers make use of innovative techniques to avoid linking women on surnames, such as Olivetti and Paserman
   (2015) who pseudo-link people over time using the socio-economic content of first names.
16
   This sample omits a small number of male operators from our analysis as well as a small number of operators
   younger than 16 or older than 60. Only operators in cities with cutovers after 1920 are included. We further limit
   to operators in cities with population 100,000 in 1920, where cutovers were typically one-shot events, matching
   the sample we use when we study the next generation of potential operators (see Section 4). For the 1930 sample,
   we further restrict the sample by filtering out cities with cutovers before 1930, as these women are selected on being
   operators after their city was cut over to dial service.
17
   Whether or not an operator--or anyone else--is attached to the FamilySearch tree is inevitably nonrandom. Pages


                                                           12
Third, we query the FamilySearch tree for links to the next census. That is, we begin with the set
of operators who were attached to the tree in year t  {1920, 1930}, the census in which they were
an operator. We check whether or not each operator's profile on FamilySearch has been linked to
a record from the census in t+10. Conditional on being on the tree, 42.4% of records in our sample
from 1920 are linked ahead to the 1930 census and 44.7% of 1930 records to 1940.

Finally, for the set of operators with FamilySearch records attached to censuses in t and t + 10,
we use census record metadata--reel, page, and line number--to make links back to the complete
count, restricted-use IPUMS data. This process yields a sample of 12,900 operators linked from
1920 to 1930 and another 8,955 linked from 1930 to 1940, the latter number lower because we
exclude operators in cities already cutover to dial. For all of these operators, we observe the full
set of census covariates in t and t +10, allowing us to study what happens to operators a decade
later, including their occupation, industry, marital status and fertility.

These data would be sufficient for comparing incumbent operators in cities with versus without
cutovers, but because cutovers affect all local operators, we would not be able to control for city-
specific trends. We thus supplement these data by identifying, for each operator, a matched com-
parison set of women from the same census enumeration district (akin to a neighborhood of roughly
1,000 residents) who were also working and of the same age (±3 years), sex, race, nativity (U.S.
versus foreign-born), parental nativity, marital status, and with or without children, and we apply
the same linking procedure to track them from a base year to the next census. This effort produces
matched controls for about two-thirds of operators in 1920 and 1930, with an average of four control
women per operator.18 With this expanded sample we can add operator-specific fixed effects to
condition comparisons to between treated operators and their matched controls.

An example can clarify why linking women is difficult, and why the FamilySearch data can help.
Suppose we start with a telephone operator in 1920 in New York named Daisy Fay. We see in the
1920 census that Daisy was born in 1902 in Kentucky. With traditional census linking methods
like Abramitzky et al. (2020) or Ferrie (1996), we would search for records in the 1930 Census with
the name Daisy Fay, born in 1902 in Kentucky, likely with some tolerance for transcription errors
or enumeration errors in these fields. However, if Daisy marries Tom Buchanan in 1922, we would
have no way of knowing that Daisy Fay is likely known as Daisy Buchanan in 1930. Worse, if
another woman named Daisy born in Kentucky around 1902 marries and takes a surname of Fay,

   are built, and records attached, by people working on family history today, and the FamilySearch platform is
   affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As long as the bias in who is likely or not likely to
   be on the tree is uncorrelated with the timing of cutovers, our event study strategy--comparing operators across
   cities and before and after cutovers--should produce an unbiased estimate of the cutover treatment effect. In
   Appendix B.3.3, we describe in more detail what predicts whether or not an operator is on the tree and shows that
   match rates are not a function of our treatment in Table B.3.
18
   More than 80% of the control women are matched to a single operator.


                                                           13
we could falsely match two women who are not the same person. With our FamilySearch-based
approach, we instead search for Daisy Fay on FamilySearch in 1920. If her 1920 record is attached
to a page, we consider her on the tree. We then look to see if a FamilySearch user has also attached
her to the census in 1930, possibly triangulating with knowledge of her name after marriage or her
marriage date, either from personal knowledge or an attached marriage or birth certificate (or in
Daisy's case, a prominent work of American literature). If she is linked to both the 1920 and 1930
censuses, she will make our sample.

The set of operators in this sample is inevitably not random. However, selection in linking is not
a problem unique to our source and setting. Bailey et al. (2017) document the general unrepre-
sentativeness of most historical linked samples made via algorithms (Abramitzky et al. 2020). To
account for this bias, we follow Bailey et al. (2017) and construct inverse propensity weights (IPW).
We describe the process in more depth in Appendix B, but in short, we use initial covariates to
predict which records are more likely to be linked ahead. Key features include age, race, middle
initial and name, name commonness, name length, marital status and fertility. We also control for
differential linking by state of birth and state of residence in the base year, which helps us account
for selection into the FamilySearch platform vis-`
                                                 a-vis descendants or genealogists today, among
other issues. Many features have the predicted signs. Women with more common first names are
less likely to be linked. Women from larger families or with children are more likely to be linked,
likely because larger families increase the chance a descendant uses the FamilySearch platform. In
addition, because FamilySearch is affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,
women living in Utah or born in Utah are significantly more likely to be on the tree and linked
ahead. As we show in Appendix B.3, rates of being on the tree or being linked from one census to
the next are not correlated with our cutover treatment, and the use of IPWs enables us to recover
an unbiased estimate of the effect of cutovers on incumbent operators.



3     Characteristics of Telephone Operators and Cutover Cities

3.1   Characteristics of telephone operators

Table 1 gives a summary view of the young, white, American-born female population from 1910
to 1940, splitting the sample into 16-to-20 and 21-to-25 age groups. Labor force participation fell
sharply for the younger group in this period (from 42.5% to 28.3%), as more completed high school,
while rising for the older group (from 37.7% to 45.2%). In the 1920s, around 4 to 4.5% of working
16 to 20 year-olds at any given time were telephone operators, but this figure masks heterogeneity,
as it approached 7% in western states. Considering that many women were operators for only a


                                                 14
short period, usually early in their careers, the fraction of young women in the labor force that was
ever an operator--and thus, the fraction of future cohorts that might suffer from the loss of these
opportunities--would have been substantially larger (see Section 1).


                                        [Table 1 about here]


Conversely, we can measure the characteristics of telephone operators directly in the census data--
including counting how many were young women. Table 2 reports the total population of telephone
operators age 16+ from 1910 to 1940, split out by industry (telephone industry versus others), along
with their demographics. The total number of operators working in the telephone industry was
growing rapidly at the beginning of the century and peaked in 1930, at 180,000. Roughly 90%
of these operators were white, American-born women throughout the period, but from 1910 to
1940, the occupation went from employing primarily younger (25) to older (26+) women, who
were also more likely to be married and have families--suggesting that for some women, telephone
operation was not just a job, but a career. Although non-telephone industries employed only
2,400 switchboard operators in 1910 (mostly men), by 1940 this population had grown to over
41,000 workers and mirrored the demographic characteristics of operators in the telephone industry.
Telephone operation thus went from being a young women's job to an older women's job over the
period covered in this paper, as local service was automated.


                                        [Table 2 about here]


3.2   Characteristics of cities with cutovers

Why did different cities adopt dial when they did? Understanding this variation is an essential step
for us to identify the effects of cutovers on either local labor markets or incumbent operators, our
goals in this paper. Ultimately, drawing on both the historical record in AT&T's internal archive
and quantitative analysis, we show that cutovers were primarily a response to the demands of a
large and growing telephone network, not a reaction to broader labor market conditions. Cutovers
generally proceeded from larger to smaller cities, driven by economies and diseconomies of scale,
and in our empirical analysis we control for city size.

A complete treatment of this question is included in a concurrent work in Feigenbaum and Gross
(2020), which examines why it took AT&T nearly a century to fully automate telephone operation.
An early obstacle was the performance of the automatic technology itself: according to internal
testing, automatic switching did not initially compare favorably to manual operation on cost,
connection speeds, or error rates. But by the late 1910s, the technology had improved, and internal

                                                 15
cost estimates suggested it would generate significant savings in large cities (Gherardi 1917). At a
1916 company conference, AT&T's top traffic engineer presented several reasons why mechanical
switching should be considered (Waterson 1916):

     1. The complexity of operation in large markets reduced the speed and accuracy of manual
        service and necessitated higher-skill operators
     2. Demand growth was outpacing population growth, requiring AT&T to employ "a greater
        and greater proportion of available women workers"
     3. Rising operator wages and high turnover

Informed by this evidence, in Table 3 we compare characteristics of cities by the timing of their
first cutover, binning cities into five-year intervals from 1920 to 1940, as well as pre-1920 and post-
1940.19 We measure characteristics in 1910--or where necessary, circa 1910--before mechanical
switching was widely adopted, focusing on variables which the historical record suggests may have
been potential drivers of automation, such as population (i.e., the size of the local market), the
fraction of young women already working or already working as operators (a proxy for labor market
slack), or union activity (a source of upward wage pressure).

Panel (A) shows unconditional means of these variables for cities in each interval (across columns),
estimated by regression, with robust standard errors in parentheses. We can see clearly in this
panel that cutovers correlate strongly with population, with larger cities being automated sooner,
especially in the AT&T cutover era (post-1920). Cities with earlier cutovers may have had somewhat
higher labor force participation among young, white, American-born women (which we denote
with the label "f/n/w/y"), and were also more likely to have had operator unions and strikes pre-
1920, but are otherwise demographically similar.20 In Panel (B), we re-estimate these regressions
controlling for log population. Once we do so, most differences disappear, with the exception of
cutovers correlating with prior operator unionization.

                                               [Table 3 about here]

The results of Table 3 underscore the importance of population in determining cutover timing. We
will thus include year-specific controls for city population throughout our analysis to account for
concurrent trends taking place in cities of different size.21
19
   Recall that AT&T began adopting dial in 1919, such that nearly all pre-1920 cutovers were independents.
20
   We measure local union chapters using historical issues of the Journal of Electrical Workers and Operators (IBEW
   1915) and the Union Telephone Operator (IBEW 1921), the monthly journal of the Telephone Operator Department
   of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, and strikes using Annual Reports of the U.S. Secretary of
   Labor (U.S. Department of Labor 1913), as well as written histories by Norwood (1990) and Segrave (2017).
21
   Though we do not find residual differences across cities in the fraction of young women who were telephone operators
   in 1910, we will see in Section 4 that cutovers were preceded by growth in this employment share--consistent with
   AT&T beginning to exhaust the narrow pool from which it hired these workers. In Section 5 we also discuss
   pre-trends and balance tests for changes over time in the outcomes studied there.


                                                          16
4        Effects of Automation on Demand for Telephone Operators

Our primary goal in this paper is to understand how the technology shock of mechanical switching
affected the labor markets for both future generations of young women and incumbent operators.
However, any such effects could only occur if mechanical switching--and our measure of its adoption
by city--led to a decline in demand for telephone operators. In this section, we establish that both
the number of telephone operators and the share of young, white, American-born women who were
operators fell significantly after a city adopted mechanical switching.


4.1       Empirical approach

We take two empirical approaches to studying the effects of dial. Here and in Section 5, we analyze
effects on local labor markets with an event-study specification, exploiting the staggered adoption of
mechanical switching and comparing outcomes before and after each city's first observed cutover. In
Section 6, we turn to our linked samples and estimate the effects of cutovers on individual operators,
comparing those in cities with cutovers to those without, controlling for a rich set of individual- and
city-level covariates. Throughout, our focus will be the sample of cities with population 100,000
in 1920, where automation was typically a discrete event.22

Concretely, we estimate the following event-study specification:

                                                      s
                                      Yit =        s Dit + i + t + Xit  + it                                       (1)
                                               s


where i and t index cities and (census) years, i and t are city and year fixed effects, and Xit
are time-varying controls; s indexes event time with respect to a city's first cutover, omitting the
period immediately before a city's cutover, which becomes the reference point for the event study
estimates (s ). In our primary specifications, we measure s in 10-year intervals, to be consistent
with the decadal frequency with which outcomes are measured in the census. For certain analyses,
we also estimate two-year intervals to better understand adjustment dynamics, with the important
caveat that each bin (in event time) will contain different treated cities, since each city is measured
once every ten years (and will thus be included in every fifth bin).
22
     Recall from Section 2 that the focal city sample contains 2,992 cities, of which 332 have a cutover in our data
     before the 1940 census. For our event study strategy, we pare this sample to the 2,915 cities with 1920 population
     100,000 and without a cutover before 1917. This latter restriction is applied because our newspaper-based
     data collection was limited to articles published between 1917 and 1940, and our coverage of cutovers pre-1917 is
     therefore incomplete--although we do not consider this to be problematic, as pre-1917 cutovers were only performed
     by smaller, independent telephone companies (rather than AT&T), and the results are not sensitive to this choice.
     Of these 2,915 cities, 261 have a cutover pre-1940 census. In Appendix E, we also consider the "large" cities in
     the AT&T data, for which we know the fraction of subscribers with dial service by 1940, and study long-difference
     outcomes as a function of this intensive measure of adoption.


                                                           17
We measure outcomes Yit at the level of city-demographic category-year, but in nearly all specifi-
cations we will restrict attention to a single subpopulation per city (typically: white/non-Hispanic,
American-born women age 16 to 25, pooled or by age), such that observations are effectively at
the city-year level. These outcomes generally take the form of the log number of people in that
subpopulation of a certain type (e.g., the log number of telephone operators), or the fraction of
that type (e.g., the fraction who are telephone operators), in which case we weight our regressions
by population (the denominator). We are thus estimating pre- versus post-cutover changes across
cities that had cutovers at different times, with fixed effects and other controls being estimated off
of these cities as well as all other in our sample which did not have a cutover by 1940. Throughout,
we cluster standard errors at the city (x demographic group) level.

Our standard set of controls (Xit ) consists of log city population by year effects, which will account
for differential trends taking place in larger and smaller cities over time, and which are especially
important because city size is closely related to cutovers (Section 3).23 Although year fixed effects
alone can account for national trends, many of these forces were trending locally at the same time
as cutovers, and differentially so in cities of different sizes. As an empirical matter, these controls
eliminate differential pre-trends across the outcomes we study.24

After establishing that the immediate effect of cutovers is a permanent, approximately-level decline
in the fraction of young women who were telephone operators, which is a difference-in-difference
result, we will replace event studies with difference-in-difference specifications for other outcomes,
often by individual ages, with the following specification:


                              Yit =  · 1(Post-Cutover)it + i + t + Xit  + it                                         (2)


4.2    Effects of dial on operator jobs

Were operator jobs eliminated by cutovers? Appendix Figure D.1 provides event study estimates
of the effects of cutovers on employment shares in telephone operation. In the full (working age)
population of men and women, cutovers a small but significant decrease in this share, of around
0.2 percentage points (p.p., in blue). However, as we know from Table 2, the vast majority of
telephone operators were from a specific subgroup. As we narrow our focus to these demographic
groups more likely to be operators, the magnitude of the effect grows, with declines in employment
23
   For regressions where the outcome is a log number of people from a given demographic of a certain type (e.g., log
   number of young, white, American-born women who are telephone operators), we also always control for the log
   size of the focal demographic (log number of all young, white, American-born women).
24
   In Appendix F, we include results with year fixed effects only, where these underlying trends are more visible. The
   results are also robust to controlling for state-year effects, but we are mindful to not oversaturate the model. Other
   trends which AT&T records identify as drivers of cutovers, such as growth in the fraction of young women who
   were operators, are outcomes we study, and we will be able see these pre-trends below.


                                                           18
of roughly 0.9 p.p. among women (red) and 1.7 p.p. among young, white, American-born women
(green). Relative to baseline operator employment share of 3.9% for young women (and 1.8%
for all women), the decline is substantial, especially for entry level workers with weaker labor
force attachment. This large exposure to the shock among young, white, American-born women
motivates our focus in most of the rest of the paper on this demographic group.

Figure 3 shows the effects of cutovers on the (log) number of young, white American-born women
who were telephone operators in the telephone industry, first in 10-year intervals (Panel A) and
then in two-year intervals (Panel B), with associated 95% confidence intervals. Cutovers caused a
sharp decline in the number of young operators: though the number of young operators was on
average growing moderately in the decades before a city's first cutover to dial, even conditional on
overall population--consistent with AT&T's motivations for adoption (as in Feigenbaum and Gross
2020)--it subsequently dropped by 50 to 80% (Panel A). Our higher-frequency estimates indicate
that the cutover effect kicked in immediately (Panel B).25


                                               [Figure 3 about here]


In Figure 4 we shift our focus from the number of operators to the fraction of young women's jobs
that were automated away by cutovers. Panel (A) plots the high-frequency event study estimates
for the percent of young, white, American-born women who were telephone operators, where it
becomes apparent that automating local telephone operation immediately and permanently elim-
inated nearly 2% of area jobs for the group. This effect is measured in terms of the fraction of
young women who were operators at a moment in time (the month the census was taken), but given
high turnover, eliminating 2% of jobs may cut off entry-level job opportunities for several times as
many people. Although we have thus far been estimating event studies, this view of the data also
makes clear that the effect is in essence a difference-in-difference (DID) result, motivating our use
of a DID strategy throughout the rest of the paper. Panel (B) estimates this DID, splitting the
sample by individual ages (16 to 25). We see that mechanical switching hit the youngest ages the
hardest, workers we might expect to be most vulnerable to labor force detachment in the face of
such a large and long-lasting negative shock to labor demand.


                                               [Figure 4 about here]


In Appendix E, we present several robustness checks. Although we are estimating these effects in
all cities in the continental U.S. meeting our sampling criteria, our measurement of cutovers is in
25
     Because we observe very few cities 20+ years post-cutover (these are cities with a pre-1920 cutover observed in
     1940), standard errors for the final event study bin are generally larger than for other periods.


                                                          19
part dependent on the geographic coverage of our historical newspaper data sources. Incomplete
measurement should in general only attenuate our results, as we would be mistakenly binning un-
observed treated observations with the control group, and for this reason we believe our estimates
to be lower bound effects. To allay residual concerns about selection, we estimate the same regres-
sions on a sample of cities which we know to have continuous coverage in our data sources from
1917 to 1940, where we find similar (if not slightly larger) effects on operator employment. We also
estimate the effects of dial in larger cities using the AT&T sample and a long differences strategy--
exploiting the extent of local dial penetration across large cities between 1920 and 1940--and find
quantitatively similar results. In addition, we present cuts by census region, city size, and ex-ante
exposure to automation, as measured by the fraction of young women in 1910 who were telephone
operators in the telephone industry. We find these effects are largest in cities in the top quartile of
exposure, in larger cities, and in cities in the West census region.26


4.3    Substitution into other jobs in the telephone industry, or into telephone
       operation in other industries?

As we pivot to studying what happened to young women after telephone operation was automated,
our first question is whether the reduction in operator jobs was countered by increased hiring of
young women into other jobs in the telephone industry, or by the growth of telephone operators in
other industries.27 Contemporary AT&T sources alleged this was true for incumbent operators: in
a 1931 letter to the U.S. Secretary of Labor, for example, an AT&T Vice President claimed that
"Every effort is made to provide for all employees wishing to continue work after the cutover, [as]
transfers are made to other telephone departments and positions found in other industries" (Carter
1931). Was this true for future cohorts, or did they have to find work elsewhere?

Our answer is a definitive no: we see no effect of cutovers on the hiring of young women into
non-operator jobs in the telephone industry, or on hiring into telephone operator jobs in other
industries (if anything, they slightly decline, although the magnitudes are far smaller, as a fraction
of employment, than the automation shock itself). Figure 5 presents these results, first with a
pooled event study (top row) and then with DIDs by age (bottom row).


                                              [Figure 5 about here]



26
   These three results are likely closely related, as telephone operation employed a larger fraction of young women in
   larger cities and in the West region (see Appendix Table 1).
27
   As Table 2 shows, operator employment in other industries was rapidly growing, although as Appendix Table C.4
   makes clear, most of this growth was in large cities, which are excluded from our sample.


                                                         20
5       Effects on Future Cohorts of Young Women

Contemporary sources offer hints of what might have happened to incumbent operators and future
cohorts of young women after dial, which we use as a guide in organizing our analysis. Newspaper
articles sometimes discuss the fate of operators, including marriage (e.g., see Appendix A). A report
produced by the Women's Bureau of the U.S. Department of Labor (Best 1933) provides a more
nuanced view, informed by home visits to survey displaced operators in two cities, one of which
experienced a one-shot cutover like those in our sample. Of the 78 women surveyed, a year later 18
were re-employed by the telephone company, and 33 in other industries--10 in retail, 8 in clerical
jobs, 7 as PBX operators, 4 in factories, and others as waitresses, nurses, or beauticians--although
many had spent time unemployed and subsequently had lower wages.

The report also noted that displaced operators were a "large enough group to be of public interest,"
and as a result, the telephone company "sought the cooperation of the [local] chamber of commerce
... in finding possible work for the operators affected" (Best 1933). This yielded jobs in "office work,
sales work in stores, and counter work in restaurants." Some women moved to exchanges in other
cities. But while incumbent operators may have had this informal safety net, future generations
of young women who would have been operators in a world without dial had no such protections.
Our interest here is specifically how these future cohorts fared.

The question which looms largest is whether cutovers reduced employment rates. Table 4 estimates
the effects of cutovers on the fraction of young, white, American-born women who are working, in
school, married, and have families, breaking out the results by age group (16 to 18, 19 to 22, 23 to
25).28 In the first column, we present the large, negative effect of cutovers on the fraction of each
subgroup working as telephone operators, which serves as a reference point for evaluating effect
sizes in other outcomes. We find no effects on the fraction of young women working, in school,
married, or with children for any group, with relatively precise zeros. We can rule out general
unemployment increases of the magnitude of the shock itself.


                                               [Table 4 about here]


If automation did not increase unemployment, what were these young women doing instead? To
discipline our analysis of the effects of cutovers on employment in other occupations, we use in-
formation from Best (1933), occupation- and sex-specific wage distributions from NICB (1926),
and data on the most common occupations for young women from the complete count data itself
(Appendix Table C.1). Best (1933) identifies white-collar office work, factory work, service work,
28
     When we estimate the effects of cutovers on the outcomes in Tables 4 and 5 by age, we find distinctive patterns
     across different age ranges. These patterns motivate our choice to bin ages as we have.


                                                          21
and sales counter work as candidate alternatives. Several of these are also among the most common
occupations for young women, and the NICB data in particular reveals that typists, stenographers,
and office machine operators had similar wages to telephone operation (Appendix Table B.5), which
we consider the closest substitutes. In the figures below, we restrict our attention to service sector
jobs, where most of the adjustments appear to have been.

Table 5 estimates the DID effects of cutovers on the share of working young, white, American-born
women in telephone operation versus in six other jobs: (i) office machine operators, (ii) typists,
stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks, (v) beauty parlor workers,
and (vi) restaurant workers.29 Growth in middle-skill secretarial jobs and low-skill service jobs
offset most of the operator jobs lost to automation. However, the effects vary by age. Women aged
19 to 22 moved into similar-paying secretarial jobs. In contrast, women aged 16 to 18 were more
likely to be in lower-paying service jobs, like waitressing or beauty parlor work.30

                                            [Table 5 about here]

Our robustness checks mirror those presented in Section 4.2: Appendix E presents analogous results
for cities with continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940, where we find qualitatively similar
results. In this subsample, we see slightly more substitution into sales clerking, but standard errors
are sufficiently large that we cannot rule out that the results are the same as in Table 5. We also
find similar results for our large city, long-differences sample, where if anything, even more of the
occupational substitution was into waitressing, including at older ages.

Throughout this section, we have estimated the effects of cutovers on labor market outcomes di-
rectly, with an implicit first stage effect on telephone operator jobs, which we showed in the previous
section. In Appendix E we formalize this logic with a two-stage least squares design, regressing
labor market outcomes on the share of young, white, American-born women who were telephone
operators in the telephone industry, instrumenting with cutovers. The results are statistically and
quantitatively similar, with first-stage F-statistics of nearly 200.


5.1    Pre-trends and balance tests

A potential threat to this analysis is the possibility of confounding trends. For example, if cutovers
were more likely to occur where young women's labor demand was growing, this could have softened
29
   The effect of cutovers on telephone operation employment in Column (1) of both Tables 4 and 5 are of different
   magnitudes because each table is measuring outcomes within (slightly) different subpopulations. In Table 4, we
   study outcomes as a share of the white, American-born, female population, while in Table 5 we focus on white,
   American-born, women who are working. In both cases, we want the denominator in the first column to match the
   denominators in the rest of the table, to serve as a useful reference point.
30
   Other common occupations for women in this period include factory work, private household work, teaching, and
   nursing. However, we do not find that these occupations grew after cutovers.


                                                       22
the impact on employment. In Appendix Figure D.2 we provide balance tests, comparing prior-
decade changes for cities which (i) experienced their first cutover in the next decade, to those which
(ii) would not be cut over to dial for at least another decade. Importantly, there are no systematic
changes in overall employment rates in the run-up to cutovers. We see modest evidence that office
work and restaurant work may grown faster from 1910 to 1920 in cities with cutovers in the 1920s,
and employment rates in telephone operation were growing faster from 1920 to 1930 in cities with
cutovers in the 1930s. In Appendix Figures D.3 and D.4, we plot the full event studies for these
outcomes, by age group, where we see little evidence of pre-trends; any such trends are only seen
20 years prior to cutovers and are unlikely to be directly related.


5.2   Mechanisms: Why was employment so stable?

The absence of an effect of this shock on overall employment raises the question of why local labor
markets adjusted so smoothly, and whether this result is general--or if not, under what conditions
unemployment might ensue. There are many more candidate explanations for our results than we
can posit here. But we endeavor to make headway by exploring heterogeneity in the effects across
cities in two dimensions: dynamism, and aggregate demand.

Resilience could be rooted in the underlying strength of local demand. For example, cities with a
diverse employment mix may be better insulated from shocks and primed to grow (Glaeser et al.
1992). We calculate city-level occupation and industry employment Herfindahl indexes in 1910 as
measures of local economic dynamism (in the spirit of Jacobs 1970), and identify cities in the top
and bottom quartiles of the distribution--i.e., the cities with the least and most diverse employment
base. Appendix Figure F.1 estimates the effect of cutovers on employment in each group. Point
estimates remain insignificant and clustered around zero.

The effects might also vary with aggregate demand. Though our period intersects with the Great
Depression, our setting is not well suited to comparing effects of cutovers in cities which had
cutovers in the (expansionary) 1920s versus the (recessionary) 1930s, because (i) cutover timing
correlates strongly with city size and (ii) the set of cities with cutovers during the Great Depression
may be selected on unobservables, as well as for practical reasons like measurement (we observe
outcomes in 1930, which is only the very beginning of the Great Depression, and 1940, which is in
recovery) and statistical power. We instead measure cross-sectional variation in Great Depression
severity using county-level data on per-capita retail sales declines from 1929 to 1933 (Fishback et al.
2005), and in Appendix Figure F.2 and Appendix Table F.3 we estimate the effects of cutovers in
cities differentially hit by the depression. We find negative effects of cutovers on future cohorts'
employment in cities with higher depression severity. Because we cannot pin these effects specifically


                                                  23
to cutovers which coincided with the Great Depression, these results are only suggestive. But they
raise the possibility that cutovers did not cause measurable employment losses on average because
in the years we observe in our data, labor demand was relatively strong--and if we instead observed
outcomes in 1933, our results might have looked different.


5.3   General equilibrium effects

An implication of our results is that automation may have ripple effects on professions that work-
ers transition into or take up instead, including on existing workers in those professions, who are
exposed to more labor market competition. Depending on demand elasticities, the increased em-
ployment of young, white, American-born women in these occupations could come from either new
demand or employment share-stealing from other categories of workers.

Although we do not have data on wages, we evaluate the effects on other categories of workers in
these occupations in Appendix Tables F.4 and F.5, which estimate the change in total employment
and employment rates for different worker categories in secretarial work and restaurant work. The
evidence suggests different equilibrium dynamics in each occupation: because secretarial work was
growing rapidly, it appears that most of the influx of would-be operators was absorbed by new
demand. Restaurant work, on the other hand, did not experience statistically significant growth
in total employment around cutovers, and the surge of young, white American-born women in the
field may have come at the expense of black women (and possibly men). The results should be
interpreted with caution, as the estimates are only marginally significant, but they suggest that
the effects of automation may spill over to other populations.



6     Effects on Incumbent Telephone Operators

We also ask what happened to incumbent telephone operators after the installation of mechanical
switching. Despite a great deal of contemporary interest, prior evidence is limited and anecdotal.
In this section, we estimate effects of cutovers on women who were telephone operators in the most
recent census, many of whose jobs were replaced by the new technology.


6.1   Empirical approach

Our empirical strategy is straightforward. Using our sample of women telephone operators in 1920
and 1930 (year t) linked to their next census record (in t +10), comparing them to a matched set
of women from the same census enumeration district, and retaining our focus on women in "small"


                                                24
cities with population 100,000 in 1920, we estimate the effects of a cutover in the intervening
decade on individual operators' outcomes ten years later:

                                 t+10
                               Yict   =  · 1(Cutover)ct + ct + Xi 1 + Xc 2 + ict                                      (3)


        t+10
where Yict   represents an outcome in year t + 10 for a woman i who lived in city c in year t,
1(Cutover)ct indicates that city c was cut over to dial between t and t +10, ct are city-year fixed
effects, and Xi are individual-level controls.31 In our most demanding specification, we replace
the city-year fixed effects with operator-year fixed effects, which conditions comparisons to within
individual operators and their associated control women. In the tables below, we present results
pooling the 1920-30 and 1930-40 linked samples. We also present results for operators of all ages,
though our primary focus remains on young women. We cluster all standard errors by city and use
inverse propensity weights to account for selection in our linking procedure (Bailey et al. 2017).


6.2       Effects on incumbent telephone operators

We begin our analysis in Table 6 by studying the effects of cutovers on the probability that a
year-t operator: (i) was still a telephone operator in the telephone industry in t + 10, (ii) had a
non-operator job in the telephone industry, or (iii) was an operator in another industry. We initially
show results for year-t operators of all ages (Columns 1 and 2), and subsequently break out the
effects for those age 16 to 20 (Columns 3 and 4), 21-25 (Columns 5 and 6), and 26+ (Columns 7
and 8). All columns include individual-level controls. Odd-numbered columns add city-year fixed
effects, and even-numbered columns operator-year fixed effects.


                                                  [Table 6 about here]


Echoing our results from Section 4, cutovers significantly reduced the likelihood of employment as
telephone operators in the telephone industry. Table 6, Panel (A) shows that women who were
operators in the base year were 8 p.p. less likely to be operators ten years later if exposed to a
cutover (Columns 1 and 2). This effect shaves roughly one-third off of the base rate at which these
women continued working as telephone operators in non-cutover cities, relative to their matched
controls. The effects are largest for older women, who conditional on being an operator at age 26+
were more likely to remain in the job than young women.
31
     This specification will thus estimate differential outcomes in the post-period of telephone operators which were
     versus were not subject to a cutover in the intervening decade, relative to outcomes of similar women from the
     same local area. The control group is matched on age (± 3), sex, race, nativity, parents' nativity, marital status,
     and fertility, all measured in year t, and conditioned on having an occupation in year t. Individual controls consist
     of fixed effects for age, race, birthplace, and marital status in year t.


                                                             25
What did these former telephone operators do instead? Natural alternatives are other jobs in the
telephone industry or working as a private switchboard operator in a different industry. However,
the data reject the importance of either of these margins of adjustment. Former telephone operators
were very unlikely to do either, independent of cutovers or as a result of them (Table 6, Panels
B and C). Although the odds of working other jobs in the telephone industry or as a telephone
operator in another industry increased modestly after a cutover for women under 25, these effects
can only account for a small fraction of overall operator displacement.

We show in Table 7, Panel (A) that cutovers pushed many incumbent operators out of the labor
entirely. Operators who were over age 25 in the base year were roughly 9 p.p. less likely to
still be working after a cutover, relative to peers in untreated cities--accounting for most of the
displacement of operators in this age group. However, cutovers had no detectable effect on younger
women's employment (those under 25 in the base year).


                                                 [Table 7 about here]


We supplement this evidence by studying in Panels (B) and (C) the likelihood that a year-t operator
got married or had children between t and t+10 (conditional on initially having been single/having
had no children in year t, respectively), since family may have been an alternative to work for this
population and time period. The evidence suggests that cutovers may have increased the odds that
older, unmarried operators subsequently wed or had children, though the results are of marginal
significance, with no discernable effects on operators of younger ages.

In Table 8, we find that operators who continued working were roughly 12 p.p. (or 35%) more likely
than their peers to switch careers, and suggestive evidence that their new occupations were lower
status after automation. Panel (A) estimates the effects of cutovers on the probability of changing
occupation or industry, where career switching is visible. Though this change was all but implied
for a job that was automated by a monopsonist employer, the results are similar when the outcome
is an indicator for changing occupation alone or changing industry alone. In Panels (B) and (C),
we estimate the effect of cutovers on log occupation score (a commonly-used occupation-level proxy
for income, measuring occupations' median income--and which we calculate specifically for women
in 1940, the first year that income is measured in the census) and the likelihood that a worker was
in a lower-paying occupation in t + 10 than in t.32 The occupation score of operators who were
exposed to cutovers and are still working a decade later on average fell by 5%, at the same time

32
     We study whether operators in year t were in higher- versus lower-paying jobs ten years later, rather than focusing
     on whether year-t operators transitioned into specific occupations after cutovers, because older women tended to be
     distributed across many more occupations. The occupation scores we construct for women in 1940 are analogous
     to those calculated and made widely available by IPUMS for the entire population in 1950.


                                                            26
as their untreated peers' occupation scores increased 8%, with similar effects across ages. Roughly
10% of these women end up in a lower-paying job a decade later.


                                        [Table 8 about here]



7    Discussion and Conclusion

The automation of telephone operation is among the largest discrete automation shocks in U.S.
history, and as such it provides a unique opportunity to study what happens when technology
replaces an entire major category of work, and in particular an entire major entry-level occupation.
Using panel variation in the local adoption of mechanical switching and population outcomes from
complete count census data from 1910 to 1940, we show that dial cutovers presented a large negative
shock to local labor demand for young, white, American-born women, with the number of young
operators dropping by upwards of 80%--a near-total collapse in entry-level hiring in one of the
country's largest occupations for young women--and accordingly around 2% of jobs for this group
being permanently replaced by machines, essentially at the flip of a switch.

These 2% of jobs represented entry-level opportunities for several times as many young women,
and the fear was that its automation might choke off future generations from the labor force. We
find that this shock did not reduce future cohorts' employment rates. It appears that comparable
middle-skill office jobs and some lower-skill service sector jobs absorbed future generations of young
workers, and did so fairly quickly, with women of only the youngest ages on average ending up in
lower-paying occupations than they would have been in otherwise. The adverse consequences of
automation were concentrated in incumbent telephone operators, who were subsequently less likely
to be working, and conditional on working, more likely to be in lower-paying occupations--but
even then, the magnitudes of these impacts were relatively modest.

We consider these results to be a useful reference point in the modern discussion of the risks
that automation poses to workers' and families' economic security today--and one that suggests
that dislocations do occur, but perhaps are not as severe as often feared. However, the inevitable
question is how much bearing this episode has for the present or the future, especially in light of
the potential distinctiveness of the period and affected population. A second, equally important
question is whether specific institutional features of the historical setting contributed to workers'
relatively smooth adjustment, and whether they are reproducible today.

Both questions merit attention. As Section 1 explains, the early 20th century was a time of rapid
growth in women's educational attainment, labor demand, and labor force participation. Jobs which


                                                 27
were growing in this period (like office work) were a natural source of countervailing labor demand,
and may have even been furthered by mechanical switching, which required businesses to dial their
own telephone calls. Although in our setting we find no evidence that mechanical switching was a
response to general labor market tightening, if firms are more likely to automate work when labor
demand is growing, this may intrinsically blunt any adverse effects on employment. More generally,
understanding how the effects of automation are mediated by local economic conditions, including
secular trends or the business cycle, is an important question for future research.

Equally important, however, may be that the necessity of complementary investments required that
cutovers be planned a few years in advance--a fact which we see firsthand in newspaper reporting.
This advance notice may have potentially allowed young women nearing working age to adjust their
educational investments and early career choices (or for their parents and high schools to do the
same), mitigating the impact of the shock. A better understanding of how advance notice facilitates
adjustments is thus a second opportunity for further research. Most automation threats today are
likely to take place gradually and over longer horizons, and it seems unlikely that 2% of local jobs
may spontaneously be automated with less warning.

This historical example raises many other questions. For example, when the workplace is a key
nexus for social ties (as was the case for operators), automation or other shocks that eliminate jobs
may also break or weaken these ties, or preclude them from forming altogether--if so, industrial
decline might link to declining community and social capital, which has been blamed as a reason
for growing political polarization in the U.S. today. Technological change may also have spillover
effects from affected workers to their families, not only due to the resulting economic insecurity but
also because in some blue-collar professions, jobs themselves can be intergenerationally transmitted.
History provides fertile ground for further research on these and other questions, which we believe
is warranted given growing concerns about automation today.




                                                 28
References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J. Feigenbaum, and Santiago P´
                                                                                            erez. 2020. Auto-
  mated Linking of Historical Data. NBER Working Paper 25825.

Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. "The Race between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology
  for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment," American Economic Review, Vol. 108, No. 6, pp. 1488­1542.

         . 2020. "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from U.S. Labor Markets," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 128, No.
  6, pp. 2188­2244.

AT&T. 1915. Bell Telephones in Principal Cities, 1915 to 1940 editions. Available at AT&T Archives and History
  Center (San Antonio, TX and Warren, NJ).

       . 1937. First Dial Cutover and Per Cent Dial Stations of Total Stations (as of 12-31-37) in Cities of 50,000
  Population or Over. Appendix to Freeman (1937), "History of the Development of the Panel Machine Switching
  System," available at AT&T Archives and History Center (Warren, NJ), Box 106-10-02-07.

Autor, David H. 2019. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 109, pp. 1­32.

Bailey, Martha J., Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey. 2017. How Well Do Automated Methods
  Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth. NBER Working Paper 24019.

Bennett, Victor M. 2019. Automation and Concentration. Working paper.

Bessen, James E. 2015. Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages, and Wealth. New
  Haven: Yale University Press.

Bessen, James E., Maarten Goos, Anna Salomons, and Wiljan Van den Berge. 2019. Automatic Reaction: What
  Happens to Workers at Firms that Automate?. Boston University School of Law, Law and Economics Research
  Paper No. 19-2.

Best, Ethel. 1933. The Change from Manual to Dial Operation in the Telephone Industry. Bulletin of the Women's
  Bureau No. 110.

Carter, E. F. 1931. Letter to William N. Doak, U.S. Secretary of Labor (September 9). Available at AT&T Archives
  and History Center (Warren, NJ), Box 127-01-01-07.

Cobble, Dorothy Sue. 1992. Dishing It Out: Waitresses and Their Unions in the Twentieth Century. Urbana: Uni-
  versity of Illinois Press.

Couch, Kenneth A. and Dana W. Placzek. 2010. "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited," American
  Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 1, pp. 572­89.

Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Jens Suedekum, and Nicole Woessner. 2018. Adjusting to Robots: Worker-
  Level Evidence. Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute Working Paper 13.

Dixon, Jay, Bryan Hong, and Lynn Wu. 2019. The Employment Consequences of Robots: Firm-Level Evidence.
  Working paper.

Feigenbaum, James J. and Daniel P. Gross. 2020. Why Do Firms Automate Production, and How Do They Adjust?
  Evidence from the Bell Telephone System in the Early 20th Century. Working paper.

Feintzeig, Rachel. 2020. The Vanishing Executive Assistant.. Wall Street Journal, available at https://www.wsj.com/
  articles/the-vanishing-executive-assistant-11579323605.

Ferrie, Joseph P. 1996. "A New Sample of Males Linked from the Public use Microdata Sample of the 1850 U.S.
  Federal Census of Population to the 1860 U.S. Federal Census Manuscript Schedules," Historical Methods: A
  Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 141­156.


                                                        29
Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. 2005. "Did New Deal Grant Programs Stimulate Local
  Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales During the Great Depression," The Journal of Economic
  History, Vol. 65, No. 1, pp. 36­71.

Gherardi, Bancroft. 1917. Memorandum for J. J. Carty, Chief Engineer. Appendix to Freeman (1937), "History
  of the Development of the Panel Machine Switching System," available at AT&T Archives and History Center
  (Warren, NJ), Box 106-10-02-07.

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1992. "Growth in Cities," Journal of
  Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 6, pp. 1126­1152.

Goldin, Claudia. 1984. "The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions and Occupations," Explorations in
  Economic History, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 1­27.

       . 1998. "America's Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of Secondary Schooling in the
  Twentieth Century," The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 345­374.

       . 2006. "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family," AER:
  Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 96, No. 2, pp. 1­21.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge: Harvard
  University Press.

Goldin, Claudia and Claudia Olivetti. 2013. "Shocking Labor Supply: A Reassessment of the Role of World War II
  on Women's Labor Supply," American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 3, pp. 257­62.

Graetz, Georg and Guy Michaels. 2018. "Robots at Work," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 100, No. 5, pp.
  753­768.

Hochheiser, Sheldon. 2017. Conversation between the authors and Sheldon Hochheiser, AT&T Corporate Historian.

Humlum, Anders. 2019. Robot Adoption and Labor Market Dynamics. Working paper.

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW). 1915. The Journal of electrical Workers and Operators,
   1915-1920. First volume in 1915.

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) Telephone Operators' Department. 1921. The Union Tele-
   phone Operator, 1921-1922. First volume in 1921.

Jacobs, Jane. 1970. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage Books.

Jaworski, Taylor. 2014. ""You're in the Army Now:" The Impact of World War II on Women's Education, Work,
  and Family," The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 74, No. 1, pp. 169­195.

Kahn, Lisa B. 2010. "The Long-term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy,"
  Labour Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 303­316.

Koch, Michael, Ilya Manuylov, and Marcel Smolka. 2019. Robots and firms. CESifo Working Paper 7608.

Lucas Jr., Robert E. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 22,
  No. 1, pp. 3­42.

National Industrial Conference Board (NICB). 1926. Clerical Salaries in the United States.

Norwood, Stephen H. 1990. Labor's Flaming Youth: Telephone Operators and Worker Militancy, 1878-1923. Urbana:
  University of Illinois Press.

O'Connor, W. J. 1930. Effects of Dial Operation on Employment in the Telepone Business (May 31). Available at
  AT&T Archives and History Center (Warren, NJ), Box 127-01-01-07.


                                                       30
Olivetti, Claudia and M. Daniele Paserman. 2015. "In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter): Intergenerational
  Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940," American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 8, pp. 2695­2724.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till Von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. "The Short-and Long-term Career Effects of Grad-
  uating in a Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 1­29.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2018. Automation, Skills Use and Training.
  OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 202.

Price, Joseph, Kasey Buckles, Jacob Van Leeuwen, and Isaac Riley. 2019. Combining Family History and Machine
  Learning to Link Historical Records. NBER Working Paper 26227.

Ruggles, Steven. 2002. "Linking Historical Censuses: A New Approach," History and Computing, Vol. 14, No. 1-2,
  pp. 213­224.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew Sobek. 2019.
  IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0.

Segrave, Kerry. 2017. The Women Who Got America Talking: Early Telephone Operators, 1878-1922. Jefferson:
  McFarland & Company.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 1932. "The Dial Telephone and Unemployment," Monthly Labor Review, Vol.
  34, pp. 235­247.

           . 2019a. Occupational Employment Statistics. Accessed September 2019 for Telephone Operators (SOC 43-
  2021).

       . 2019b. Occupational Outlook Handbook. Accessed September 2019 for Cashiers, General Office Clerks, and
  Customer Service Representatives.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1913. Annual Report of the Secretary of Labor, 1913-1933. First volume in 1913.

           . 1946. The Woman Telephone Worker. Bulletin of the Women's Bureau No. 207.

Waterson, K. W. 1916. Address at Bell System Technical Conference. Referenced by Freeman (1937), "History of the
 Development of the Panel Machine Switching System," available at AT&T Archives and History Center (Warren,
 NJ), Box 106-10-02-07.

Zator, Michael. 2019. Digitization and Automation: Firm Investment and Labor Outcomes. Working paper.




                                                        31
        Table 1: Employment of white, American-born women age 16-20 and 21-25, 1910-1940
                                                Age range: 16-20                         Age range: 21-25
                                       1910      1920     1930       1940       1910      1920     1930         1940

   Population (1000s)                 2427.6    2690.9    3618.4     4043.3    2295.9     2769.8       3509.4   4148.5
   Working population (1000s)         1032.3    1215.6    1409.0     1143.0     865.8     1124.9       1556.9   1873.5
   Labor force participation          42.5%     45.2%     38.9%      28.3%     37.7%      40.6%        44.4%    45.2%
   Percent tel. oper. in tel. ind.     3.2%      4.5%      4.0%       1.3%      2.3%       3.3%         3.3%     1.5%

   Percent tel. operators in tel. industry, by census region (%)
    Northeast                           2.4      3.6       3.7        0.8        1.9          3.3       3.2      1.1
    Midwest                             3.6      4.8       4.2        1.4        2.5          3.3       3.3      1.6
    South                               3.5      5.6       4.4        1.7        2.3          3.1       3.2      1.6
    West                                5.2      6.8       4.0        2.4        2.8          4.4       3.5      2.4

   Percent tel. operators in tel. industry, by city size (in 1920) (%)
    Population 2-5k                     4.3       5.1       4.0     1.3          3.1          3.8       3.5      1.4
    Population 5-10k                    3.7       4.5       3.5     1.3          2.8          3.4       3.3      1.5
    Population 10-20k                   3.2       4.2       3.7     1.3          2.3          3.0       3.1      1.4
    Population 20-50k                   2.8       3.8       3.9     1.2          2.0          2.7       3.0      1.5
    Population 50-100k                  2.6       4.0       3.4     1.2          1.6          2.6       2.8      1.5
    Population 100-200k                 3.0       4.8       4.0     1.6          1.9          3.1       3.2      1.6
    Population >200k                    3.3       4.9       4.8     1.3          2.2          3.7       3.7      1.5

Notes: Table reports employment characteristics for white, American-born women age 16-20 and 21-25, by year.
Employment rates in telephone operation are computed as a percentage of the working population. Breakdowns
by city size are for the 3,027 cities in our primary sample (see Appendix B).




                         Table 2: Characteristics of telephone operators, 1910-1940
                                             Telephone industry                      Other industries
                                      1910     1920    1930     1940          1910    1920 1930 1940

           Population (1000s)        73.03     134.63    182.04    152.70     2.40     5.74    22.83    41.17

           Composition (%)
           Percent female             90.1      94.6      96.2      91.9      22.3     66.6    86.4      87.4
            & native-born             86.7      90.8      92.3      88.8      20.9     62.7    82.1      83.9
            & white/non-Hisp          86.3      90.5      92.0      88.2      20.8     61.8    81.3      83.1
            & young (16-25)           71.8      68.5      59.2      27.8      14.4     39.8    41.0      22.2
           Percent married            7.6       11.9      22.7      40.3      40.3     30.7    30.7      39.6
           Percent has children        5.6       8.2      12.4      22.1      28.0     21.0    17.4      23.4

        Notes: Table shows the number of telephone operators in the U.S. complete count Census data
        in the telephone industry and in other industries (i.e., at private company switchboards) from
        1910 to 1940, as well as their demographic composition.




                                                          32
            Table 3: Mean 1910 characteristics of cities by timing of earliest cutover

                                                         Panel A: Unconditional means
   Characteristic                 pre-1920    1921-1925       1926-1930   1931-1935   1936-1940   post-1940
   Population 16+ (1000s)           38.92      116.82          43.87       18.41         9.14        4.06
                                   (10.14)     (31.40)         (7.49)      (3.31)       (1.71)      (0.13)
   Average age                      27.93       27.97          28.15       28.32        27.70       27.75
                                    (0.38)      (0.26)         (0.22)      (0.29)       (0.36)      (0.06)
   Percent female                   48.46       50.08          48.94       50.08        50.03       50.34
                                    (0.78)      (0.38)         (0.53)      (0.65)       (0.58)      (0.11)
   Percent f/n/w/y                  12.25       11.62          11.46       11.74        11.96       12.32
                                    (0.44)      (0.29)         (0.24)      (0.27)       (0.33)      (0.06)
   Percent working                  60.54       60.35          60.81       59.60        58.96       57.55
                                    (0.96)      (0.64)         (0.53)      (0.69)       (0.75)      (0.14)
   Percent operators                 0.19        0.21           0.19        0.17         0.19        0.21
                                    (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.00)
   F/n/w/y percent working          41.17       40.68          40.23       44.01        36.71       35.09
                                    (1.42)      (1.52)         (0.96)      (1.44)       (1.58)      (0.24)
   F/n/w/y percent operators         1.16        1.36           1.19        1.02         1.12        1.21
                                    (0.12)      (0.14)         (0.08)      (0.08)       (0.10)      (0.02)
   Unionized by 1920                 0.17        0.26           0.19        0.09         0.08        0.03
                                    (0.07)      (0.06)         (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.00)
   Had strike by 1920                0.07        0.10           0.09        0.03         0.03        0.01
                                    (0.05)      (0.04)         (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.00)

                                      Panel B: Conditional means, controlling for log adult population
   Characteristic                 pre-1920    1921-1925       1926-1930   1931-1935   1936-1940   post-1940
   Average age                     26.78        26.64          27.07       27.49        27.09       27.37
                                   (0.42)       (0.32)         (0.27)      (0.32)       (0.36)      (0.08)
   Percent female                  48.76        50.43          49.22       50.30        50.19       50.44
                                   (0.86)       (0.51)         (0.65)      (0.69)       (0.61)      (0.16)
   Percent f/n/w/y                 13.76        13.38          12.88       12.83        12.77       12.82
                                   (0.49)       (0.38)         (0.32)      (0.30)       (0.33)      (0.09)
   Percent working                 56.67        55.83          57.18       56.80        56.90       56.27
                                   (1.05)       (0.79)         (0.69)      (0.73)       (0.73)      (0.22)
   Percent operators                0.23         0.25           0.23         0.19         0.21        0.22
                                   (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.01)
   F/n/w/y percent working         29.26        26.78          29.05       35.40        30.36       31.15
                                   (1.55)       (1.47)         (1.14)      (1.47)       (1.58)      (0.34)
   F/n/w/y percent operators        1.17         1.37           1.21         1.03         1.13       1.22
                                   (0.14)       (0.18)         (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.03)
   Unionized by 1920                0.01         0.06           0.04        -0.03        -0.01       -0.02
                                   (0.07)       (0.06)         (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.00)
   Had strike by 1920               0.02         0.04           0.04        0.00          0.01       0.00
                                   (0.04)       (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.00)


Notes: Table reports mean 1910 characteristics of cities in our primary sample whose first cutover occurred in
each of the periods shown (2,992 cities included in this table, omitting 31 cities with cutovers with ambiguous
timing and New York City boroughs). Panel (A) reports unconditional means, and Panel (B) reports condi-
tional means after controlling for each city's log adult (16+) population. Each row presents estimates from
a regression of the variable in the left-most column on indicators for whether the city had its first cutover in
the interval represented by each of the remaining columns. We also report operator unionization and strike
activity (nearly all of which occurred in the 1910s). Percentages are measured in whole units (out of 100).
Population and population percentages reflect the adult population only, and f/n/w/y is shorthand for female,
American-born, white/non-Hispanic, and young (age 16 to 25). Note that the dial era in the AT&T system
began in 1919, such that cutovers pre-1920 are nearly all by independents. The final column consists of cities
that do not have a cutover in our data by April 1, 1940. Heteroskedasticity-robust SEs in parentheses.




                                                         33
Table 4: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns around cutovers

                      Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                          Fraction of the group that is:
                           Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.007***      -0.001         0.001     -0.002       0.001
                             (0.001)      (0.009)        (0.008)   (0.002)      (0.001)
           N                  11652       11652          11652     11652        11652
           R2                  0.55        0.83           0.76      0.80         0.68
           Cities             2913         2913           2913      2913        2913
           Cut over            261          261            261       261         261
           Y Mean              0.01        0.30           0.53      0.09         0.03

                       Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                          Fraction of the group that is:
                           Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.008***      -0.002         -0.001    0.003        0.004
                             (0.001)      (0.006)        (0.003)   (0.004)      (0.003)
           N                  11656       11656          11656     11656        11656
           R2                  0.51        0.81           0.79      0.84         0.79
           Cities             2914         2914           2914      2914        2914
           Cut over            261          261            261       261         261
           Y Mean              0.01        0.48           0.11      0.36         0.19

                      Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                          Fraction of the group that is:
                           Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.005***      -0.000         -0.001    0.002        0.002
                             (0.001)      (0.006)        (0.001)   (0.004)      (0.004)
           N                  11656       11656          11656     11656        11656
           R2                  0.43        0.77           0.66      0.80         0.77
           Cities             2914         2914           2914      2914        2914
           Cut over            261          261            261       261         261
           Y Mean              0.01        0.41           0.02      0.60         0.38


      Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local
      dial adoption on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive
      cohorts who are in the labor force, in school, married, and have children, for cities with
      population 100k in 1920. The left-most column provides the effect of cutovers on
      the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry,
      as a reference point. All regressions include city and year fixed effects, and log city
      size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
      respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                    34
 Table 5: Changes in employment shares in select occupations around cutovers

                             Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                             Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
             Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.022***      0.000        0.007*          -0.001     0.002      0.002**      0.014***
              (0.003)      (0.000)       (0.004)        (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.001)       (0.004)
N               11613       11613        11613          11613       11613       11613        11613
R2               0.46        0.36         0.58           0.62        0.50        0.39         0.56
Cities           2913        2913        2913            2913       2913        2913          2913
Cut over         261          261         261             261        261         261          261
Y Mean           0.03        0.00         0.08           0.04        0.11        0.01         0.05

                             Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                             Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
             Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.017***      0.000       0.009***         -0.003     0.003        0.001      0.006***
              (0.002)      (0.000)       (0.003)        (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.002)
N               11642       11642        11642          11642       11642       11642        11642
R2               0.50        0.55         0.76           0.73        0.57        0.66         0.72
Cities           2914        2914        2914            2914       2914        2914          2914
Cut over         261          261         261             261        261         261          261
Y Mean           0.03        0.00         0.14           0.05        0.10        0.01         0.04

                             Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                             Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
             Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.010***      0.000         0.003          -0.004     0.000       0.002*      0.004**
              (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.004)        (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.001)     (0.002)
N               11633       11633        11633          11633       11633       11633        11633
R2               0.39        0.54         0.72           0.67        0.49        0.65         0.69
Cities           2914        2914        2914            2914       2914        2914          2914
Cut over         261          261         261             261        261         261          261
Y Mean           0.02        0.00         0.13           0.05        0.09        0.01         0.04


Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adop-
tion on young, white, American-born women's employment shares in select occupations, across
successive cohorts, for cities with population 100k in 1920. The left-most column provides the
effect of cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone
industry, as a reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine
operators, (ii) typists, stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks,
(v) beauty parlor workers, and (vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year
fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                   35
  Table 6: Effects of dial cutovers on the probability of being a telephone operator
               or having a non-operator job in the telephone industry
                               All Ages                   16-20                 21-25                  26+
                            (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)     (5)           (6)      (7)          (8)

                                          Panel A: Is telephone operator in telephone industry?
Operator × Post-cutover   -0.082     -0.078 -0.042 -0.047 -0.079 -0.084 -0.141 -0.131
                          (0.013)     (0.013) (0.012) (0.013) (0.018) (0.020) (0.024) (0.031)
Operator                  0.240      0.237       0.168       0.167      0.255      0.263      0.397      0.402
                           (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.014)    (0.016)

Individual Controls         Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes
City × Year FEs             Yes        No           Yes           No      Yes           No      Yes           No
Operator FEs                No         Yes          No            Yes     No            Yes      No          Yes

Observations               80326      80326        41230      41230      28580      28580      10516         10516
Adjusted R2                 0.23       0.51         0.17       0.41       0.23       0.45       0.32          0.57
Y Mean                      0.07       0.07         0.04       0.04       0.06       0.06       0.18          0.18

                                              Panel B: Has other job in telephone industry?
Operator × Post-cutover   0.007       0.008       0.009      0.011       0.002       -0.002    0.015     0.030
                          (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.007)   (0.012)    (0.018)
Operator                  0.022      0.021       0.013       0.011      0.024      0.026      0.040      0.039
                           (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.006)    (0.007)

Individual Controls         Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes
City × Year FEs             Yes        No           Yes           No      Yes           No      Yes           No
Operator FEs                No         Yes          No            Yes     No            Yes      No          Yes

Observations               80326      80326        41230      41230      28580      28580      10516         10516
Adjusted R2                 0.03       0.36         0.01       0.30       0.02       0.28       0.01          0.40
Y Mean                      0.01       0.01         0.01       0.01       0.01       0.01       0.02          0.02

                                             Panel C: Is telephone operator in other industry?
Operator × Post-cutover    0.005     0.007         0.005       0.008    0.012      0.023       0.008      0.006
                          (0.005)    (0.004)      (0.007)     (0.005)   (0.007)     (0.008)   (0.010)    (0.012)
Operator                  0.022      0.021       0.017       0.015      0.021      0.017      0.034      0.037
                           (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.008)

Individual Controls         Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes
City × Year FEs             Yes        No           Yes           No      Yes           No      Yes           No
Operator FEs                No         Yes          No            Yes     No            Yes      No          Yes

Observations               80326      80326        41230      41230      28580      28580      10516         10516
Adjusted R2                 0.06       0.46         0.12       0.42       0.07       0.41       0.08          0.49
Y Mean                      0.01       0.01         0.01       0.01       0.01       0.01       0.02          0.02


Notes: Table reports effect of cutovers on decade-later outcomes of women who reported being
telephone operators in the telephone industry in a given census year, as a function of whether their
city had its first cutover in the intervening decade, relative to a matched control group. Sample
restricted to women in small city sample (population 100k in 1920) in the base year. Individual
controls include fixed effects for age, birthplace, race, and marital status, all measured in the base
year. Operator fixed effects apply to each operator and the associated control women. Following
Bailey et al. (2017), we use inverse propensity weights to adjust for observable differences between
matched and unmatched persons in our linked sample. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                       36
Table 7: Effects of dial cutovers on the probability of working, getting married, or having children
                                     All Ages                  16-20                  21-25                   26+
                                  (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)      (7)           (8)

                                                                 Panel A: Still working?
      Operator × Post-cutover -0.040 -0.028             -0.026      -0.017     -0.024       -0.017   -0.088 -0.091
                               (0.013) (0.014)         (0.019)     (0.020)    (0.021)      (0.029)    (0.028) (0.036)
      Operator                  0.024       0.023       0.014       0.010      0.009        0.017    0.059      0.067
                                 (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.014)      (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.020)

      Individual Controls         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes          Yes
      City × Year FEs             Yes          No        Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes           No
      Operator FEs                No           Yes       No            Yes      No            Yes      No           Yes

      Observations               80326        80326     41230       41230      28580       28580      10516         10516
      Adjusted R2                 0.07         0.12      0.05        0.10       0.06        0.10       0.10          0.15
      Y Mean                      0.40         0.40      0.35        0.35       0.42        0.42       0.58          0.58

                                           Panel B: Got married? (conditional on unmarried in pre-period)
      Operator × Post-cutover    0.010        -0.013    0.019       -0.000     -0.032       -0.045   0.064       0.061
                                (0.011)      (0.015)   (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.024)      (0.036)   (0.035)    (0.043)
      Operator                  0.025       0.027      0.021       0.026      0.040        0.035      0.006      -0.001
                                 (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.010)      (0.010)    (0.013)     (0.015)   (0.023)    (0.026)

      Individual Controls         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes          Yes
      City × Year FEs             Yes          No        Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes           No
      Operator FEs                No           Yes       No            Yes      No            Yes      No           Yes

      Observations               73305        73305     40527       40527      26192       26192      6586          6586
      Adjusted R2                 0.11         0.16      0.06        0.13       0.06        0.09      0.10          0.13
      Y Mean                      0.72         0.72      0.79        0.79       0.69        0.69      0.42          0.42

                                             Panel C: Had children? (conditional on none in pre-period)
      Operator × Post-cutover    0.019        0.003     0.012       -0.004     0.002        -0.010   0.057       0.053
                                (0.012)      (0.016)   (0.018)     (0.021)    (0.021)      (0.030)   (0.029)    (0.036)
      Operator                   0.001        0.001     0.014      0.020       0.000        -0.010    -0.025    -0.034
                                (0.008)      (0.008)   (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.013)      (0.015)   (0.016)    (0.018)

      Individual Controls         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes          Yes
      City × Year FEs             Yes          No        Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes           No
      Operator FEs                No           Yes       No            Yes      No            Yes      No           Yes

      Observations               77419        77419     41135       41135      28009       28009      8275          8275
      Adjusted R2                 0.08         0.13      0.05        0.11       0.05        0.10      0.10          0.15
      Y Mean                      0.52         0.52      0.59        0.59       0.49        0.49      0.27          0.27


       Notes: Table reports effect of cutovers on decade-later outcomes of women who reported being
       telephone operators in the telephone industry in a given census year, as a function of whether their
       city had its first cutover in the intervening decade, relative to a matched control group. Sample
       restricted to women in small city sample (population 100k in 1920) in the base year. Individual
       controls include fixed effects for age, birthplace, race, and marital status, all measured in the base
       year. Operator fixed effects apply to each operator and the associated control women. Following
       Bailey et al. (2017), we use inverse propensity weights to adjust for observable differences between
       matched and unmatched persons in our linked sample. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
       0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                            37
       Table 8: Effects of dial cutovers on the probability of persisting in the same
                    occupation/industry and future occupation scores
                             All Ages                   16-20                  21-25                     26+
                           (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)      (7)            (8)

                       Panel A: Still working in same occupation and industry? (conditional on still working)
Operator × Post-cutover -0.119 -0.126 -0.099 -0.130 -0.109 -0.162 -0.156 -0.183
                         (0.023) (0.026) (0.031) (0.037) (0.036) (0.043) (0.043) (0.067)
Operator                0.324      0.332       0.310       0.340       0.327      0.334       0.347      0.356
                         (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.018)     (0.023)     (0.019)    (0.026)     (0.024)    (0.028)

Individual Controls       Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes            Yes
City × Year FEs           Yes        No           Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes            No
Operator FEs               No        Yes          No            Yes      No            Yes      No             Yes

Observations             32268      32268       14229        14229      11991      11991       6048            6048
Adjusted R2               0.15       0.22        0.15         0.23       0.14       0.19       0.14            0.21
Y Mean                    0.30       0.30        0.22         0.22       0.32       0.32       0.45            0.45
                                                    Panel B: Log occupation score
Operator × Post-cutover -0.052 -0.051 -0.056                  -0.054   -0.041     -0.069 -0.069            -0.022
                         (0.012) (0.018) (0.018)             (0.034)   (0.022)     (0.027) (0.024)        (0.035)
Operator                0.076      0.086       0.101       0.120       0.048      0.061       0.101      0.094
                         (0.007)    (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.012)    (0.014)     (0.015)    (0.018)

Individual Controls       Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes
City × Year FEs           Yes        No           Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes         No
Operator FEs               No        Yes          No            Yes      No            Yes      No         Yes

Observations             28922      28922       12418        12418      10906      10906       5598        5598
Adjusted R2               0.10       0.10        0.15         0.13       0.15       0.15       0.10        0.04
Y Mean                    2.08       2.08        2.05         2.05       2.10       2.10       2.10        2.10

                                              Panel C: Decline in occupation score decile
Operator × Post-cutover 0.117      0.115        0.064        0.081     0.141      0.169       0.114        0.075
                         (0.022)    (0.031)     (0.033)      (0.045)    (0.034)    (0.049)     (0.041)    (0.053)
Operator                  0.008     -0.009     0.073          0.040     -0.025      -0.028     -0.028      -0.037
                         (0.011)   (0.014)      (0.020)      (0.026)   (0.019)     (0.025)    (0.023)     (0.028)

Individual Controls       Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes      Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes
City × Year FEs           Yes        No           Yes           No       Yes           No       Yes         No
Operator FEs               No        Yes          No            Yes      No            Yes      No         Yes

Observations             25149      25149       10474        10474      9534           9534    5141        5141
Adjusted R2               0.04       0.11        0.07         0.13      0.10           0.14    0.02        0.15
Y Mean                    0.22       0.22        0.24         0.24      0.22           0.22    0.19        0.19


 Notes: Table reports effect of cutovers on decade-later outcomes of women who reported being
 telephone operators in the telephone industry in a given census year, as a function of whether their
 city had its first cutover in the intervening decade, relative to a matched control group. Sample
 restricted to women in small city sample (population 100k in 1920) in the base year. Individual
 controls include fixed effects for age, birthplace, race, and marital status, all measured in the base
 year. Operator fixed effects apply to each operator and the associated control women. Following
 Bailey et al. (2017), we use inverse propensity weights to adjust for observable differences between
 matched and unmatched persons in our linked sample. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                        38
             Figure 1: Percent of Bell system on dial, 1913-1972

               1.00


               0.80


               0.60
                                                 < WPB restrictions put in place

               0.40
                                        < End of Great Depression

               0.20


               0.00
                   1910   1920   1930     1940       1950      1960       1970     1980

Notes: Figure shows the fraction of Bell system telephones with mechanical operation
(i.e., dial) over time. Data from "Bell System Distributions of Company Telephones,"
AT&T Archives and History Center, box 85-04-03-02. Note that adoption investments
declined during the Great Depression, leading to a slowdown in the late 1930s, and
War Production Board restrictions on the use of copper during World War II effectively
halted installations for the duration of the war.




                                            39
                Figure 2: Cities in data with cutovers by 1940

Panel (A): AT&T data (bubbles proportional to % of subscribers cut over by 1940)




Panel (B): Newspaper data (bubbles proportional to # of cutovers through 1940)




 Notes: Figure maps the cities with a dial cutover in the AT&T data (top panel)
 and newspapers data (bottom panel) through 1940. Bubble sizes are proportional to
 percent of local subscribers cut over by 1940 for the AT&T data, and to the # of
 reported cutovers through 1940 for the newspaper data.




                                        40
Figure 3: Effect of dial cutovers on the log number of young, white, American-born women who
    are telephone operators in the telephone industry (event study, 10- and 2-yr intervals)

                        Panel (A)                                           Panel (B)
         Log # of tel. operators (10-yr intervals)           Log # of tel. operators (2-yr intervals)




           Notes: Figure shows event study estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on the
           (log) number of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are
           telephone operators in the telephone industry, for the small city sample (population
           100k in 1920), with 10- and 2-year event windows. When event windows are narrower
           than the 10-year frequency at which outcomes are measured, each bin contains different
           cities (every fifth bin represents the same set of cities). Error bars represent 95%
           confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.



Figure 4: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
     who are telephone operators in the telephone industry (event study and DID by age)

                        Panel (A)                                            Panel (B)
    Fraction who are tel. operators (2-yr intervals)      Fraction who are tel. operators (DID by age)




           Notes: Figure shows event study and difference-in-difference estimates (by age) of the
           effects of local dial adoption on the fraction of working young, white, American-born
           women in successive cohorts who are telephone operators in the telephone industry, for
           the small city sample (population 100k in 1920). Error bars represent 95% confidence
           intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                     41
Figure 5: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
  with other jobs in the telephone industry or who are telephone operators in other industries

                     Panel (A)                                                Panel (B)
   Other jobs in the tel. industry (2-yr intervals)        Tel. operator in other industries (2-yr intervals)




                     Panel (C)                                                 Panel (D)
    Other jobs in the tel. industry (DID by age)            Tel. operator in other industries (DID by age)




        Notes: Upper panels show event study estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on
        the fraction of working young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who have
        other jobs in the telephone industry (left) and who are telephone operators in other industries
        (right), for the small city sample (population 100k in 1920). Because event windows are
        narrower than the 10-year frequency at which outcomes are measured, each bin contains
        different cities (every fifth bin represents the same set of cities). Lower panels show the
        associated difference-in-differences estimates, by age. We plot the estimates on the same
        scale (-0.03 to 0.03) as the previous figures to ease comparison. Error bars represent 95%
        confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                      42
Web Appendix
A    Historical Details

This appendix provides supplementary material to accompany the discussion of U.S. telephone
industry history and mechanical switching in Section 1. Table A.1 provides descriptive statistics
on the U.S. telephone industry from 1902 to 1932. Table A.2 lists annual employment in the
1920s at the three largest U.S. employers. Figures A.1 and A.2 reproduce two tables from BLS
(1932), a government study of the effects of dial on operator employment. Figure A.3 shows example
newspaper headlines from articles describing dial cutovers and their effects on young women. Figure
A.4 shows a map of Bell System operating companies as of 1922.

                               Table A.1: U.S. telephone industry, 1902-1932
                                        1902      1907         1912     1917      1922      1927      1932

         Growth of industry
         Miles of wire (1000s)           4,900    12,999    20,248      28,827    37,266    63,836    87,678
         Telephones (1000s)              2,371     6,119     8,730      11,717    14,347    18,523    17,424
         Telephone calls (MMs)           5,071    11,373    13,736      21,846    24,648    31,614    30,048
         Telephone calls (per capita)       64       131       144         212       224       266       241
         Employees                      78,752   144,169   183,361     262,629   312,015   375,272   334,085
         Male                                                           91,510   104,433   131,802   128,677
         Female                                                        171,119   207,582   243,470   205,408

         Labor productivity
         Employees per MM calls          15.53     12.68       13.35     12.02     12.66     11.87     11.12
         Male                                                             4.19      4.24      4.17      4.28
         Female                                                           7.83      8.42      7.70      6.84

         Market share
         AT&T share                       56%       51%         58%       63%       66%       74%       79%

Notes: Data from U.S. Census of Electrical Industries, 1907-1932. Enumeration covered all Bell and independent
operating companies. Call volume and employment reported for 1912 is restricted to companies with >$5,000 in
income (in 1912 dollars) and is thus slightly understated. Operating revenue figures in 1902 are for all companies;
in 1907-1917, for companies with >$5,000 income; and in 1922-1932, for companies with >$10,000 income.

                            Table A.2: Three largest U.S. employers, 1920-1929
                                                   Employment (1000s)
                            Year       Pennsylvania RR    U.S. Steel       AT&T
                            1920             280.7           267.3         231.3
                            1921             218.9           191.7         224.3
                            1922             243.5           214.9         243.1
                            1923             247.4           260.8         272.0
                            1924             218.6           246.8         279.7
                            1925             213.9           249.8         293.1
                            1926             217.7           253.2         300.6
                            1927             201.6           231.5         308.9
                            1928             186.3           221.7         334.3
                            1929             183.2           225.0         364.0
                Notes: Table reports employment at the three largest U.S. employers throughout
                the 1920s. Employment figures obtained from annual reports and represent year-
                end employment at each company, except for the Pennsylvania Railroad from
                1923-1929, when only average monthly employment was provided.



                                                           1
     Figure A.1: BLS (1932) Table 1, "Telephones, Telephone Calls, and Personnel
                  of a Single-Office Exchange Now 98 Percent Dial"




   Notes: Figure reproduces Table 1 from BLS (1932), describing changes in employment at a single
   anonymous exchange which converted from manual to mechanical operation in 1927.



Figure A.2: BLS (1932) Table 2, "Changes in Employment Opportunities for Operators"




    Notes: Figure reproduces Table 2 from BLS (1932), describing changes in employment at 18
    surveyed exchanges which converted from manual to mechanical operation.




                                                 2
            Figure A.3: Sampling of newspaper headlines, 1925 to 1940




                   Syndicated article, published in newspapers nationwide in 1932




Enquirer and Evening News, Battle Creek, MI, 1927




                                                        Ogden Standard-Examiner, Ogden, UT, 1940
   Hartford Daily Courant, Hartford, CT, 1930




                                                         Indianapolis Star, Indianapolis, IN, 1925


     Arizona Republican, Phoenix, AZ, 1925

Notes: Figure reproduces newspaper headlines and/or content from the following articles:
"Telephone Dial Usurps Jobs" (syndicated); "Hello Girl Says Goodbye Forever and City `Di-
als,' " The Enquirer and Evening News (Battle Creek, MI), September 4, 1927; "Dials Will Re-
place 500 Phone Girls," The Hartford Daily Courant (Hartford, CT), March 7, 1930; "To what
extent do automatic telephones do away with telephone operators?" The Arizona Republican
(Phoenix, AZ), July 5, 1925; "Phone Girls to Continue Jobs," The Ogden Standard-Examiner
(Ogden, UT), January 25, 1940; "Cupid Beats Out Old Man Hunger," The Indianapolis Star
(Indianapolis, IN), May 29, 1925. All articles accessed from Newspapers.com.

                                                    3
                     Figure A.4: Map of the Bell regional operating companies, from AT&T's 1922 annual report




4
    Notes: Figure marks the boundaries of the various Bell operating companies' territories across the united states, and the headquarters city for
    each. Map from AT&T's 1922 annual report.
B     Data Appendix

B.1     Data on dial cutover location/timing

We collect data on the local adoption of mechanical call switching (dial) from two sources: records
at the AT&T archives which report dial penetration in cities with population >50,000 in the 1930s,
and local newspaper reports, which cover cities large and small across the country.

To understand the cutover data collection it is useful to first recall the process by which cutovers
took place. Although the AT&T corporate office (specifically, AT&T's chief engineer) gave general
guidance to the regional operating subsidiaries on the adoption of dial--including information on the
performance of dial vs. manual operation in different-sized markets and under different operating
conditions--the decision to convert any single telephone exchange from manual to dial was made
by the management of the operating companies themselves. This decision would set in motion
a multi-year planning and installation process: exchange buildings had to be expanded or built,
new switching equipment had to be installed, and new telephone directories and dial telephone
sets had to be distributed to subscribers, who in turn had to be taught how to use them when
dial service began. Judging from the newspaper reporting which we describe below, the date that
telephone service would convert to dial was fixed in advance, but sometimes experienced (usually
modest) delays. On the designated day--usually at midnight on a Saturday, when call volumes were
lowest--technicians would physically cut the wires out of the manual switchboards, and connect
them to the mechanical equipment (hence the term "cutover"). The actual cutting-over took only
a few minutes, after which local calls were mechanically operated. In small cities and rural areas
with at most a few telephone exchanges, these would typically all be cut over together. In larger
cities with many to hundreds of telephone exchanges (New York had hundreds), these conversions
effectively took place one exchange/neighborhood at a time, such that in these cities, telephone
service was automated in a more piecemeal fashion over years or decades.

Data from AT&T's corporate archives

Because AT&T cutover decisions were decentralized, there is no single source at the AT&T archives
documenting the place and time of all cutovers in the Bell system.1 However, in the course of
reviewing documents at the AT&T corporate archives (Warren, NJ), we discovered a three-page
document compiled in the late 1930s which lists all cities in the U.S. and Canada with population
>50,000, along with the date of that city's first cutover to dial and the percent of subscribers on
dial as of December 31, 1937 (Figure B.1).2 For cities which were less than 100% dial in 1937, we
manually search Google and historical newspapers for reports of cutovers between 1937 and 1940,
and update the percent dial to 1940 values based on these results.

1
  According to a call with Sheldon Hochheiser, AT&T corporate historian, on March 1, 2017, the decision and pace
  of dial adoption was decided by management of the individual regional operating companies, not AT&T corporate.
2
  This document was found in AT&T Archives and History Center box 106-10-02-07.


                                                       5
         Figure B.1: AT&T data on the adoption of dial in cities of population >50,000




            Notes: Figure shows an extracted table from the source data on dial installation in
            large cities from the AT&T Archives and History Center (box 106-10-02-07).


We use distinct estimation strategies for studying the effects of dial in small versus large cities,
which we cut at a 1920 population of 100,000, with an event study strategy for small cities (which
typically had one-shot cutovers) in the paper and a long-differences strategy for larger cities (which
were converted to dial in a more graduated, piecemeal fashion) in the appendix. Figures B.2 and
B.3 below provide suggestive evidence that this was indeed the case: the figures show that smaller
cities in the AT&T data (with population 100k) were nearly all 100% dial by 1940, irrespective
of the date of their first cutover--suggesting these were one-shot events.

          Figure B.2: AT&T city-level data: Fraction dial in 1940 vs. first cutover date

                                                           Population: 50-100k         Population: 100k-200k
                                                 1.0


                                                 0.5
                          Percent dial in 1940




                                                 0.0
                                                          Population: 200k-500k          Population: >500k
                                                 1.0


                                                 0.5


                                                 0.0
                                                       1920 1925 1930 1935 19401920 1925 1930 1935 1940
                                                                  Date of first cutover to dial

            Notes: Figure plots a city's fraction dial in 1940 against the date of the city's first
            cutover to dial, for cities in the AT&T data, group by their 1920 population. The
            figure illustrates that smaller large cities (100k population) with cutovers were nearly
            all 100% dial, irrespective of the first cutover date, suggesting that they were single-
            cutover cities. In larger cities (200-500k), the fraction dial in 1940 varies with how
            recently cutovers began, and in the largest cities (>500k), which nearly all began
            cutting over to dial before 1925, they are unrelated.


                                                                                 6
                  Figure B.3: AT&T city-level data: Fraction dial in 1940 vs. population


                                                       1.0




                                Percent dial in 1920
                                                       0.9



                                                       0.8



                                                       0.7



                                                       0.6
                                                             10   11             12             13   14
                                                                       Ln(Population in 1920)

                 Notes: Figure shows a binned scatterplot of a city's fraction dial in 1940 against its
                 log population, with a trend break at 100k population (the log of which is 11.5).
                 The figure indicates that these smaller cities were typically around 100% dial by 1940,
                 irrespective of their size, suggesting that they were single-cutover cities. In larger cities,
                 the fraction dial in 1940 varies inversely with population.


Data from historical newspapers

We supplement the large-city AT&T data with a more comprehensive data collection effort from
historical newspapers. Dial cutovers were locally-notable events and often reported on in the days
before and after the change, and also sometimes months or even years in advance or later--not only
because readers needed to know when to start using their dial telephone sets, but also out of public
curiosity or celebration, as well as due to public concern over the fate of soon-to-be disemployed
telephone operators, which was itself the focus of many articles.
We searched three online digitized newspaper collections for reports of cutovers and had assistants
read through search hits to identify articles which reported cutovers, and for each record the cutover
city, date, and number or percent of affected subscribers. Because these data are at the core of the
paper, we will describe the data collection in substantial detail.

Round 1: July-August 2017
Data collection efforts began in the summer of 2017 and were initially focused on reviewing articles
between 1917 and 1940 at Newspapers.com, which hosts the largest digitized, searchable historical
newspaper collection available.3 After testing several potential Boolean search terms, we settled
on two preferred search terms, which we label "ST1" and "ST2" below:

        (ST1) telephone ("dial" or "automatic") ("cutover" or "cut over" or
                "changeover" or "manual") ("office" or "exchange")
3
    The search window was chosen on the grounds that (i) AT&T records indicate that the firm only began dial cutovers
    in the late 1910s, and (ii) we have outcome data through 1940.


                                                                             7
        (ST2) telephone ("dial" or "automatic") ("cutover" or "cut over" or
                 "changeover" or "manual") "midnight"

Whereas ST2 is a more targeted search (due to the requirement of the word "midnight") and is de-
signed to minimize false positives, ST1 casts a wider net and is designed to minimize false negatives.
Between the two, we believe we can identify nearly all cutovers reported in the Newspapers.com
collection. When these searches were conducted in July 2017, ST2 returned 4173 results, and ST1
returned 36072 results, of which 33060 were additional to those of ST2.

We had research assistants read all articles in the ST2 search results and the top 25% of the ST1
results4 and asked them to determine whether the article does in fact describe a cutover, and if so,
to record (i) the cities affected (sometimes several neighboring small towns are cut over at once,
or served jointly by a single exchange); (ii) the date, including whether past or future (planned);
(iii) the number or percent of subscribers affected, if reported (rarely); and (iv) any additional
notes that may be relevant to measurement or interpretation (for example, occasionally an article
reports on a cutover at a large firm or other organization that operates its own private, internal
switchboard, rather than at the local telephone service provider). Whenever a research assistant
flagged an article as describing a cutover or potentially describing a cutover, we manually reviewed
their data entry to ensure the accuracy of the entered data.

We find newspaper reporting on both past and future cutovers characterized with varying degrees of
specificity: many articles report exact dates, but some--especially articles that reference cutovers
in passing, but are focused on other telephone company news--describe only the month and year
(e.g., "last month"), season and year ("next fall"), year alone ("towards the end of this year"), or
are non-specific (e.g., "nearing completion", proposed but not yet planned, or no timing reported;
in the cases where an article describes a cutover without providing any information on its timing,
we nevertheless infer whether that timing is past or future based on the verb tense in the article).
In many cases, we find multiple reports of the same cutover, and we use these to cross-validate and
refine our timing measures where possible. We take these data and aggregate up to the city and
month: given that we study census-measured outcomes at decadal frequency, monthly variation in
cutover timing should be sufficient for the purposes of this paper.

It is important to attempt to include cutovers even with imprecisely-reported timing: dropping
these cutovers would bias our results towards zero, as the control group (of cities not cut over by
1940) would then have treated locations in it. Moreover, with outcomes at only decadal frequency, a
bit of measurement error on the precise timing is acceptable in specifications that measure treatment
as 1(Post-cutover) (but specifications measuring the time since a cutover would be more sensitive
to this type of measurement error). When a cutover is reported with an "approximate" date, we

4
    The search results are listed in order of "relevance", however determined by the website. Reassuringly, the rate of
    verified cutovers in these search results declines rapidly in the search rank: by the time we get a quarter of a way
    down the ST1 results list, only around 5 out of every 100 search results is a true description of a cutover, and these
    are often redundant to earlier reports, or lacking information on timing and unusable.


                                                             8
thus treat it as the true date. If the reported timing is otherwise non-specific, we use the following
classification and crosswalk to approximate the month and year:

                                Category        Timing
                                ongoing         same month
                                recent          same month
                                soon            same month
                                in few weeks    next month
                                in few months   3 months ahead
                                winter          January of given year
                                winter early    December of given year
                                winter mid      January of given year
                                winter late     February of given year
                                spring          April of given year
                                spring early    March of given year
                                spring mid      April of given year
                                spring late     May of given year
                                summer          July of given year
                                summer early    June of given year
                                summer mid      July of given year
                                summer late     August of given year
                                fall            October of given year
                                fall early      September of given year
                                fall mid        October of given year
                                fall late       November of given year
                                year early      March of given year
                                year mid        July of given year
                                year late       November of given year


When an article provides only the year and no more precise information can be inferred from other
reports, we do the following: if the year is in the past or present (relative to the article), we assign
the cutover to July of that year (the midpoint). Although this may introduce measurement error,
this error will not be material to this paper unless the year is a Census year, and there are only
two such cases in the data (one of which is Detroit, a large city, which we exclude from our event
study on the grounds of its size anyway). If the year is in the future, the cutover itself is uncertain,
let alone the timing, and we treat it as planned but undated.




                                                   9
              Figure B.4: Example newspaper headlines reporting dial cutovers and job losses




                  Notes: Figure shows examples of headlines from historical newspapers reporting local
                  cutovers. Clockwise from top: Worcester Telegram, Worcester, MA, 1930; Hartford
                  Courant, Hartford, CT, 1930; Battle Creek Enquirer, Battle Creek, MI, 1927.


Round 2: July-August 2019

In the summer of 2019, we undertook a second round of newspaper-based data collection to capture
new results from Newspapers.com, whose collection of digitized newspapers had more than doubled,
and to expand our data collection effort to the two next-largest digital newspaper repositories
(NewspaperArchive.com and GenealogyBank.com), which may cover different cities or time periods.
In July 2019, we repeated our ST1 and ST2 searches for the 1917-1940 period on Newspapers.com,
and also performed searches on these two additional sites.5

In Figure B.5, we map cities with any newspaper issues on Newspapers.com or GenealogyBank.com
in this period (1917-1940) as of June 2019 (Panel A), as well as cities with continuous newspaper
coverage throughout the period (Panel B). Although some states are over-represented in these
data, we are reassured by the fact that every state is covered by multiple newspapers. Moreover,
cross-sectional differences will be washed out by city fixed effects in our analysis, which focuses on
changes in young women's outcomes over time. Note that cities with newspaper-reported cutovers
are not limited to these, as newspapers often reported cutovers in other cities in the same state. But
cities with newspapers, especially those with continuous coverage, are most reliably reported--and
for this reason, our analysis includes robustness checks on only these latter cities, to ensure that
our results are not driven by selection into the newspaper.
5
    Note that NewspaperArchive.com does not support Boolean search. In this case, we searched each non-Boolean
    permutation of each search term. For this data source we skipped the following permutations of ST1: "telephone
    dial manual office" / "telephone dial manual exchange" / "telephone automatic manual office" / "telephone automatic
    manual exchange", due to the size of the results list and the high rate of false positives. Having omitted these results,
    we review all other ST1 results from NewspaperArchive.com (rather than just the top 25%). We believe most true
    positives in these search results will be picked up this way.


                                                              10
             Figure B.5: Cities covered by Newspapers.com and GenealogyBank.com

                  Panel (A): Cities with at least one year of newspaper coverage, 1917-1940




                      Panel (B): Cities with continuous newspaper coverage, 1917-1940




              Notes: Figure maps the cities with digitized newspapers on Newspapers.com and
              GenealogyBank.com at the time of data collection. We often see a given newspaper
              reporting cutovers in other cities in the same state or county.



When these searches were conducted on Newspapers.com in June 2019, ST2 returned 6666 results,
of which 2490 were new since 2017, and 2280 of these unique newspaper issues (in the second
round of data collection, we noticed that sometimes the search returns multiple hits from the same
newspaper on the same day, and we had assistants read each newspaper issue only once, to reduce
duplicated efforts). ST1 returned 55312, of which 39889 were also not already collected in 2017 or
covered by ST2, 36502 of these from unique issues, and 3512 in the top 25% of ST1 search results.
These results (2280 for ST2, 3512 for ST1) were then manually reviewed by research assistants.
Similarly: on GenealogyBank.com, ST2 returned 2609 results, of which 2497 were new since 2017,
and 2309 of these unique issues; ST1 returned 21171, of which 18143 were also not already collected
in 2017 or covered by ST2, 16304 of these unique issues, and 4021 in the top 25% of ST1 search
results. On NewspaperArchive.com, ST2 returned 2100 results, of which 1512 were new since 2017,
and 1189 of these unique issues; ST1 returned 1520 (see previous footnote as to why this number is
lower than that for ST2), of which 828 were also not already collected in 2017 or covered by ST2,
513 of these unique issues. The table below summarizes this information:




                                                     11
                                                                              ST1
                                                                             (not in
                                                                      ST2     ST2)      Total
                                                      All results    4,173   33,060    37,233
          Round 1 (2017)    Newspapers.com
                                                      Reviewed       4,173    8,265    12,438
                                                      New results    2,490   36,502    38,782
                            Newspapers.com
                                                      Reviewed       2,280    3,512     5,792
                                                      All results    2,100    1,520     3,620
          Round 2 (2019)    NewspaperArchive.com
                                                      Reviewed       1,189     513      1,702
                                                      All results    2,609   21,171    23,780
                            GenealogyBank.com
                                                      Reviewed       2,309    4,021     6,330
                                                      All results   11,372   92,253    103,415
                            Total
                                                      Reviewed       9,951   16,311    26,262

Results

In total, we find 3,945 reports of cutovers in the continental U.S., with 3,859 describing non-private
branch exchange (PBX) cutovers in 887 distinct cities and towns. With respect to the precision of
the timing information, these reports break down as follows:

                                                                                  Articles
          Category   Label                                                   Count Percent
             1       Exact date provided                                     2,171      56.2
             2       Date inferred from coarse information + other reports   1,150      29.8
             3       Month and year provided or approximated                  308        8.0
             4       Year provided, past or present                            25        0.7
             5       Year provided, future                                     9         0.2
             6       No timing information provided                           196        5.1
           Total                                                             3,859       100


Of the 887 cities with cutovers, 798 have at least one cutover in the newspapers data with exact or
approximate timing (categories 1-4 above), whereas 89 only have cutovers without reliable timing
information. To be conservative, we drop these cities from the analysis in Sections 4 to 6 of the
paper, because we cannot know for certain when the shock occurred--or, for reports of future
cutovers, if it even occurred at all. For the remaining cities: although a handful (43) have 1
reports of a cutover that we are unable to date, (i) most of these are large cities excluded from
the event study sample, and (ii) we find that the majority (70%) have their earliest known cutover
in the 1920s, and the vast majority (98%) by 1933, providing confidence that we can accurately
measure cities' earliest cutovers, which is the relevant margin for this paper.

We aggregate these data up to the city x month level, identifying months in which each city was
reported to have experienced a dial cutover, and henceforth we call each such city-month a "cutover"
(we assume that when there are multiple reported cutovers in a given city in the same month, these
are part of the same event--although there are few such cases in the data, as we have previously
harmonized cutover dates in the raw data).

There are 1,047 cutovers with known timing across the 798 cities in our final sample (an average
of 1.3 per city, with a median of 1, 90th percentile of 2, and max of 15), and 904 that take place

                                                 12
between the 1910 and 1940 Censuses (April 1910 and April 1940), the period studied in this paper.
Among these, the average and median cutover took place in 1931.6 Figure B.6 below maps these
cutovers, illustrating their expanding geographic incidence--which is the variation at the heart of
this paper. Figure B.7 shows a binned scatterplot of a city's number of cutovers in the Newspapers
data against 1920 log population, with a line at 100k population (our threshold for the event study
sample). This figure reinforces the evidence that smaller cities typically have only one or at most
two cutovers in our data, consistent with these locations being served by only one or a few telephone
exchanges, which could be simultaneously converted to dial.

           Figure B.6: Newspapers city-level data: Expanding geography of dial, 1915 to 1940

                                   1915                                  1920




                                   1925                                  1930




                                   1935                                  1940




                  Notes: Figure maps the cities with a dial cutover in the newspaper data through
                  the year shown in each panel. Bubble sizes are proportional to the cumulative # of
                  reported cutovers in the given city through the given year.




6
    Note that of the 1,047 cutovers with known timing from the Newspapers data, 26 cutovers (2.5%) took place before
    the first cutover in the AT&T data (in November 1919), ostensibly having been executed by independent (non-
    AT&T) telephone service providers--which we confirm by manual review. Additional comparisons between AT&T
    and Newspapers data are provided in the next subsection below.


                                                          13
    Figure B.7: Newspapers city-level data: Number of reported cutovers vs. 1920 population

                                                      6




                        Cutovers in Newspapers data
                                                      5


                                                      4


                                                      3


                                                      2


                                                      1
                                                          6   8               10           12   14
                                                                  Ln(Population in 1920)


            Notes: Figure shows a binned scatterplot of cities' number of reported cutovers, mea-
            sured as the number of distinct months between 1919 and 1940 with a cutover reported
            in our Newspaper data, against log 1920 population, with a line drawn at 100k popula-
            tion (the log of which is 11.5). The figure illustrates that smaller cities typically have
            only one or at most two cutovers in our data, suggesting that they were single-cutover
            cities. Larger cities have several cutovers in our data.


Comparison of AT&T and Newspapers data

We can also cross-validate the AT&T and Newspapers data against each other, by comparing the
timing of the earliest cutover reported in newspapers versus in the AT&T administrative data
for all cities appearing in both sources. Figure B.8 shows this comparison, plotting individual
cities' earliest newspaper-reported cutover (vertical axis) against earliest AT&T-reported cutover
(horizontal axis). Each point represents a city and is labeled with its state's abbreviation, and the
dashed red line is the 45-degree line. Dates coincide across the two sources for the vast majority
of cities, providing reassurance on the quality of the newspaper data. For the handful of cities
where newspapers report a cutover preceding those in the AT&T data by more than a month
(below the 45-degree line), we revisited the reporting articles and determined that either (i) these
were performed by independent (non-AT&T) companies (13 cases), or (ii) these were preliminary
cutovers affecting a very small portion of the population (1 case).




                                                                         14
               Figure B.8: Timing of cities' first cutover in AT&T data vs. newspaper data

                                                                1940                                                                   IL
                                                                                                                                      SC
                                                                                                                                      MA
                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                              OH                      TX
                                                                                                                                     OH




                             Earliest Date in Newspapers Data
                                                                                                                                IA
                                                                                                                           ME
                                                                                                                           WA
                                                                                                                          KY
                                                                                                                          TX
                                                                                                        NJ             OH
                                                                                                                       MAWV
                                                                                                                        IA
                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                      NC
                                                                                                                      VA
                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                      IN
                                                                                                                     CT
                                                                1930                                        TX CA    OH
                                                                                                                     WI
                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                    DC
                                                                                                                    CT
                                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                   NC
                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                                                  MI
                                                                                                                   IN
                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                  TN
                                                                                                                  NJ
                                                                                                                 GA
                                                                                                                 MI
                                                                                                  OK IL        NY
                                                                                                                IN
                                                                                                               WI
                                                                                                               OHMI
                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                              IA
                                                                                                             AL
                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                           OH
                                                                                                           MO
                                                                                                           OH
                                                                                                           PA
                                                                                                          TN
                                                                                                        MATN
                                                                                                         PA
                                                                                                        OK
                                                                                                         NJ         TN
                                                                                                      MD
                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                     NY
                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                      MI
                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                      IL
                                                                                                     WA
                                                                                                     NY
                                                                                                     RI
                                                                                                    OR               PA
                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                    AR
                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                   MO
                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                   SC
                                                                                                   TX      FL
                                                                                                  NE PA
                                                                1920                              TX

                                                                                                 MNIN        PA
                                                                                                                   OH

                                                                                                                    AZ
                                                                1910                                                IL
                                                                                                             MI

                                                                                                              MI

                                                                1900
                                                                       1900      1910           1920               1930               1940
                                                                              Earliest Date from AT&T Archival Data

                 Notes: Figure plots cities' earliest observed cutover date in newspapers data versus
                 AT&T data, for cities in both data sources, and the 45-degree line in red. Each city
                 is labeled with its state abbreviation. Figure is presented to illustrate the degree of
                 agreement between the AT&T and newspapers data. Nearly all cutovers identified in
                 the newspaper data collection that preceded AT&T-reported cutovers were performed
                 by independent (non-AT&T) telephone companies.



B.2        Complete-count Census data

Taken decennially, the US Federal Census enumerates the entire population and contains a wealth
of economic, social, and demographic information. We draw on the recently digitized complete
count census data from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2019) for the censuses in 1900, 1910, 1920, 1930,
and 1940.7 That the data is complete count means simply that all individuals enumerated--the
complete count of people in the US in each census year--has been transcribed and coded by IPUMS.
This enables us to count not just the number of telephone operators in the telephone industry in
each city, but the number who are 17, white, born in Massachusetts, and single, if we wanted
that level of granularity. In this appendix subsection, we describe our aggregation procedures--
particularly which individuals we include in which samples--as well as other controls variables we
build with the complete count data.

Aggregation of complete count individual-level data

Unit of observation
We restrict attention to the adult (16+) non-farm population with non-farm occupations, in the
continental U.S. only (lower 48 states plus District of Columbia). Our primary dataset aggregates
these individuals in the complete count data up to the level of:
7
    We stop in 1940 because the census is privacy-restricted for 72 years after it is taken and so 1940 is the most recent
    census IPUMS has and could transcribe and digitize in full.


                                                                                           15
          city (continental U.S. only)
           x American-born (dummy)
           x race and ethnicity (bins)
           x sex (dummy)
           x age (bins)
           x urban (dummy)
           x occupation (1950 encoding)
           x industry (1950 encoding)
           x year (decade)

where these variables are defined as follows:
       · American-born: indicates whether an individual was born in a U.S. state or territory
       · Race/ethnicity: bins for (i) white/non-Hispanic, (ii) white/Hispanic, (iii) black, (iv) Native
         American, (v) Asian, (vi) mixed, and (vii) other
       · Sex: indicates whether individual is male or female
       · Age: 5-year bins for individuals age 16-20 to 56-60, and 61+
       · Urban: indicates whether individual's household was urban (vs. rural)
       · Occupation: 1950 occupation codes (283 categories)
       · Industry: 1950 industry codes (162 categories)

We also prepare derivative datasets that (i) further aggregate up to dummies for telephone operators
and the telephone industry (rather than separate bins for each occupation and industry), and (ii)
aggregate up all occupations and industries. To study effects of dial on the youngest ages, we also
prepare variants of these datasets where age is measured in individual years for ages 16-25, plus a
bin for age 46+ (for comparison/control), omitting ages in between.8

In addition to these city x demographic bin x year datasets, we prepared separate datasets of (i)
all individuals reporting as telephone operators (occ1950=370), and (ii) all individuals reporting
as working in the telephone industry (ind1950=578).

Sampled cities

The raw complete count data include each individual's household's state and county, and city
where relevant. The IPUMS data includes not only a raw city string (as originally reported on
Census manuscripts) but also a standardized city, to account for the fact that city spellings may
change or be reported slightly differently for different households or in different years. However,
this standardized city was not always provided, or was sometimes provided where the raw city was
missing, and we determined that additional harmonization was needed.

8
    Although not referenced or used in this paper, we also prepare county-level variants of these datasets. Our research
    interest is in local labor markets, which we believe would be more accurately characterized by cities than counties
    in a period when commuting over more than short distances was relatively costly. However, results throughout the
    paper are similar when run with county-level rather than city-level data.


                                                            16
We begin by combining the list of raw city strings and IPUMS-standardized cities from all years
1910-1940 (note that these can vary: some smaller cities are not found in every year of the IPUMS
data). Having done so, we then manually examine (i) cities in the same state that start with the
same three letters, (ii) cities in the same county that sort adjacently and have a Levenshtein edit
distance of 4, and/or (iii) cities in the same county that sort within 30 positions of each other
and have an edit distance 2, to find spelling variants that appear to be the same city. We use
the results of this effort to build a crosswalk from the raw and IPUMS-standardized city names to
our manually, fully-harmonized city names. We apply this crosswalk to both the raw city strings
and IPUMS-standardized city names, which will also now match when both are provided. We take
either of these measures, when available, as an individual's (household's) true city.
From this effort, we produce a list of unique, harmonized cities by year. We then identify all such
cities which (i) are observed every year from 1910 to 1940, and (ii) have a population of 2,000 in
1920, as measured by aggregating up individuals in the IPUMS data. This yields a balanced panel
of 3,027 cities, which comprise the sample for this paper. Within this sample, the median 1920 city
population is 4,346; the 95th percentile is 48,414. Of these 3,027 cities, 415 are identified in our
cutover data, and 384 with exact or approximate cutover timing.

Variables measured
For each city x demographic bin x year, we measure the following variables:

             Category                        Variable
             Population                      Population in city-bin-year
                                             Number married
                                             Number ever married
                                             Mean/median age at first marriage
                                             Number with children
             Family and Residence            Mean/median number of children
                                             Number living with parents
                                             Number living with other family
                                             Number who own their dwelling
                                             Number who rent their dwelling
                                             Number who moved within the past 5 years
                                             Number who moved within state
             Migration status (1940 only)    Number who moved between states
                                             Number living in the same incorporated place
                                             Number living in the same SEA
                                             Mean/median income
             Income measures (1940 only)
                                             Mean/median occupation score
             Education status                Number currently in school

For datasets that aggregate up occupations and industries, we also measure the following group-level
employment characteristics:

                     Category               Variable
                                            Number working (with an occupation)
                     Employment status      Number who are telephone operators
                                            Number working in telephone industry

                                                  17
In preparing these data, we create a new code that identifies every individual who reported either
(i) not being in the labor force, or (ii) having a non-working occupation (occupation codes in the
980-999 range, which includes housewives, students, retirees, disabled persons, and inmates, as well
as missing/unknown). We define the working population as all others, i.e. all persons who both (i)
report as being in the labor force, and (ii) have a working occupation.

Other remarks

We also collect 1920 to 1940 city populations from Census publications for validation and indepen-
dent use. From the 1930 Census, we retrieve 1920 and 1930 populations for all cities with >1,000
people in 1930, and from the 1940 Census, 1930 and 1940 population for all cities with >1,000
people in 1940. We then merge these data to build the panel (retaining 1930 values from the 1940
Census, rather than the 1930 Census, where conflicts arise).


B.3        Creating our Linked Sample of Female Telephone Operators

In addition to studying future cohorts, we study the effects of automating telephone operation on
the telephone operators themselves. To do this, we have to follow operators over time, tracing their
careers and lives from when they were employed as operators in the telephone industry to after
the cutover shocks. If the operators had been men, this task would be relatively straightforward
and we could rely on one of the commonly used census linking strategies in the economic history
literature.9 However, as we showed in Table 2, the vast majority of operators in 1920 and 1930 were
young women. While the demographic profile of operators makes them an interesting set of workers
to study, it also makes them impossible to link across censuses in traditional ways. Census linking
is commonly performed on "stable" features enumerated in the census, most importantly names.
However, young female operators may marry and then change their names upon marriage between
the census we see them as an operator and the next census where we would like to find them.
Because census records do not attach unmarried names to married records, such name changes
would make linking impossible without additional data or information.
To create our individual-level longitudinal data on telephone operators, we turn to an alternative
source of linked data, the FamilySearch public family history tree (Price et al. 2019). In this ap-
pendix, we describe in detail our precise procedure to link telephone operators via the FamilySearch
tree and how we weight our final sample to ensure our results are internally valid to all telephone
operators in this period and not just those more likely to be on the tree. In the penultimate sub-
section of the appendix, highlighting the novelty of using the FamilySearch tree to created linked
data for empirical analysis in this paper and future research, we ask and answer the question of
which individual features make someone more or less likely to be on the tree.
When we analyze the effects of cutovers on telephone operators, we compare the operators to control
women. To serve as a control woman for a given operator, the control must match the operator
9
    For an overview of automated census linking, see Abramitzky et al. (2020).


                                                          18
in the initial census (1920 or 1930, the census in which the operators were employed as telephone
operators in the telephone industry) on sex, race, Hispanic ethnicity, marital status, whether or
not she has any children, whether or not she is US-born, whether or not her mother is US-born,
whether or not her father is US-born, and is between 3 years younger or older of the operator.
In addition, we match controls on precise geography, zooming in on the enumeration district. In
the 1920 and 1930 census, enumeration districts are census-constructed geographies that contain
about 1000 people all living in close proximity, akin to a neighborhood in most cities. The final
key matching variable is employment status: we only compare telephone operators to other women
who were also employed in the initial census. As we note in the paper, we identified 17 controls
for each operator. We then followed the same genealogical linking strategy for the control women
as for the operators, locating them on FamilySearch and, if possible, tracing them forward to the
following census. Ultimately, we linked about 4 controls per operator. However, to reduce data
collection time, we attempted to link control women forward only after we had linked the operators
and we only attempted to link the control women for operators we linked ahead to the following
census. This reduced the number of control women we had to attempt to link dramatically, from
more than 4.2 million to about 330 thousand, and with no empirical downside because unmatched
control observations would not be included in our analysis. Because this procedure determined
entry into the sample, we focus our description of our linking and our analysis of who is on the tree
on the operators. In the final subsection of the appendix, however, we describe the control sample
in more detail.


B.3.1        The Procedure to Link Telephone Operators

To link the women in our sample, we develop and implement a novel linking procedure, making use
of a popular genealogy platform and the "work" of many expert family historians (both professional
genealogists and hobbyists) linking the women in their family trees across censuses, marriage events,
migration events, and more. In this subsection, we describe our linking pipeline and the matched
data, echoing information from the main paper with additional details.
We begin by reproducing our description of the linking procedure from Section 2. We link in the
following four steps. First, we identify all women working as telephone operators in the telephone
industry in the 1920 and 1930 complete count census data (Ruggles 2002). After limiting to women
in our focal cities, we have 96,264 women in 1920 and 61,229 women in 1930.10 Second, we look
for each telephone operator on FamilySearch, a public genealogy platform with an open wiki-style
family tree (Price et al. 2019), where users create pages for deceased individuals--usually their own
ancestors but not always--and attach links to historical records, including entries from Federal
10
     Note that this sample omits a small number of male operators from our analysis as well as a small number of
     operators younger than 16 or older than 60. Only operators in cities with cutovers after 1920 are included. We
     further limit to operators in cities with population 100,000 in 1920, where cutovers were typically one-shot events,
     matching the sample we use when we study the next generation of potential operators (see Section 4). For the 1930
     sample, we further restrict the sample by filtering out cities with cutovers before 1930, as these women are selected
     on being operators after their city was cut over to dial service.


                                                             19
Censuses, marriage records, and birth certificates. We search FamilySearch in our base years by
name, age, sex, location, and state of birth. Because the 1920 and 1930 census transcriptions in the
IPUMS complete count data are based on the same original manuscripts as those on FamilySearch
and we can use names, addresses, and other characteristics to link them, matching is straightfor-
ward. However, not all telephone operators have a page on FamilySearch. We are able to find
30.4% of operators in 1920 and 32.3% in 1930 with a FamilySearch page.11

Third, we query the FamilySearch tree for links to the next census. That is, we begin with the set
of operators who were attached to the tree in year t  {1920, 1930}, the census in which they were
an operator. We check whether or not each operator's profile on FamilySearch has been linked to
a record from the census in t+10. Conditional on being on the tree, 42.4% of records in our sample
from 1920 are linked ahead to the 1930 census and 44.7% of 1930 records are linked to 1940.

Finally, for the set of operators with FamilySearch records attached to censuses in t and t + 10,
we use census record metadata--reel, page, and line number--to make links back to the complete
count, restricted use IPUMS data. This process yields a sample of 12,900 operators linked from
1920 to 1930 and another 8,955 linked from 1930 to 1940. For all of these operators, we observe
the full set of census covariates in t and t +10, allowing us to study what happens to operators a
decade later, including their occupation, industry, marital status, and fertility.

An example can clarify why linking women is difficult, and why the FamilySearch data can help.
Suppose we start with a telephone operator in 1920 in New York named Daisy Fay. We see in the
1920 census that Daisy was born in 1902 in Kentucky. With traditional census linking methods
like Abramitzky et al. (2020) or Ferrie (1996), we would search for records in the 1930 Census with
the name Daisy Fay, born in 1902 in Kentucky, likely with some tolerance for transcription errors
or enumeration errors in these fields. However, if Daisy marries Tom Buchanan in 1922, we would
have no way of knowing that Daisy Fay is likely known as Daisy Buchanan in 1930. Worse, if
another woman named Daisy born in Kentucky around 1902 marries and takes a surname of Fay,
we could falsely match two women who are not the same person. With our FamilySearch-based
approach, we instead search for Daisy Fay on FamilySearch in 1920. If her 1920 record is attached
to a page, we consider her on the tree. We then look to see if a FamilySearch user has also attached
her to the census in 1930, possibly triangulating with knowledge of her name after marriage or her
marriage date, either from personal knowledge or an attached marriage or birth certificate (or in
Daisy's case, a prominent work of American literature by ). If she is linked to both the 1920 and
1930 censuses, she will make our sample.


11
     Whether or not an operator--or anyone else--is attached to the FamilySearch tree is inevitably nonrandom. Pages
     are built, and records attached, by people working on family history today, and the FamilySearch platform is
     affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As long as the bias in who is likely or not likely to
     be on the tree is uncorrelated with the timing of cutovers, our event study strategy--comparing operators across
     cities and before and after cutovers--should produce an unbiased estimate of the cutover treatment effect. Later in
     this appendix, we describe in more detail what predicts whether or not an operator is on the tree and shows that
     match rates are not a function of our treatment.


                                                             20
B.3.2     Inverse Propensity Weights

The set of operators that we can link using the FamilySearch data from 1920 to 1930 (or 1930
to 1940) is inevitably not random. To account for any potential unrepresentativeness of our final
sample, we follow Bailey et al. (2017) and use inverse propensity weights (IPW) to adjust for
observable differences between telephone operators in our initial sample and those we are able to
match to the following census via the FamilySearch tree.12
Bailey et al. (2017) construct these weights in two steps, per footnote 33 of that paper:
     · Step 1: Run a probit regression of link status (whether an individual is matched) on the
       following variables: an indicator for those with a middle name; the length of first, middle,
       and last names; polynomials in the day of birth and age; an index for how common the first
       and last names are; whether or not one has siblings and the number of siblings; and the length
       of the names of one's parents.
     · Step 2: Inverse propensity scores are then computed as 1- p m
                                                                p 1-m , where p is the predicted
       likelihood of being matched based on the estimated probit coefficients and m is the actual
       match rate.

Starting with the census attributes we observe about the telephone operators in our initial sam-
ple, we follow a similar procedure to predict which women are linked and which are not. As we
emphasized in the previous section, there are three reasons an operator might not reach our final
sample.13 The IPWs account for any differential propensity to stay in or leave the sample being
driven at any stage in the linking process.
We adapt the reweighting procedure to match our setting as follows:
     1. We control for age and age-squared. However, we cannot include polynomials for the day of
        birth, as day of birth is not recorded in either the 1920 or 1930 censuses.
     2. We include two indicators for middle names/initials, one for the presence of a middle name
        and one for the presence of a middle initial.14
     3. We control for first and last name length, separately. We do not control for parents' name
        length as we rarely observe our operators living with their parents, unlike the Bailey et al.
        (2017) example which linked children to their adult-selves.
     4. We control for both the commonness of first and last name, measured as the log of the number
        of people in the 1900, 1910, and 1920 censuses with that first or last name.

12
   Concerns about whether or not the final analysis sample is representative of the underlying population is not unique
   to our setting, nor to genealogy-based linking (versus hand or automated linking). All historical samples built with
   census linking could potentially be subject to concerns about unrepresentativeness, as linking is a function of names,
   ages, and other individual characteristics--features which might correlate both with being link-able and with other
   empirically-relevant observed or unobserved individual attributes.
13
   The reasons why an operator may not reach our final sample are: 1. The operator does not have a page on the
   FamilySearch tree to begin with; 2. The operator's record in the following census is not attached to her page on
   the tree; 3. The metadata in the tree or in the IPUMS complete count census indicates that the same person is
   not referenced in the same reel x page x line of each source (errors), although this last issue is very rare.
14
   Approximately a dozen operators in each linked sample are edge cases with enumerated names like "Ruby Anna
   M" or "Anna Bell F". In these cases, we declare them to have both middle names and middle initials and include
   the interaction of the two indicators in our probit model.


                                                           21
  5. We control for whether or not the operator is married or single, whether or not the operator
     has children, and household size, all measured in the initial census. These are similar, in
     spirit, to the Bailey et al. (2017) controls for siblings.
  6. We include a full set of indicators for the operator's role within the household (head of
     household, spouse, daughter, boarder, etc).
  7. We include a full set of indicators for birthplace (state of birth for the American-born, and
     country of birth for the few foreign-born).
  8. We include a full set of indicators for current state and size of place, where size of place refers
     to the city or town of residence in the census year.
  9. We control for race and Hispanic status.

In Table B.1, we present the coefficients from the probit regression for our linked samples, with
the weight-generating function for the link from 1920 to 1930 in the first column and from 1930 to
1940 in the second column. We omit the many fixed effects--for state of birth, state of residence,
household role, and size of place--and report coefficients directly from the probit model. We see
that operators with more common first names are less likely to be linked, so we will use the IPWs
to up-weight the women with common names whom we do link so that our final analysis sample
is comparable to our initial sample. On the other hand, we see that operators with children or in
larger households are more likely to be linked, perhaps because they have larger families with more
descendants researching genealogy today. Though not statistically significant in both years, we see
matching is less likely for non-white and Hispanic women, a common result in the linking literature
that may be exacerbated by the demographics of the FamilySearch userbase.




                                                  22
          Table B.1: Probit Model of Operator Linking to Build Inverse Propensity Weights
                                                                 Telephone Operators
                                              Linked 1920-1930                         Linked 1930-1940
                                                       (1)                                   (2)
                                                             
 Age                                              -0.013                                   0.018
                                                   (0.003)                                  (0.005)
 Age-Squared                                         0.000                                -0.000
                                                     (0.000)                               (0.000)
 First Name Length                                    -0.005                                -0.004
                                                     (0.003)                               (0.004)
 Last Name Length                                     -0.002                                -0.001
                                                     (0.003)                               (0.004)
 First Name Commonness                            -0.011                                  -0.012
                                                   (0.002)                                 (0.002)
 Last Name Commonness                                 -0.003                               -0.005
                                                     (0.002)                                (0.002)
 Family Size                                      0.050                                    0.049
                                                   (0.003)                                  (0.003)
 Has Children                                     0.157                                    0.150
                                                   (0.028)                                  (0.025)
 Single                                               0.020                                 -0.009
                                                     (0.024)                               (0.025)
 Middle Name                                      -1.176                                  -1.510
                                                   (0.348)                                 (0.268)
 Middle Initial                                   0.173                                    0.136
                                                   (0.014)                                  (0.016)
 Middle Name and Initial                             -1.067                                 -0.338
                                                     (0.553)                               (0.315)
 Hispanic                                            -0.200                                 -0.137
                                                     (0.118)                               (0.161)
 Nonwhite                                         -0.481                                    -0.041
                                                   (0.185)                                 (0.159)
 Birthplace                                           Yes                                    Yes
 State of Residence                                   Yes                                    Yes
 Size of Place                                        Yes                                    Yes
 Relation to Household Head                           Yes                                    Yes
 N                                                   98523                                  61599




B.3.3       Who is on the FamilySearch Tree?

While the weighting scheme described in the previous section addresses the potential unrepresen-
tativeness of our sample built with genealogical links, because this paper is the first to use the




                                                23
FamilySearch tree links for empirical analysis15 we also want to explore in more detail the repre-
sentativeness of the tree. We do so in this section, tracing out which operators in our initial sample
are more or less likely to be on the tree. We find that being on the tree is far from random on many
demographic features--especially state of residence, place of birth, and family size--but unrelated
to the treatment in this paper, telephone exchange cutovers.

Of the 157,493 telephone operators we went looking for on the FamilySearch tree, we found 49,045
(31%) on the tree. As Table B.2 shows, the share-on-the-tree is very similar for operators in 1920
and in 1930. Why are some operators on the tree and others are not? One simple reason is that the
operators on the tree were put there by someone, likely a descendant. However, these descendants
need not be direct descendants; much of the genealogical work on the tree is done by relatively
distant relatives expanding their trees in many directions. An operator could be a grandmother
or great grandmother of a FamilySearch user today, but she could also be a distant great aunt
or the spouse of a third cousin. We lack specific (private, protected) data from FamilySearch on
who is adding each person to the tree and how they are related. But we can investigate which
demographic features or other census-enumerated covariates predict which operators or are not on
the FamilySearch tree, which is more germane to our analysis.

                    Table B.2: Share of Operators on the Family Search Tree, 1920-1930
     Year       Telephone Operators      On the Tree      Share (%)      Linked to Next Census      Share (%)
 Pooled                157493               49045              31.1              21855                 13.9
 1920                  96264                29282              30.4              12900                 13.4
 1930                  61229                19763              32.3               8955                 14.6




The FamilySearch tree has much more coverage of people who were likely ancestors of today's
FamilySearch users. One particularly large user group is members of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints (LDS), as FamilySearch is operated in partnership with the LDS church. We can
see this in the maps in Figure B.9 and Figure B.10, where Utah and other Mountain West states
stand out in their rates of tree coverage. Tree rates are lowest in Mid-Atlantic states like New York
and New Jersey, which have relatively fewer LDS members.




15
     We are not the first to propose using the FamilySearch tree data. Price et al. (2019) introduce the FamilySearch
     tree data to the economics literature, but their focus is on building a new method to link census data using the
     FamilySearch tree as training data rather than using the links (training data) themselves.


                                                          24
     Figure B.9: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by State of Birth.

                                                                                         ME                                                                              ME

                                                             WI                     VT   NH                                                     WI                  VT   NH

            WA       ID      MT          ND        MN        IL    MI          NY   MA                  WA       ID      MT     ND    MN        IL   MI        NY   MA

            OR       NV      WY          SD        IA        IN    OH    PA    NJ   CT   RI             OR       NV      WY     SD    IA        IN   OH   PA   NJ   CT   RI

            CA       UT      CO          NE        MO        KY    WV    VA    MD   DE                  CA       UT      CO     NE    MO        KY   WV   VA   MD   DE

                     AZ      NM          KS        AR        TN    NC    SC                                      AZ      NM     KS    AR        TN   NC   SC

                                         OK        LA        MS    AL    GA                                                     OK    LA        MS   AL   GA

                                         TX                                    FL                                                TX                            FL



       Share on FamilySearch Tree                                                                  Share on FamilySearch Tree
                                    20        30        40    50    60    70                                                    20         40        60




                                                   (a) 1920                                                                           (b) 1930


 Note: We map the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree in the same census we identified them
  as telephone operators in the telephone industry, plotted according to their states of birth in the census.



  Figure B.10: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by State of Residence.

                                                                                         ME                                                                              ME

                                                             WI                     VT   NH                                                     WI                  VT   NH

            WA       ID      MT          ND        MN        IL    MI          NY   MA                  WA       ID      MT     ND    MN        IL   MI        NY   MA

            OR       NV      WY          SD        IA        IN    OH    PA    NJ   CT   RI             OR       NV      WY     SD    IA        IN   OH   PA   NJ   CT   RI

            CA       UT      CO          NE        MO        KY    WV    VA    MD   DE                  CA       UT      CO     NE    MO        KY   WV   VA   MD   DE

                     AZ      NM          KS        AR        TN    NC    SC                                      AZ      NM     KS    AR        TN   NC   SC

                                         OK        LA        MS    AL    GA                                                     OK    LA        MS   AL   GA

                                         TX                                    FL                                                TX                            FL



       Share on FamilySearch Tree                                                                  Share on FamilySearch Tree
                                    20        30    40        50   60    70                                                     20         40        60




                                                   (a) 1920                                                                           (b) 1930


 Note: We map the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree in the same census we identified them
  as telephone operators in the telephone industry, plotted according to their states of residence in the census.



Operators who were younger in the initial census are more likely to be found on the tree, though this
relationship is stronger in 1920 than in 1930. We plot the share on the tree by age in Figure B.11.
About 35% of the youngest operators in 1920 are on the FamilySearch tree, falling to around 25%
around age 30 where the rate plateaus. In 1930, by contrast, tree rates fluctuate around 30% for
most ages, falling a bit for the few operators older than 35.




                                                                                              25
              Figure B.11: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by Age.
                                                            40




                           Share on the FamilySearch Tree
                                                            30



                                                            20



                                                            10



                                                             0
                                                                 15   20   25       30          35          40   45   50
                                                                                Age in Initial Census
                                                                                         1920        1930



     Note: We plot the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree in the same census we identified them
      as telephone operators in the telephone industry according to their age in the initial census.



As most people are added to the FamilySearch tree by descendants--and the FamilySearch hints
are often based on own name and names of other people in the household--those in larger families
are more likely to be on the tree. We plot this relationship in Figure B.12. In both 1920 and 1930,
the share of women operators on the tree who were in households alone is quite low, less than 10%.
This rises monotonically with family size in both censuses.16

Name commonness is a pervasive challenge for census linking, whether by hand or by automated
methods (Abramitzky et al. 2020, Bailey et al. 2017). When there are multiple people with the same
name, humans and algorithms can struggle to determine which is the correct person and which is
the doppelganger. This challenge affects our tree linking as well. Women with the most common
first names are least likely to be on the tree, as we show in Figure B.13a, where we split women into
deciles by name commonness. However, the differences are relatively small: women with the least
common first names are on the tree in 1920 and 1930 about 33% of the time, compared to 25%
for women with the most common first names. The pattern among last names is a bit different.
Women with incredibly rare last names are very unlikely to be on the tree (22% in 1920 and 24%
in 1930), possibly because such women have been enumerated or transcribed with error. That is,
these rare last names may not actually be rare, but rather noise and error, and a name transcribed
incorrectly might make it hard to connect it to other records for that person. Otherwise, the
relationship between last name commonness and being on the tree is relatively flat, fluctuating
within the low 30% range in both 1920 and 1930.

16
     We measure family size in the census with the famsize variable from IPUMS, defined as "the number of own family
     members residing with each individual, including the person her/himself. Persons not living with others related to
     them by blood, marriage/cohabitating partnership, or adoption are coded 1."


                                                                                         26
                                       Figure B.12: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by Family Size.
                                                                                          50




                                                         Share on the FamilySearch Tree
                                                                                          40


                                                                                          30


                                                                                          20


                                                                                          10


                                                                                           0
                                                                                                 1          2       3       4        5                                     6           7       8        9        10
                                                                                                                        Family Size in Initial Census
                                                                                                                                     1920                                       1930



    Note: We plot the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree in the same census we identified them
     as telephone operators in the telephone industry according to the size of their family in their household in the
     initial census. Specifically, we use the IPUMS variable famsize.



        Figure B.13: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by Name Commonness.
                                  40                                                                                                                                       40
 Share on the FamilySearch Tree




                                                                                                                                          Share on the FamilySearch Tree




                                  30                                                                                                                                       30



                                  20                                                                                                                                       20



                                  10                                                                                                                                       10



                                   0                                                                                                                                        0
                                       1    2   3    4                                    5      6          7   8       9       10                                               1         2       3    4    5        6          7   8   9   10
                                                First Name Commonness Decile                                                                                                                       Last Name Commonness Decile
                                                Least Common to Most Common                                                                                                                        Least Common to Most Common
                                                                                          1920       1930                                                                                                    1920         1930


                                           (a) Commonness of First Name                                                                                                                    (b) Commonness of Last Name


    Note: We plot the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree in the same census we identified them
     as telephone operators in the telephone industry according to the commonness of their first or last names. Name
     commonness is calculated using the complete count censuses in 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930.



Similar to how rare first or last names may help census linkers or genealogists distinguish one person
from another, middle names or initials could play a similar role. 28% of the operators enumerated
in the census have a middle initial reported, while only about 1% have a full middle name. In both
cases, these people are more likely to be on the FamilySearch tree, ranging from around 40% with
a middle initial or name down to 28% without either listed.

                                                                                                                                     27
 Figure B.14: Share of Telephone Operators on the FamilySearch Tree by Middle Name Status.

                                                   40




                  Share on the FamilySearch Tree
                                                   30



                                                   20



                                                   10



                                                    0
                                                        Middle Initial       Middle Name      Neither
                                                                         Middle Name Status
                                                                              1920     1930


  Note: Not every person enumerated in the complete count censuses report a middle name or middle initial.
   Whether or not someone reports this extra identifying information affects the ease of linking them, census to cen-
   sus or to other records on FamilySearch. We plot the share of telephone operators who were found on the tree
   in the same census we identified them as telephone operators in the telephone industry according to whether or
   not they report a middle name or middle initial or neither.



Ultimately, our goal is to estimate the effect of automation on incumbent operators. If operators
in cities with cutovers over the following decade are differentially likely--either more or less--to be
found on the tree, that could cause issues with inference, at a minimum by shifting sample weight
across cities which were or were not treated. Is this the case? Can future cutovers predict whether
women are on the tree in the census before the cutover? As we show in Table B.3, the answer is no.
Having a cutover over the next decade--that is, being in the treated group--does not significantly
predict whether we were able to find an operator on the FamilySearch tree for either the 1920
sample nor the 1930 sample of operators (columns 1 and 2). Moreover, the relative magnitudes of
these effects are small: a cutover in the next decade reduces the probability a woman is found on
the tree by about one p.p. from a base tree rate of 31 to 33%.

We also see that having a cutover in the next decade does not predict whether we were ultimately
able to link an operator to a record in the next census, as we show in columns 3 and 4 of Table B.3.
Here the relative magnitudes are also small. Conditional on being on the FamilySearch tree, 45
to 47% of women are found in the next census. A cutover reduces this rate by a statistically
insignificant 0.1 p.p. for boh the 1920 to 1930 and 1930 to 1940 samples.




                                                                              28
        Table B.3: Telephone Cutovers Do Not Predict Operator FamilySearch Tree Status
                                           On the FamilySearch Tree                        Linked to Next Census
                                       1920-30                 1930-40                1920-30                1930-40
                                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)                   (4)
 Cutover Previous Decade                -0.012                  -0.010                  -0.011                -0.014
                                       (0.009)                 (0.007)                 (0.009)               (0.011)
 Individual Controls                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes
 City Controls                           Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes
 State FEs                               Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes

 Observations                           92665                   57273                  28491                  19005
 Adjusted R2                             0.15                    0.14                   0.03                   0.04
 Y Mean                                  0.31                    0.33                   0.45                   0.47

  Note: We analyze whether or not an operator is on the FamilySearch tree (columns 1 and 2) or whether or not
   an operator is successfully linked to the following census conditional on being on the FamilySearch tree (columns
   3 and 4). We cannot replicate the empirical strategy from our the individual-level analysis in the paper which
   includes city by year fixed effects (enabled because we compare operators with control women who were not op-
   erators). Instead, we include a suite of city-level and individual-level controls. All regressions are unweighted.
   Individual controls include fixed effects for age, birthplace, race, marital status, family size, middle names or ini-
   tials, all measured in the base year, as well as controls for first and last name commonness. City controls include
   population, the share of women with occupations, the black and foreign-born shares of the population, and the
   share of people in the city who were operators in the telephone industry, all measured in the base year. SEs
   clustered by city in parentheses.



B.3.4     Linking Control Women

When we analyze the individual-level linked data, we use a differences in differences specification:
we compare the outcomes in the following census of telephone operators living in cities with and
without cutovers over the following decade, and--to account for any secular trends in the local
labor market--we compare operators to other working women living in their neighborhoods. In
this section, we detail how we construct this control sample.

For every telephone operator in our sample, we identify a set of women who are "similar" in the
complete count census and can serve as a control for her. The size of the complete count census
allows us to match on a number of dimensions. Specifically, we focus on women of the same race
and Hispanic status and within three years of age. We also match on marital status and fertility;
if the operator is married, her controls are as well, and if the operator has children, her controls
must have children as well. We also use the operator's birthplace and her mother and father's
birthplaces to link on nativity; if the operator is US-born, her controls must be US-born, and the
same for her mother's US-born status and her father's US-born status. Finally, we match on precise
geography, using census enumeration districts. In 1920 and 1930, enumeration districts contained
approximately 1000 residents (usually 200 to 300 households) and were geographically compact
units that we think of as neighborhoods. Finally, we require control women to have an occupation
in the initial census so that we compare telephone operators to other working women.


                                                          29
As we document in Table B.4, we locate approximately 16 control women for each telephone
operator in 1920 and 1930. We then follow the linking procedure outlined in Appendix Subsection
B.3.1 to locate these control women on FamilySearch and find them in the following census. Of
270,994 matched control women, 100,299 are on the tree (37% versus 31% for operators).17 48,177
of the control women are attached to records in the following census. These women form our final
control set, providing about four control observations for every operator observation.

                Table B.4: Share of Control Women on the Family Search Tree, 1920-1930
                                Control Women                                   On the Tree                  Linked to Next Census
     Year         Unique                          per Operator        Unique             per Operator       Unique         per Operator
 Pooled           270994                               16.4            100299                7.1            48177              4.1
 1920             162413                               16.4             61154                7.1            29447              4.2
 1930             108581                               16.5             39145                6.9            18730              4.1




While we see 4.1 control women per operator on average, there is wide variation in the actual
number of control women for each operator in the sample (Figure B.15). In both 1920 and 1930,
about two-thirds of our operators have at least one linked control woman. In both years, about
15% of operators have only one linked control woman and another 11% have two. At the other end
of the range, 11% of operators are matched to more than ten linked control women.

              Figure B.15: Control Women Linked to Next Census per Telephone Operator.

                                           4000
                     Number of Operators




                                           3000



                                           2000



                                           1000



                                              0
                                                   0      1      2     3    4        5       6     7    8     9      10+
                                                                     Number of Control Women
                                                                 Successfully Linked to Next Census
                                                                                1920        1930




17
     Note that compared to the operator sample, a higher share of control women are on the tree. However, this is not
     surprising, as we have limited our search to the control women of operators whom we already successfully linked.
     These control women thus come from the same neighborhoods (and age, race, and family nativity, etc.) of linked
     operators, not random operators, and are selected on being more "linkable".


                                                                                30
We do not enforce uniqueness among controls for operators. That is, one control woman could
serve as a control for multiple operators in our data, if the operators (and the control) live in the
same enumeration district and match on all the required criteria. More than 80% of control women
in 1920 and 1930 are matched to only one operator. Of the controls matched to multiple operators,
14% are matched to only two operators and only a handful are matched to more than 5 operators
(17 in 1920 and 38 in 1930; none matched to more than 8 operators).



B.4    Additional (supplementary) data

We also collect data from additional sources which have ancillary uses in this paper.

AT&T data on dial diffusion, 1913-1972

Archival documents at the AT&T corporate archives include a two-page report providing the annual
time series of the total number of Bell system telephones from 1913 to 1972, and a breakdown by the
type of central office, manual versus dial (see "Bell System Distributions of Company Telephones,"
AT&T Archives and History Center, box 085-04-03-02). We use these data to chart aggregate dial
diffusion within the Bell system (shown in Figure 1).

AT&T subscribers in large cities, 1915-1940

In addition to the AT&T dial diffusion data, we also collect data on annual local telephone adoption
U.S. cities with over 50,000 population. The AT&T publication "Bell Telephones in Principal
Cities" (AT&T 1915) was published annually, and made available to us by the AT&T Archives
and History Center for years 1915 to 1940. Each volume of this publication reports the number of
Bell system telephone stations in each city, as well as an estimate of the service area population
(for measuring telephone penetration), and a breakdown of the percent of telephones which are
business subscribers (vs. residence). In Feigenbaum and Gross (2020), we use these data to study
how cutovers were related to AT&T network growth.

NHGIS shapefiles, GNIS place names, and other geographic data

We use the USGS Geographic Names Information System (GNIS) database of U.S. populated places
to link cities to their counties (manually disambiguating cities of the same name in the same state,
as needed) and retrieve their geographic coordinates. We use these data with 1940 state boundary
shapefiles from NHGIS (Ruggles et al. 2019) to map cutovers (as in Figure 2), but these data are
not otherwise used in the analysis.

Measures of local severity of the Great Depression

We use data from Fishback et al. (2005) on county per-capita retail sales growth from 1929 to 1933,
1935, and 1939 to measure local severity of the Great Depression. See the appendix to Fishback

                                                 31
et al. (2005) for information on data sources. To each city in our city sample, we assign retail sales
growth of the surrounding county. For cities that span county boundaries, we compute weighted
averages, weighting by the city population in each associated county.

National Industrial Conference Board 1926 clerical salary survey

We use historical survey data on salaries of clerical workers to identify clerical occupations with
a similar earnings profiles to telephone operators, which might therefore be natural substitutes.
In the 1920s, the National Industrial Conference Board (NICB) surveyed employers in large U.S.
cities for the job titles and salaries of clerical workers, with survey returns covering 18 cities, 416
firms, and 25,879 employees. The published results (NICB 1926) report salary distributions for 20
different job titles--separately for males and females, and often separately for junior and senior
employees--with one of the worker categories being "Switchboard operators".18

We identified three surveyed occupations with similar female earnings profiles to telephone opera-
tors: "Office labor-saving machine operators", "Junior stenographers", and "Experienced typists",
which had median and average earnings of around $21-22 per week. Table B.5 shows the earnings
profile for women in each occupation, and an imputed median (see table notes). These occupations
map directly to 1950 occupation codes 341 ("Office machine operators") and 350 ("Stenographers,
typists, and secretaries"), which are thus two of the occupations we study in Section 5 when we
examine the post-cutover occupations of young women.




18
     We thank Claudia Goldin for pointing us to and sharing these records.


                                                          32
Table B.5: NICB (1926) Salary Distributions for Select Clerical Occupations

         Switchboard operators                  Office Machine Operators
      Range      Count Cum. pct.               Range      Count Cum. pct.
      16.50          30          5%            15.00         235         10%
   16.51 - 18.00     77         16%         15.01 - 17.00    190         18%
   18.01 - 19.50     51         24%         17.01 - 19.00    235         28%
   19.51 - 21.00    155         47%         19.01 - 21.00    363         44%
   21.01 - 22.50     57         56%         21.01 - 23.50    461         63%
   22.51 - 25.00    111         73%         23.51 - 26.00    376         79%
   25.01 - 27.50     66         83%         26.01 - 30.00    373         95%
      27.51         116        100%            30.01         116       100%
        Imputed median: 22.00                    Imputed median: 22.71

          Junior Stenographers                     Experienced Typists
      Range       Count Cum. pct.              Range      Count Cum. pct.
      17.50          191        20%            17.50         263        23%
   17.51 - 19.00     104        31%         17.51 - 19.00    105        33%
   19.01 - 20.50      97        41%         19.01 - 20.50    196        50%
   20.51 - 22.00     123        54%         20.51 - 22.00    149        63%
   22.01 - 23.50     151        69%         22.01 - 23.50    153        77%
   23.51 - 25.00      78        77%         23.51 - 25.00     89        84%
   25.01 - 26.50      97        88%         25.01 - 27.50     96        93%
      26.51          120       100%            27.51          81       100%
        Imputed median: 20.97                    Imputed median: 20.50

   Notes: Table reports salary distribution for female switchboard operators,
   office machine operators, junior stenographers, and experienced typists from
   NICB (1926). Medians imputed assuming a uniform distribution in each bin
   in which the median salary occurs (i.e., as a weighted average of the lower
   and upper bounds of the bin in which the true median falls).




                                       33
C     Supplemental Descriptive Figures/Tables

Here we provide additional descriptive statistics for young, white, American-born women over
the sample period. Table C.1 lists the most common occupations for this demographic in 1920,
and their rank in other years. Table C.2 does the same for occupation-industry pairings, where
telephone operator is at the top of the list. Tables C.3 and C.4 provide a more detailed view of the
characteristics of telephone operators by region and city size.

         Table C.1: Top occupations for white, American-born women age 16 to 20, 1910-1940
                                                                             Rank
                        Occupation                                1910   1920 1930     1940
                        Operative and kindred workers               1      1      1      1
                        Stenographers, typists, and secretaries     4      2      2      3
                        Salesmen and sales clerks                   2      3      3      4
                        Clerical and kindred workers               10      4      5      5
                        Telephone operators                        5      5       6     13
                        Private household workers                   3     6       4      2
                        Bookkeepers                                 8      7      7      8
                        Laborers                                   11      8     10      9
                        Teachers                                    9      9     11     16
                        Waiters and waitresses                     14     10      8      6
                   Notes: Table ranks the top 10 occupations employing white, American-born
                   women age 16-20 in the U.S. in 1920, and shows their ranks in other years.



     Table C.2: Top occupation-industries for white, American-born women age 16 to 20, 1910-1940
                                                                                             Rank
      Occupation                                  Industry                      1910     1920 1930    1940
      Telephone operators                         Telephone                       4        1      2    14
      Salesmen and sales clerks                   General merchandise            2         2      3     5
      Private household workers                   Private households             1         3      1     1
      Stenographers, typists, and secretaries     Misc business services          7       4       8    60
      Operative and kindred workers               Yarn, thread, and fabric        5        5      6    9
      Operative and kindred workers               Apparel and accessories        3         6      4     2
      Teachers                                    Educational services            8        7     11    30
      Salesmen and sales clerks                   Food stores, except dairy      14        8     10    6
      Operative and kindred workers               Knitting mills                 10       9      12    18
      Operative and kindred workers               Footwear, except rubber        12       10     14    19
       Notes: Table ranks the top 10 occupation-industry pairs employing white, American-born women
       age 16-20 in the U.S. in 1920, and shows their ranks in other years. Note that the decline in
       "Stenographers, typists, and secretaries" in the "Misc business services" industry from 1930 to 1940
       is due to a change in industry classification (the occupation overall was growing).




                                                          34
Table C.3: Characteristics of telephone operators, 1910-1940, by census region
                             Telephone industry                 Other industries
                         1910 1920 1930 1940             1910    1920 1930 1940

   Northeast
   Population (1000s)    23.51   48.76   68.74   50.44   0.80    2.33   9.36   14.43
   Percent female (%)     90.6   95.2    96.4    90.1    29.6    70.6   86.6   85.9
    & native-born        86.2    91.0    91.6    85.5    27.2    65.8   81.4   81.1
    & white/non-Hisp      85.9    90.7    91.4    85.0   26.8    64.6   80.7    80.4
    & young (16-25)      72.4    70.0    61.3    23.5    19.0    42.4   42.0   20.8

   Midwest
   Population (1000s)    30.86   49.34   63.24   50.61   0.95    2.00   7.91   13.66
   Percent female (%)     91.8   95.0    96.2    93.4    20.5    63.9   87.1   89.1
    & native-born        88.2    90.8    92.2    90.6    19.4    60.1   82.7   85.8
    & white/non-Hisp      88.1    90.7    92.1    90.3   19.4    60.0   82.2    85.3
    & young (16-25)      72.6    66.8    58.5    29.7    14.2    39.3   41.9   24.6

   South
   Population (1000s)    11.59   23.05   31.70   32.06   0.39    0.87   3.23   7.82
   Percent female (%)     83.9   91.8    95.8    90.7    10.7    60.0   82.6   85.2
    & native-born        83.4    90.9    95.2    90.2    10.7    58.8   81.7   84.2
    & white/non-Hisp      82.9    90.4    94.7    89.4   10.7    57.0   80.2   82.9
    & young (16-25)      68.0    70.2    62.3    29.5     6.4    36.0   40.2   21.0

   West
   Population (1000s)     7.06   13.48   18.37   19.59   0.26    0.54   2.34   5.25
   Percent female (%)     91.5   95.8    96.0    94.6    24.2    70.2   88.7   90.6
    & native-born         86.6   90.0    90.3    90.2    22.6    65.3   83.1   86.2
    & white/non-Hisp      85.6    89.2    89.5    89.2   22.3    64.5   82.5   84.9
    & young (16-25)       72.6   66.3    48.9    31.4    12.8    36.2   35.1   21.8

    Notes: Table reports characteristics of telephone operators in the telephone
    industry and in other industries, by census region and year. Data for the
    pooled population can be seen in Table 2 of the paper.




                                          35
Table C.4: Characteristics of telephone operators, 1910-1940, by city size
                               Telephone industry                 Other industries
                           1910 1920 1930 1940             1910    1920 1930 1940

 Cities w/ pop. 2-5k
 Population (1000s)        6.25    9.23    12.13   8.05    0.21    0.29   0.83    2.22
 Percent female (%)        90.2    94.9    97.7    92.5    13.2    48.1   79.3    87.2
  & native-born            88.5    93.1    95.6    89.8    12.3    47.7   76.9    83.9
  & white/non-Hisp         88.2    92.9    95.4    89.3    12.3    47.7   76.8    82.8
  & young (16-25)          72.1    67.6    56.3    28.5     8.5    31.7   40.3    21.2

 Cities w/ pop. 5-10k
 Population (1000s)        4.64    7.42    9.52    6.78    0.13    0.22   0.70    1.75
 Percent female (%)        93.0    95.7    97.2    92.3    10.8    45.4   81.3    87.4
  & native-born            91.1    93.6    95.0    89.3    10.8    43.6   79.3    84.3
  & white/non-Hisp         90.7    93.3    94.7    88.7    10.8    43.1   78.7    83.6
  & young (16-25)          75.3    71.4    60.3    28.6     7.7    25.7   40.1    22.8

 Cities w/ pop. 10-20k
 Population (1000s)        4.56    7.55    10.71   7.03    0.12    0.27   1.06    1.85
 Percent female (%)        92.3    95.9    97.0    91.3    20.5    60.3   87.1    86.0
  & native-born            89.7    93.7    94.8    88.6    20.5    57.4   83.9    83.3
  & white/non-Hisp         89.5    93.4    94.6    87.9    20.5    57.4   83.6    82.6
  & young (16-25)          75.6    73.3    64.1    30.1    18.0    40.4   46.5    24.5

 Cities w/ pop. 20-50k
 Population (1000s)        5.82    10.48   15.63   10.69   0.14    0.48   1.90    2.78
 Percent female (%)        92.1    95.9    96.4    92.4    20.4    67.5   87.6    86.5
  & native-born            88.6    92.4    93.1    89.1    19.7    63.6   84.0    83.0
  & white/non-Hisp         88.2    92.0    92.7    88.7    19.7    63.4   83.5    82.3
  & young (16-25)          74.9    73.2    65.7    28.9    13.9    44.3   45.4    23.7

 Cities w/ pop. 50-100k
 Population (1000s)        4.04    8.78    11.66   8.72    0.09    0.40   1.70    2.19
 Percent female (%)        90.8    95.2    95.9    92.3    31.6    75.9   87.9    87.3
  & native-born            87.2    91.6    92.5    90.0    28.4    71.1   83.9    84.2
  & white/non-Hisp         87.0    91.3    92.2    89.4    28.4    70.6   83.4    83.4
  & young (16-25)          75.5    73.2    63.8    27.6    24.2    47.3   41.7    23.7

 Cities w/ pop. 100-200k
 Population (1000s)        4.44    9.78    12.20   8.18    0.10    0.47   1.64    2.25
 Percent female (%)        90.6    95.1    96.0    92.9    20.6    79.2   89.1    87.2
  & native-born            86.9    92.0    93.2    90.6    15.5    73.7   85.7    84.6
  & white/non-Hisp         86.5    91.8    92.9    90.1    15.5    72.8   84.7    83.5
  & young (16-25)          74.9    74.5    65.3    27.2    10.3    50.1   39.0    19.2

 Cities w/ pop. ¿200k
 Population (1000s)        25.89   52.63   70.75   39.37   0.54    2.25   11.16   11.51
 Percent female (%)        91.6    95.5    96.2    92.2    45.5    81.5   88.3     89.4
  & native-born             86.3   89.9    90.5    87.9    42.2    76.0   83.0     84.6
  & white/non-Hisp         85.9    89.4    90.1    87.1    41.4    74.2   82.0    83.7
  & young (16-25)          75.2    70.1    61.3    25.7    30.0    47.6   41.7     21.3

 Notes: Table reports characteristics of telephone operators in the telephone
 industry and in other industries, by city size and year. Breakdowns by city
 size are for the 3,027 cities in our primary sample (see Appendix B). Data for
 the pooled population can be seen in Table 2 of the paper.




                                            36
D     First Stage, Balance Tests and Event Study Pre-Trends

D.1    Differential effects of cutovers across subpopulations

Figure D.1 presents event study estimates of the effects of dial cutovers on the fraction of different
population groups who are telephone operators in the telephone industry, estimated with 10-year
intervals. Consistent with the evidence from Table 2 that the majority of operators were young,
white, American-born women, we see that the employment share reduction is largest for this group,
further motivating our focus on young women throughout the paper.

    Figure D.1: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of different demographic groups who are
           telephone operators in the telephone industry (event study, 10-yr intervals)




                 Notes: Figure shows event study estimates of the effects of local dial adop-
                 tion on the fraction of increasingly narrow adult populations (from all adults
                 to young, white, American-born women) in successive cohorts who are tele-
                 phone operators in the telephone industry, for the small city sample (pop-
                 ulation 100k in 1920). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals,
                 computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                       37
D.2    Pre-treatment balance tests

Figure D.2: Pre-treatment run-up balance tests for the outcomes studied throughout the paper

          Run-up to 1920 only                 Run-up to 1930 only            Run-up to 1920 & 1930 (pooled)




Notes: Figures estimate differences in the prior 10-year changes in each of the variables shown across cities with
versus without an imminent cutover. For example, the left panel examines cities which in 1920 had not yet had a
cutover in our data, calculates the 1910 to 1920 change in a given outcome (Y ), and estimates the conditional
difference in means of Y between cities which did versus did not have a cutover between 1920 and 1930, controlling
for city size. The middle panel repeats for 1930, and the right panel pools 1920 and 1930 together. All outcomes
are measured for young, white, American-born women only. The evidence indicates that most outcomes were
not changing differentially (over the prior 10 years) in cities with an impending cutover, with the exception of
employment in telephone operation, which was growing prior to cutovers, and possibly employment in secretarial
and restaurant work, which we show in the paper absorbed many of the women who might have otherwise been
operators. In all figures, sample restricted to cities with population 100k in 1920. Error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                        38
D.3    Event studies for labor market outcomes, by age

In Figure D.3 and D.4, we show the event study estimates for labor market outcomes of successive
cohorts of young, white, American-born women around cutovers, splitting the population into the
same age groups as in Tables 4 and 5: 16 to 18, 19 to 22, and 23 to 25.

   Figure D.3: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns for young, white,
                American-born women around cutovers (event study, by age)

                    Fraction working                                     Fraction in school
              w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                         w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




                    Fraction married                                    Fraction with children
              w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                         w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




         Notes: Figure shows event study estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption on the
         fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in the labor
         force, in school, married, and have children, for cities with population 100k in 1920. Error
         bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                       39
Figure D.4: Changes in employment shares in select occupations for young, white, American-born
                                  women around cutovers

           Fraction who are office mach. operators           Fraction who are typists/stenographers
               w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                     w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




                Fraction who are office clerks                    Fraction who are sales clerks
                w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                    w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




                 Fraction who are beauticians                     Fraction who are waitresses
                w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                    w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




         Notes: Figure shows event study estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption on
         young, white, American-born women's employment shares in select occupations, across suc-
         cessive cohorts, for cities with population 100k in 1920. Error bars represent 95% confidence
         intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                      40
E     Robustness Checks and Heterogeneity

E.1   Restricting to cities with continuous newspaper coverage

Here we present robustness checks restricting the estimation sample to cities with continuous news-
paper coverage in our data sources from 1917 to 1940. Figures E.1 to E.3, and Tables E.1 and E.2,
are counterparts to Figures 3 to 5, and Tables 4 and 5, in the body of the paper.


Effects on Operator Employment

Figure E.1: Effect of dial cutovers on the log number of young, white, American-born women who
                 are telephone operators in the telephone industry (event study)

                         Panel (A)                                              Panel (B)
          Log # of tel. operators (10-yr intervals)              Log # of tel. operators (2-yr intervals)




            Notes: Figure shows event study estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on the
            (log) number of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are
            telephone operators in the telephone industry, for the small city sample (population
            100k in 1920), with 10- and 2-year event windows. When event windows are narrower
            than the 10-year frequency at which outcomes are measured, each bin contains different
            cities (every fifth bin represents the same set of cities). Sample restricted to cities with
            continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940. Error bars represent 95% confidence
            intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                        41
Figure E.2: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
      who are telephone operators in the telephone industry (event study and DID by age)

                         Panel (A)                                            Panel (B)
     Fraction who are tel. operators (2-yr intervals)      Fraction who are tel. operators (DID by age)




            Notes: Figure shows event study and difference-in-difference estimates (by age) of the
            effects of local dial adoption on the fraction of working young, white, American-born
            women in successive cohorts who are telephone operators in the telephone industry,
            for the small city sample (population 100k in 1920). Sample restricted to cities with
            continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940. Error bars represent 95% confidence
            intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                      42
Figure E.3: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
   with other jobs in the telephone industry or who are telephone operators in other industries

                      Panel (A)                                                Panel (B)
    Other jobs in the tel. industry (2-yr intervals)        Tel. operator in other industries (2-yr intervals)




                      Panel (C)                                                Panel (D)
     Other jobs in the tel. industry (DID by age)           Tel. operator in other industries (DID by age)




          Notes: Upper panels show event study estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on
          the fraction of working young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who
          have other jobs in the telephone industry (left) and who are telephone operators in other
          industries (right), for the small city sample (population 100k in 1920). Sample restricted
          to cities with continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940. Because event windows are
          narrower than the 10-year frequency at which outcomes are measured, each bin contains
          different cities (every fifth bin represents the same set of cities). Lower panels show the
          associated difference-in-differences estimates, by age. We plot the estimates on the same
          scale (-0.03 to 0.03) as the previous figures to ease comparison. Error bars represent 95%
          confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                       43
Effects on the Labor Market for Young Women

    Table E.1: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns around cutovers
       sample restricted to cities with continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940

                           Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                               Fraction of the group that is:
                                Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
                Post-cutover     -0.007***      -0.005         -0.005    -0.002       0.000
                                  (0.001)      (0.011)        (0.012)   (0.003)      (0.001)
                N                  2088         2088           2088      2088         2088
                R2                 0.64         0.86           0.79      0.86         0.77
                Cities             522           522            522       522          522
                Cut over           137          137             137       137          137
                Y Mean             0.01         0.31           0.52      0.09         0.03

                            Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                               Fraction of the group that is:
                                Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
                Post-cutover     -0.011***      -0.009         -0.005    0.003        0.002
                                  (0.001)      (0.009)        (0.004)   (0.005)      (0.003)
                N                  2088         2088           2088      2088         2088
                R2                 0.61         0.84           0.83      0.87         0.83
                Cities             522           522            522       522          522
                Cut over           137          137             137       137          137
                Y Mean             0.01         0.49           0.11      0.37         0.19

                           Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                               Fraction of the group that is:
                                Tel. oper.    Working In school Married           Has children
                Post-cutover     -0.006***      -0.005         -0.001    0.002        -0.002
                                  (0.001)      (0.009)        (0.002)   (0.005)      (0.005)
                N                  2088         2088           2088      2088         2088
                R2                 0.53         0.81           0.75      0.85         0.81
                Cities             522           522            522       522          522
                Cut over           137          137             137       137          137
                Y Mean             0.01         0.42           0.02      0.60         0.37


           Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local
           dial adoption on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive
           cohorts who are in the labor force, in school, married, and have children, for cities
           with population 100k in 1920. Sample restricted to cities with continuous newspaper
           coverage from 1917 to 1940. The left-most column provides the effect of cutovers on
           the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry,
           as a reference point. All regressions include city and year fixed effects, and log city
           size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
           respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                         44
 Table E.2: Changes in employment shares in select occupations around cutovers
sample restricted to cities with continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940

                             Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                              Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
              Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.024***      0.000         0.008          -0.003      0.010      0.002**      0.012***
              (0.004)      (0.000)       (0.005)        (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.001)       (0.004)
N               2084         2084         2084           2084        2084         2084         2084
R2              0.56         0.50         0.64           0.68        0.59         0.43         0.67
Cities          522           522          522            522         522          522          522
Cut over         137         137           137            137         137          137          137
Y Mean          0.03         0.00         0.09           0.04        0.12         0.01         0.05

                             Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                              Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
              Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.020***      0.000         0.007          -0.001    0.010***      -0.000       0.004
              (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.001)      (0.003)
N               2087         2087         2087           2087        2087         2087         2087
R2              0.61         0.61         0.81           0.77        0.64         0.77         0.81
Cities          522           522          522            522         522          522          522
Cut over         137         137           137            137         137          137          137
Y Mean          0.03         0.00         0.15           0.05        0.10         0.01         0.04

                             Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                              Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
              Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Post-cutover -0.012***      -0.000        0.000          -0.003      0.005       0.002        0.003
              (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.001)      (0.003)
N               2086         2086         2086           2086        2086         2086         2086
R2              0.50         0.60         0.79           0.74        0.57         0.75         0.79
Cities          522           522          522            522         522          522          522
Cut over         137         137           137            137         137          137          137
Y Mean          0.02         0.00         0.14           0.05        0.09         0.01         0.04


Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adop-
tion on young, white, American-born women's employment shares in select occupations, across
successive cohorts, for cities with population 100k in 1920. Sample restricted to cities with
continuous newspaper coverage from 1917 to 1940. The left-most column provides the effect of
cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry,
as a reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine operators,
(ii) typists, stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks, (v) beauty
parlor workers, and (vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year fixed effects,
and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                   45
E.2   Heterogeneity by region, city size, and exposure

We also explore heterogeneity across cities in the difference-in-difference estimates of the effects
of cutovers, which we present in the tables below. Table E.3 estimates effects on employment of
our focal demographic group (young, white, American-born women) in telephone operation, in the
telephone industry, and overall, by geographic region, and Table E.4 does so for the fraction who
are working in select other occupations. Tables E.5 and E.6 repeat by city size. Tables E.7 and
E.8 repeat by local "exposure" to automation, which we define as the fraction of young women in
1910 who were telephone operators in the telephone industry.




                                                46
Heterogeneity by region

 Table E.3: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women who are telephone
                        operators, in telephone industry, or employed at all

                                                    Sample: Northeast census region
                              Fraction who are tel. operators             Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                          All     In tel. industry   In oth. industry        In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.010***        -0.009***          -0.001***               -0.001               0.008
                       (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.010)
       N                 2962            2962               2962                    2962               2964
       R2                0.63            0.62               0.40                    0.55               0.84
       Cities            741             741                 741                    741                741
       Cut over           86              86                 86                      86                 86
       Y Mean            0.02            0.02               0.00                    0.00               0.47

                                                     Sample: Midwest census region
                                Fraction who are tel. operators           Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                          All       In tel. industry   In oth. industry      In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.019***        -0.018***          -0.001***              -0.002**              0.006
                       (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.000)                (0.001)             (0.007)
       N                 4209            4209               4209                    4209               4212
       R2                0.56            0.57               0.43                    0.44               0.76
       Cities            1053            1053               1053                    1053               1053
       Cut over           89              89                 89                      89                 89
       Y Mean            0.03            0.03               0.00                    0.00               0.40

                                                      Sample: South census region
                                Fraction who are tel. operators           Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                          All       In tel. industry   In oth. industry      In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.020***        -0.019***          -0.002***               -0.002               -0.010
                       (0.003)          (0.003)            (0.000)               (0.002)              (0.009)
       N                 3238            3238               3238                    3238               3244
       R2                0.59            0.59               0.48                    0.49               0.79
       Cities            811             811                 811                    811                811
       Cut over           60              60                 60                      60                 60
       Y Mean            0.04            0.04               0.00                    0.01               0.34

                                                      Sample: West census region
                              Fraction who are tel. operators             Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                          All     In tel. industry   In oth. industry        In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.027***        -0.025***          -0.002**                -0.002               -0.036
                       (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.001)               (0.001)              (0.023)
       N                 1236            1236               1236                    1236               1236
       R2                0.52            0.54               0.50                    0.39               0.61
       Cities            309             309                 309                    309                309
       Cut over           26              26                 26                      26                 26
       Y Mean            0.04            0.04               0.00                    0.01               0.33


    Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on the fraction
    of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are (i) telephone operators, (ii) other
    occupations in telephone industry, and (iii) working. Sample restricted to cities in the given region. All
    regressions include city and year fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent
    significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                           47
Table E.4: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women in select occupations

                                                 Sample: Northeast census region
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.009***     0.000      0.012**        -0.008*    0.000      0.001       0.003
                         (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.005)        (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.001)     (0.003)
           N               2962       2962         2962          2962      2962       2962        2962
           R2              0.62       0.53         0.85          0.80      0.78       0.74        0.77
           Cities          741         741          741           741       741        741        741
           Cut over         86         86            86            86       86          86         86
           Y Mean          0.02       0.00         0.12          0.06      0.08       0.01        0.02

                                                  Sample: Midwest census region
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.018***     0.001       0.006          0.004     -0.002     0.001     0.009***
                         (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.004)        (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.002)
           N               4209       4209         4209          4209      4209       4209        4209
           R2              0.57       0.67         0.80          0.80      0.60       0.78        0.78
           Cities          1053       1053         1053          1053      1053       1053        1053
           Cut over         89         89           89            89        89         89          89
           Y Mean          0.03       0.00         0.12          0.05      0.10       0.01        0.04

                                                   Sample: South census region
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.019***     0.001       0.003          0.005    0.011**     0.002       0.005
                         (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.006)        (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.002)     (0.005)
           N               3238       3238         3238          3238      3238       3238        3238
           R2              0.59       0.55         0.80          0.70      0.59       0.76        0.80
           Cities          811         811          811           811       811        811        811
           Cut over         60         60            60            60       60          60         60
           Y Mean          0.04       0.00         0.13          0.04      0.11       0.01        0.05

                                                    Sample: West census region
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.025***     -0.001     0.012*          -0.009    -0.000     0.001       0.001
                         (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.007)        (0.007)   (0.008)    (0.003)     (0.007)
           N               1236       1236         1236          1236      1236       1236        1236
           R2              0.54       0.61         0.80          0.75      0.51       0.79        0.71
           Cities          309         309          309           309       309        309        309
           Cut over         26         26            26            26       26          26         26
           Y Mean          0.04       0.00         0.15          0.04      0.11       0.02        0.07


        Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on
        the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in select
        occupations. Sample restricted to cities in the given region. The left-most column provides the
        effect of cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone
        industry, as a reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine
        operators, (ii) typists, stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks,
        (v) beauty parlor workers, and (vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year
        fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
        and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                           48
Heterogeneity by city size

 Table E.5: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women who are telephone
                        operators, in telephone industry, or employed at all

                                                  Sample: Cities 100k population in 1920
                               Fraction who are tel. operators             Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                           All     In tel. industry   In oth. industry        In tel. industry       occupation
        Post-cutover   -0.017***        -0.016***          -0.001***             -0.002***              0.000
                        (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.006)
        N                11645            11645              11645                 11645               11656
        R2                0.60             0.60               0.44                  0.47                0.83
        Cities           2914             2914                2914                  2914                2914
        Cut over          261              261                261                    261                261
        Y Mean            0.03             0.03               0.00                  0.00                0.40

                                                  Sample: Cities 50k population in 1920
                                 Fraction who are tel. operators           Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                           All       In tel. industry   In oth. industry      In tel. industry       occupation
        Post-cutover   -0.015***        -0.014***          -0.001***              -0.002**             0.010*
                        (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.000)                (0.001)             (0.005)
        N                11357            11357              11357                 11357               11368
        R2                0.57             0.58               0.42                  0.44                0.81
        Cities           2842             2842                2842                  2842                2842
        Cut over          212              212                212                    212                212
        Y Mean            0.03             0.03               0.00                  0.00                0.39

                                                  Sample: Cities 20k population in 1920
                                 Fraction who are tel. operators           Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                           All       In tel. industry   In oth. industry      In tel. industry       occupation
        Post-cutover   -0.012***        -0.011***          -0.001***              -0.001*               0.003
                        (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.007)
        N                10563            10563              10563                 10563               10572
        R2                0.55             0.55               0.37                  0.38                0.78
        Cities           2643             2643                2643                  2643                2643
        Cut over          154              154                154                    154                154
        Y Mean            0.03             0.03               0.00                  0.00                0.37

                                                  Sample: Cities 10k population in 1920
                               Fraction who are tel. operators             Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                           All     In tel. industry   In oth. industry        In tel. industry       occupation
        Post-cutover   -0.008***        -0.007***          -0.001***               -0.000               -0.005
                        (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.010)
        N                 9233            9233               9233                  9233                 9240
        R2                0.51            0.52               0.34                  0.36                 0.74
        Cities            2310            2310               2310                  2310                 2310
        Cut over           110             110               110                    110                 110
        Y Mean            0.04            0.03               0.00                  0.00                 0.36


     Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on the fraction
     of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are (i) telephone operators, (ii) other
     occupations in telephone industry, and (iii) working. Sample restricted to cities of the given size. All
     regressions include city and year fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent
     significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                            49
Table E.6: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women in select occupations

                                               Sample: Cities 100k population in 1920
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.016***     0.000       0.007**          -0.003    0.001     0.001*    0.007***
                         (0.001)     (0.000)      (0.003)         (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)
           N              11645       11645        11645          11645     11645       11645     11645
           R2              0.60        0.59         0.81           0.78      0.66        0.75      0.77
           Cities          2914        2914         2914          2914       2914        2914     2914
           Cut over         261         261         261            261       261          261      261
           Y Mean          0.03        0.00         0.13           0.05      0.10        0.01      0.04

                                               Sample: Cities 50k population in 1920
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.014***     0.001        0.006*          0.003     -0.001     -0.000   0.005*
                         (0.001)     (0.000)       (0.003)        (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.002)
           N              11357       11357        11357          11357     11357       11357     11357
           R2              0.58        0.55         0.80           0.77      0.64        0.74      0.75
           Cities          2842        2842         2842          2842       2842        2842     2842
           Cut over         212         212         212            212       212          212      212
           Y Mean          0.03        0.00         0.12           0.04      0.10        0.01      0.04

                                               Sample: Cities 20k population in 1920
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.011***     0.000         0.003          -0.002    -0.004     -0.000    0.001
                         (0.002)     (0.001)       (0.005)        (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.003)
           N              10563       10563        10563          10563     10563       10563     10563
           R2              0.55        0.51         0.76           0.72      0.61        0.72      0.73
           Cities          2643        2643         2643          2643       2643        2643     2643
           Cut over         154         154         154            154       154          154      154
           Y Mean          0.03        0.00         0.11           0.04      0.10        0.01      0.04

                                               Sample: Cities 10k population in 1920
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.007***     0.001         0.005          -0.003    0.000      -0.000    -0.001
                         (0.002)     (0.001)       (0.005)        (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.002)   (0.004)
           N               9233       9233          9233           9233      9233       9233      9233
           R2              0.52       0.51          0.74           0.69      0.58       0.70      0.71
           Cities          2310       2310          2310           2310      2310       2310      2310
           Cut over         110        110          110            110       110         110       110
           Y Mean          0.03       0.00          0.11           0.04      0.10       0.01      0.04


        Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on
        the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in select
        occupations. Sample restricted to cities of the given size. The left-most column provides the
        effect of cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone
        industry, as a reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine
        operators, (ii) typists, stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks,
        (v) beauty parlor workers, and (vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year
        fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
        and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                             50
Heterogeneity by exposure

 Table E.7: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women who are telephone
                        operators, in telephone industry, or employed at all

                                                   Sample: Cities in top 25% of exposure
                             Fraction who are tel. operators              Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                         All     In tel. industry   In oth. industry         In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.017***         -0.016**            -0.001*                -0.002              -0.011
                       (0.006)           (0.006)            (0.001)               (0.001)             (0.015)
       N                 2941            2941                2941                  2941                2944
       R2                0.59            0.61                0.38                  0.36                0.70
       Cities            736             736                  736                  736                 736
       Cut over           33              33                  33                    33                  33
       Y Mean            0.05            0.05                0.00                  0.00                0.33

                                                Sample: Cities in bottom 25% of exposure
                                Fraction who are tel. operators           Fraction non-operators   Fraction with
                         All        In tel. industry   In oth. industry      In tel. industry       occupation
       Post-cutover   -0.010***        -0.009***           -0.001***               -0.001              0.014
                       (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.000)               (0.001)             (0.012)
       N                 2931            2931                2931                  2931                2932
       R2                0.59            0.58                0.38                  0.43                0.86
       Cities            733             733                  733                  733                 733
       Cut over           58              58                  58                    58                  58
       Y Mean            0.02            0.02                0.00                  0.00                0.45


       Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption on
       the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are (i) telephone
       operators, (ii) other occupations in telephone industry, and (iii) working. Sample restricted to
       cities by quartile of "exposure" to automation, which we define as a city's fraction of young, white,
       American-born working women in 1910 who were operators. All regressions include city and year
       fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and
       0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                            51
Table E.8: Effects of dial on fraction of young, white, American-born women in select occupations

                                               Sample: Cities in top 25% of exposure
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.016**     -0.001       0.015*          -0.004    0.012       0.003     0.003
                         (0.006)    (0.001)       (0.008)        (0.005)   (0.008)     (0.003)   (0.009)
           N              2941        2941         2941           2941      2941         2941     2941
           R2             0.61        0.51         0.71           0.68      0.53         0.73     0.72
           Cities         736          736          736            736       736          736     736
           Cut over        33          33            33             33       33            33      33
           Y Mean         0.05        0.00         0.12           0.04      0.11         0.02     0.05

                                              Sample: Cities in bottom 25% of exposure
                                        Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                        Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
           Post-cutover -0.009***    0.000         0.006          -0.001    -0.005      0.001     0.003
                         (0.002)    (0.001)       (0.006)        (0.005)   (0.005)     (0.001)   (0.003)
           N              2931        2931         2931           2931      2931         2931     2931
           R2             0.58        0.52         0.81           0.79      0.68         0.73     0.75
           Cities         733          733          733            733       733          733     733
           Cut over        58          58            58             58       58            58      58
           Y Mean         0.02        0.00         0.10           0.05      0.08         0.01     0.03


           Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of local dial adoption
           on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in
           select occupations. Sample restricted to cities by quartile of "exposure" to automation,
           which we define as a city's fraction of young, white, American-born working women in
           1910 who were operators. The left-most column provides the effect of cutovers on the
           fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry, as a
           reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine operators,
           (ii) typists, stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks, (v)
           beauty parlor workers, and (vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year
           fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1,
           0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                            52
E.3    Long-differences strategy with "Large City" sample

In the body of the paper, we focus our attention on "small" cities (those with population 100,000
in 1920), where cutovers were typically one-time events. As a robustness check, we also examine
the 160 "large" cities in the AT&T sample which merge to our focal city sample (=164 U.S. cities in
AT&T data, less four New York City boroughs)--where automation typically took place gradually,
as individual exchanges were converted to mechanical operation one or two at a time. Although
this sample is not suitable for event studies, we can use AT&T's data on the intensity of local dial
adoption to estimate its effects on young women, and the results are statistically and quantitatively
similar to those for smaller cities in the body of the paper.

Specifically, we relate the AT&T data on the fraction of a city's subscribers with dial service as of
1940 to 1920-to-1940 long-differenced outcomes, as follows:

                        1920,1940 Yi =  · Fraction dial in 1940i + Xi  + i


where i indexes cities. Only one city in the AT&T data had its first cutover before the 1920 census
(Norfolk, VA), which we therefore omit from the estimation.

Results from these regressions are presented below, in a format analogous to the by-age difference-
in-difference results in the paper. Figures E.4 and E.5 estimate the effects on the fraction of young,
white, American-born women who are telephone operators in the telephone industry, have other
jobs in the telephone industry, or are telephone operators in other industries (for comparison to
Figures 4 and 5 in the body of the paper). Tables E.9 and E.10 estimate effects on the fraction
of women who are working, in school, married, have children, and are in assorted occupations (for
comparison to Tables 4 and 5 in the body of the paper).




                                                 53
Effects on Operator Employment

Figure E.4: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
 in a given city who are telephone operators in the telephone industry (long differences, by age)

                                  Fraction who are tel. operators (LD by age)




            Notes: Figure shows 1920 to 1940 long difference estimates, by age, of the effects of
            local dial adoption (measured as the fraction of a city on dial as of the 1940 Census
            [April 1940]) on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women who are
            telephone operators in the telephone industry. Sample restricted to cities in the AT&T
            data whose first cutover occurred after the 1920 Census (January 1920). Error bars
            represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from robust SEs.



Figure E.5: Effect of dial cutovers on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women
   with other jobs in the telephone industry or who are telephone operators in other industries

           Other jobs in the telephone industry                     Tel. operator in other industries




           Notes: Figure shows 1920 to 1940 long differences estimates, by age, of the effects of local
           dial adoption (measured as the fraction of a city on dial as of the 1940 Census [April 1940])
           on the fraction of working young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who
           have other jobs in the telephone industry (left) and who are telephone operators in other
           industries (right). Sample restricted to cities in the AT&T data whose first cutover
           occurred after the 1920 Census (January 1920). We plot the estimates on the same
           scale (-0.1 to 0.1) as the previous figures to ease comparison. Error bars represent 95%
           confidence intervals, computed from robust SEs.




                                                        54
Effects on the Labor Market for Young Women

    Table E.9: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns around cutovers

                    Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                                    Fraction of the group that is:
                                     Tel. oper.    Working In school Married            Has children
            Fraction dial in 1940     -0.007***      0.035      -0.050**      -0.008        -0.000
                                       (0.003)      (0.026)      (0.019)     (0.006)       (0.002)
            N                            159          159         159          159           159
            R2                           0.10         0.21        0.18        0.01           0.02
            Y Mean                      -0.03        -0.34        0.27        -0.02         -0.00

                    Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                                    Fraction of the group that is:
                                     Tel. oper.    Working In school Married            Has children
            Fraction dial in 1940     -0.011***      -0.021      -0.008       -0.021        -0.002
                                       (0.002)      (0.016)     (0.006)      (0.016)       (0.009)
            N                            159          159         159          159           159
            R2                           0.24         0.01        0.01        0.02           0.00
            Y Mean                      -0.02        -0.02        0.04        -0.02         -0.02

                    Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                                    Fraction of the group that is:
                                     Tel. oper.    Working In school Married            Has children
            Fraction dial in 1940     -0.007***      -0.016      -0.002       -0.020        0.004
                                       (0.001)      (0.015)     (0.001)      (0.013)       (0.011)
            N                            159         159          159         159            159
            R2                           0.25        0.02         0.03        0.04           0.01
            Y Mean                      -0.01        0.06         0.01        0.03          -0.01


           Notes: Tables present long differences estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial
           adoption (measured as the fraction of a city on dial as of the 1940 Census [April 1940])
           on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in
           the labor force, in school, married, and have children. Sample restricted to cities in the
           AT&T data whose first cutover occurred after the 1920 Census (January 1920). The
           left-most column provides the effect of cutovers on the fraction of these women who
           were telephone operators in the telephone industry, as a reference point. All regressions
           include log city size controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01
           levels, respectively. Robust SEs in parentheses.




                                                       55
    Table E.10: Changes in employment shares in select occupations around cutovers

                                     Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                      Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                      Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Fraction dial in 1940 -0.030***      0.001      0.033**        0.004        -0.004      0.002      0.022**
                       (0.007)      (0.001)     (0.014)       (0.007)      (0.010)     (0.001)     (0.009)
N                         159        159           159         159          159         159          159
R2                       0.10        0.03         0.13         0.05         0.20        0.13         0.06
Y Mean                   -0.05       0.00         -0.02        0.02         0.01        0.01         0.06

                                      Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                      Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                      Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Fraction dial in 1940 -0.024***      -0.000       0.016        -0.004       0.006       0.003     0.020***
                       (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.013)      (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.002)     (0.006)
N                         159        159           159         159          159         159          159
R2                       0.22        0.05         0.02         0.00         0.13        0.04         0.11
Y Mean                   -0.03       0.01         -0.01        0.02         0.02        0.02         0.05

                                      Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                      Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                      Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
Fraction dial in 1940 -0.016***      0.000        0.005        -0.003       0.002     0.004**     0.014***
                       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.012)      (0.009)      (0.005)    (0.002)      (0.005)
N                         159        159          159          159          159         159          159
R2                       0.29        0.08         0.01         0.00         0.02        0.04         0.07
Y Mean                   -0.02       0.01         0.02         0.02         0.01        0.02         0.05


Notes: Tables present long differences estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption (measured
as the fraction of a city on dial as of the 1940 Census [April 1940]) on young, white, American-born
women's employment shares in select occupations. Sample restricted to cities in the AT&T data whose
first cutover occurred after the 1920 Census (January 1920). The left-most column provides the effect
of cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry, as
a reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine operators, (ii) typists,
stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks, (v) beauty parlor workers, and
(vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include log city size controls. *, **, *** represent significance at
the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. Robust SEs in parentheses.




                                                     56
E.4     Instrumental variables strategy

Throughout the paper, we estimate the effects of cutovers on labor market outcomes directly in the
reduced form. The underlying logic is that cutovers reshuffled the broader labor market for young
women by nearly eliminating one of its largest occupations. In this section, we operationalize this
logic with a 2SLS design, where the first stage uses cutovers to instrument for the share of working
young women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry, and the second stage then
uses this to explain other labor market outcomes. Concretely, we estimate:

                              Wit =  · 1(Post-Cutover)it + i + t + Xit  + it
                                        ^ it + i + t + Xit  + it
                               Yit =  · W

We restrict our focus to young, white, American-born women. As before, it indexes city-years, i
and t are city/year fixed effects, and Xit are time-varying controls. Wit and Yit represent our first-
and second-stage outcomes, respectively. To improve readability, we rescale Wit to make each unit
represent a 10 p.p. decline in the fraction of working young women who were telephone operators.
Table E.11 uses this specification to estimate the effect of a decline in telephone operators jobs
on the fraction of young women in subsequent cohorts who were (i) working, and (ii) conditional
on working, the fraction working in focal occupations. The predictive power of cutovers for tele-
phone operator employment rates is unsurprisingly very large (with a partial F-statistic of nearly
200), and the results are statistically and quantitatively similar to those in the paper. We see no
relationship between the decline of telephone operator jobs and overall employment rates, but we
see countervailing employment growth in secretarial work, restaurant work, and perhaps in beauty
work. The magnitudes are also consistent with those in the paper: with cutovers on average elim-
inating around 2% of jobs for this demographic, these estimates can be multiplied by one-fifth to
get roughly the same magnitudes we find in our main results.

   Table E.11: Effects of decline of telephone operation on the employment and occupations of
               future cohorts of young, white, American-born women: 2SLS design
                                                           Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                                    Pct. working Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
    Pct. tel. oper./tel. ind. 10%      0.003        0.002     0.044***      -0.018      0.009     0.008**    0.043***
                                      (0.031)      (0.002)     (0.016)     (0.013)     (0.013)    (0.003)     (0.011)
    N                                  11645       11645       11645        11645      11645       11645      11645
    F-stat                             198.58      198.58      198.58       198.58     198.58      198.58     198.58
    Cities                              2914        2914        2914         2914       2914        2914       2914
    Cut over                            261          261        261           261        261         261        261
    Y Mean                              0.40        0.00        0.13         0.05       0.10        0.01       0.04
  Notes: Tables present estimates of the effects of a 10% decline in telephone operator employment on the fraction
  of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are working, and of those working, the fraction
  in select occupations. Observations are at the city x year level. The RHS variable measures the fraction of this
  demographic working as telephone operators in the telephone industry, and we instrument for this variable with
  an indicator for whether the given city has experienced a dial cutover. All estimates are scaled to correspond to
  a 10 p.p. decline in the fraction of the population working as operators. All regressions include city and year
  fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
  respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.



                                                             57
Tables E.12 and E.13 estimate the 2SLS versions of Tables 4 and 5 from the body of the paper.
The patterns, including the magnitudes (once appropriately adjusted, i.e. multiplied by one-fifth,
as above), are again similar to those which we find in the reduced form.

    Table E.12: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns around cutovers

                              Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                                             Fraction of the group that is:
                                                  Working      In school Married Has children
                  Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       -0.004       0.005       -0.008        0.003
                                                   (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.009)       (0.004)
                  N                                 11613       11613        11613         11613
                  F-stat                            71.41       71.41        71.41         71.41
                  Cities                            2913         2913         2913          2913
                  Cut over                           261          261          261           261
                  Y Mean                             0.30        0.54         0.09          0.03

                              Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                                             Fraction of the group that is:
                                                  Working      In school Married Has children
                  Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       -0.014       -0.004      0.016         0.022
                                                   (0.031)      (0.017)     (0.023)       (0.015)
                  N                                 11642       11642       11642         11642
                  F-stat                            157.59      157.59      157.59        157.59
                  Cities                             2914        2914        2914          2914
                  Cut over                           261          261         261           261
                  Y Mean                             0.48        0.11        0.36          0.19

                              Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                                             Fraction of the group that is:
                                                  Working      In school Married Has children
                  Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       -0.006       -0.007      0.023         0.022
                                                   (0.055)      (0.011)     (0.039)       (0.036)
                  N                                 11633       11633       11633         11633
                  F-stat                            110.55      110.55      110.55        110.55
                  Cities                             2914        2914        2914          2914
                  Cut over                           261          261         261           261
                  Y Mean                             0.41        0.02        0.60          0.38


        Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption
        on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are in the labor
        force, in school, married, and have children, for cities with population 100k in 1920. The
        RHS variable measures the fraction of this demographic working as telephone operators in the
        telephone industry, and we instrument for this variable with an indicator for whether the given
        city has experienced a dial cutover. All estimates are scaled to correspond to a 10 p.p. decline
        in the fraction of the population working as operators. All regressions include city and year fixed
        effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and
        0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                          58
    Table E.13: Changes in employment shares in select occupations around cutovers

                                            Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                          Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                                Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       0.002        0.033**      -0.006       0.008      0.010***    0.066***
                                  (0.001)       (0.016)     (0.011)      (0.017)      (0.003)     (0.013)
 N                                11613          11613       11613        11613       11613        11613
 F-stat                           71.41          71.41       71.41        71.41       71.41        71.41
 Cities                           2913            2913       2913         2913         2913         2913
 Cut over                          261             261        261          261         261          261
 Y Mean                            0.00           0.08        0.04         0.11        0.01         0.05

                                            Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                          Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                                Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       0.002       0.053***      -0.016       0.017       0.004      0.038***
                                  (0.002)       (0.018)     (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.004)      (0.011)
 N                                11642          11642       11642       11642        11642       11642
 F-stat                           157.59         157.59      157.59      157.59       157.59      157.59
 Cities                            2914           2914        2914        2914         2914        2914
 Cut over                          261             261         261         261         261         261
 Y Mean                            0.00           0.14        0.05        0.10         0.01        0.04

                                            Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                          Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                                Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Pct. tel. op. tel. ind. 10%       0.004         0.026      -0.040*       0.002      0.017*       0.045**
                                  (0.004)       (0.032)     (0.023)      (0.022)     (0.009)      (0.019)
 N                                11633          11633       11633       11633        11633       11633
 F-stat                           110.55         110.55      110.55      110.55       110.55      110.55
 Cities                            2914           2914        2914        2914         2914        2914
 Cut over                          261             261         261         261         261         261
 Y Mean                            0.00           0.13        0.05        0.09         0.01        0.04


Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption on
young, white, American-born women's employment shares in select occupations, across successive cohorts,
for cities with population 100k in 1920. The RHS variable measures the fraction of this demographic
working as telephone operators in the telephone industry, and we instrument for this variable with an
indicator for whether the given city has experienced a dial cutover. All estimates are scaled to correspond
to a 10 p.p. decline in the fraction of the population working as operators. All regressions include city
and year fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                      59
F     Supplementary Results

F.1    Structural changes taking place in treated cities around cutovers

Recall that the period we study was one of significant changes in young women's education, labor
force participation, and occupational composition. These trends were thus taking place around the
time that telephone service was mechanized, both in the aggregate and at the level of individual
cities. In the paper we include city size x year controls to account for differential trends in larger
and smaller cities which may have incidentally coincided with cutovers (recall that automation on
average proceeded from larger to smaller cities). As an empirical matter, these controls eliminate
differential pre-trends in the outcomes we study, but they also wash out variation that can provide
a deeper view of the underlying structural change. In this appendix section, we present results with
year fixed effects only, where underlying trends are more visible.

Table F.1 provides the counterpart to Table 4 in the body of the paper, estimating changes in
the fraction of young, white, American-born women working, in school, married, or with children
around the time of a city's first cutover. The most important trend taking place at this time
was increasing high school completion, with a rapidly growing fraction of 16, 17, and 18 year-olds
staying in school rather than entering the labor force--and the magnitudes of these differences are
substantially larger than what could be attributed to cutovers alone.

Table F.2 then provides a counterpart to Table 5, estimating changes in employment of successive
cohorts in our focal occupations. Though not easily discerned given the scaling of the figure (which
is fixed to be consistent across all charts), there is an underlying trend of growing employment of
office machine operators--a rapidly-growing office job--as well as growth in waitressing, consistent
with the evidence of Cobble (1992), who documents the feminization of the restaurant industry in
the first half of the 20th century, observing that as the restaurant industry grew (more than tripled
between 1900 and 1930, with over a million people working at restaurants by 1940), "waiting jobs
opened up to women"-- especially "American-born, white, lower-middle-class women," the same
demographic from which AT&T hired its telephone operators.

Depending on how the question is framed, these underlying trends can also be viewed as part of
the story of this paper, and any additional controls unnecessary--and perhaps even a detriment,
insofar as they obscure these trends. In studying how future cohorts of young women adjusted to
automation, we do not necessarily need to know whether growth in employment in other occupations
was causal: we are primarily interested in understanding whether and where young women found
work after telephone operation was automated, which is ultimately a descriptive question. In the
body of the paper, we nevertheless control for these underlying trends so as to isolate changes in
employment that are more closely related to cutovers themselves.




                                                 60
Table F.1: Changes in work, education, marriage, and fertility patterns around cutovers

                        Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                           Fraction of the group that is:
                            Tel. oper.    Working   In school Married           Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.006***     -0.043***       0.029***    -0.003        -0.000
                             (0.001)       (0.009)         (0.008)   (0.002)       (0.001)
           N                  11652         11652          11652      11652         11652
           R2                  0.54          0.80           0.74       0.79          0.68
           Cities             2913           2913           2913       2913          2913
           Cut over            261            261            261        261          261
           Y Mean              0.01          0.30           0.53       0.09          0.03

                       Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                           Fraction of the group that is:
                            Tel. oper.    Working In school Married            Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.006***       -0.004        0.005**     -0.003       0.002
                             (0.001)       (0.006)        (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.003)
           N                  11656        11656          11656      11656         11656
           R2                  0.50         0.81           0.79       0.83          0.79
           Cities             2914          2914           2914       2914         2914
           Cut over            261           261            261        261          261
           Y Mean              0.01         0.48           0.11       0.36          0.19

                       Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                           Fraction of the group that is:
                            Tel. oper.    Working In school Married            Has children
           Post-cutover     -0.003***       0.002          0.001      0.002        0.004
                             (0.000)       (0.005)        (0.001)    (0.005)      (0.004)
           N                  11656        11656          11656      11656         11656
           R2                  0.42         0.77           0.66       0.79          0.77
           Cities             2914          2914           2914       2914         2914
           Cut over            261           261            261        261          261
           Y Mean              0.01         0.41           0.02       0.60          0.38


         Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of
         local dial adoption on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in
         successive cohorts who are in the labor force, in school, married, and have children,
         for cities with population 100k in 1920. The left-most column provides the effect
         of cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the
         telephone industry, as a reference point. All regressions include city and year
         fixed effects only. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
         respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                     61
  Table F.2: Changes in employment shares in select occupations around cutovers

                                Panel A: White, American-born women ages 16 to 18
                                Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Post-cutover -0.013***      0.001***       -0.006         0.001       0.004        0.001      0.015***
               (0.003)        (0.000)      (0.004)        (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.004)
 N                11613        11613        11613         11613        11613        11613        11613
 R2                0.45         0.36         0.57          0.62         0.50         0.39         0.56
 Cities            2913         2913        2913           2913        2913         2913          2913
 Cut over          261           261         261            261         261          261          261
 Y Mean            0.03         0.00         0.08          0.04         0.11         0.01         0.05

                                Panel B: White, American-born women ages 19 to 22
                                Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Post-cutover -0.011***      0.002***       -0.002         0.002      0.005**     -0.002***      0.003
               (0.001)        (0.000)      (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)
 N                11642        11642        11642         11642        11642        11642        11642
 R2                0.49         0.53         0.74          0.73         0.57         0.65         0.72
 Cities            2914         2914        2914           2914        2914         2914          2914
 Cut over          261           261         261            261         261          261          261
 Y Mean            0.03         0.00         0.14          0.05         0.10         0.01         0.04

                                Panel C: White, American-born women ages 23 to 25
                                Conditional on working, fraction employed as or in
                Tel. oper. Off. mach. Typist/secr. Office clerk Sales clerk Beautician Restaurant
 Post-cutover -0.006***      0.002***       0.003          0.003     0.006***       -0.002      0.004*
               (0.001)        (0.000)      (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)
 N                11633        11633        11633         11633        11633        11633        11633
 R2                0.39         0.51         0.71          0.66         0.49         0.64         0.69
 Cities            2914         2914        2914           2914        2914         2914          2914
 Cut over          261           261         261            261         261          261          261
 Y Mean            0.02         0.00         0.13          0.05         0.09         0.01         0.04


Notes: Tables present difference-in-difference estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption
on young, white, American-born women's employment shares in select occupations, across successive
cohorts, for cities with population 100k in 1920. The left-most column provides the effect of
cutovers on the fraction of these women who were telephone operators in the telephone industry, as a
reference point. The other occupations across columns are: (i) office machine operators, (ii) typists,
stenographers, and secretaries, (iii) other office clerks, (iv) sales clerks, (v) beauty parlor workers, and
(vi) restaurant workers. All regressions include city and year fixed effects only. *, **, *** represent
significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                     62
F.2    Potential mechanisms to explain adjustment

To better understand the mechanisms behind our results, we explore additional cuts of the data on
differential Great Depression severity and by measures of local economic dynamism.


Local economic dynamism

Our second focus is economic dynamism. "Business dynamism" is typically defined in terms of firm
entry and worker flows (e.g., the fraction of employment at given point in time from firms founded,
or the fraction of workers who have changed jobs, in the last t years), motivated by the idea that
a dynamic economy will generate a steady churn of workers and firms. Although no such data are
available for the period we study, we can consider a number of alternatives.

Since our focus is cities, we begin with measures of local industrial diversity, inspired by the Jacobs
(1970) thesis which has since been incorporated into the urban economics and economic growth
literature (Lucas Jr. 1988, Glaeser et al. 1992). Specifically, we compute, for each city and year,
a Herfindahl index of employment concentration across (i) occupations and (ii) industries (based
on coded occupations/industries in the IPUMS data). We do so for all adult workers--although
in unreported results we have also done so specifically for women and found similar patterns.
We then bin cities into quartiles of the distribution of occupation or employment concentration
in 1910 (the pre-period), and interpret unconcentrated and concentrated cities as more and less
economically dynamic, respectively. Figure F.1 presents estimated effects of cutovers on the fraction
of young, white, American-born women who are working, for cities in the bottom and top quartiles
of pre-period employment concentration. We do not find any discernable difference between these
categories of dynamism in the effect of cutovers on employment.




                                                  63
Figure F.1: Changes in employment of young, white, American-born women around cutovers
                (diff-in-diff, by age, 16-25), by measures of local dynamism

          Based on: 1910 Occupation HHI                          Based on: 1910 Industry HHI
          Bottom quartile (unconcentrated)                      Bottom quartile (unconcentrated)
           w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                         w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




           Based on: 1910 Occupation HHI                          Based on: 1910 Industry HHI
             Top quartile (concentrated)                           Top quartile (concentrated)
            w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                         w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




     Notes: Figure shows difference-in-differences estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adop-
     tion on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are work-
     ing, for cities with population 100k in 1920. Sample restricted to cities in the given quartile of
     the given dynamism measure (occupational or industrial employment concentration in 1910, in
     the left and right panels, respectively). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed
     from SEs clustered at the city level.




                                                     64
Labor market tightness, vis-`
                            a-vis Great Depression severity

We investigate heterogeneity across cities which were more or less severely exposed to the Great
Depression in the 1930s. Although a natural first instinct might be to take advantage of the time
dimension of our cutover panel variation, and explore heterogeneity across cities which were cut
over to dial in 1929-1933 versus in other years, or in the 1920s versus in the 1930s, these compar-
isons present several challenges: (i) cutover timing correlates strongly with city size, potentially
confounding the Great Depression interaction; (ii) the comparison abstracts away from consider-
able variation in depression severity across the country; (iii) even as is, our tests are underpowered
(especially when we want to compare cities automated in the 1929-1933 period against others);
and (iv) it is unclear whether to treat the 1930 census data as being pre- or mid-depression, which
began in late 1929 but did not reach peak intensity until 1932-1933.

Instead of temporal variation, we exploit variation across space in Great Depression severity, using
the Fishback et al. (2005) data on the county per-capita retail sales contractions from 1929 to
1933, assigning county-level values to each city in a given county (and averaging across counties
where necessary). We partition our sampled cities into two groups--above- versus below-median
depression severity--and estimate the effects of cutovers on young women's employment for each.
These effects will thus represent average effects in cities with weaker versus stronger labor demand
in the 1930s, independent of precisely when each city experienced its first cutover. The results are
presented by age in Figure F.2 and pooled across ages in Table F.3.

This evidence suggests a potential interaction of automation with recessions: in counties with more
severe contractions in retail spending, cutovers were followed by a detectable decline in employment
of young, white, American-born women, particularly those above school age, while in less affected
counties, cutovers instead coincided with net employment growth. Without more refined analysis
relating cutovers to not only the location but also the timing of aggregate demand shocks (for which
our data are not well suited), we cannot assert confidently that the effects of automation depend
on aggregate demand. But this is a natural next question for research on the labor market effects
of automation, which we would encourage others to pursue.




                                                 65
Figure F.2: Changes in employment of young, white, American-born women around cutovers
                 (diff-in-diff, by age, 16-25), by Great Depression severity

             Above median (more severe)                            Below median (less severe)
            w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls                         w/ Ln(City pop.) x Year Ctrls




    Notes: Figure shows difference-in-differences estimates, by age, of the effects of local dial adoption
    on the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive cohorts who are working, for
    cities with population 100k in 1920. Great Depression (GD) severity is measured as the county
    change in retail sales per capita from 1929 to 1933 (peak to trough), using data from Fishback
    et al. (2005). Sample restricted to cities with above- versus below-median GD exposure. Error
    bars represent 95% confidence intervals, computed from SEs clustered at the city level.



     Table F.3: Effects on employment, by age and local severity of Great Depression
                                    16-18                 19-22                  23-25
                                More      Less        More      Less         More      Less
               Post-cutover     -0.001     0.007    -0.014***     0.009     -0.011**    0.009
                               (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.006)
               N                17640     17284       23512       23052      17636      17288
               R2                0.80      0.83        0.68        0.73       0.65       0.72
               Cities           4410       4321        5878        5763      4409        4322
               Cut over          332       450          442        600        332        449
               Y Mean            0.27      0.32        0.45        0.50       0.38       0.43
            Notes: Table presents results from a DID regression estimating the changes around
            dial cutovers in the fraction of young, white, American-born women in successive
            cohorts who are working. Great Depression (GD) severity is measured as the
            county change in retail sales per capita from 1929 to 1933 (peak to trough), using
            data from Fishback et al. (2005). The table splits cities in our sample into above-
            and below-median GD exposure. All regressions include city and year fixed effects,
            and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
            and 0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                      66
F.3    General equilibrium effects

Although most of the paper focuses on the effects of cutovers on young, white, American-born
women, it is also possible that the effects spilled over onto other populations, especially via labor
market competition. In the following tables we explore changes in local employment of other
demographic groups, specifically focusing on the two occupations which appear to have absorbed
future cohorts of young, white, American-born women: (i) typists, stenographers, and secretaries
(Table F.4), and (ii) waitressing (Table F.5). The table explores changes in the number of adults
(of all ages) working in a given occupation around cutovers, and the fraction of employment each
occupation represents for different populations (by sex, race, and birthplace). We do not generally
find widespread evidence of spillovers, though Table F.5 includes modest evidence that the growth
in the fraction of white, American-born women in restaurant work may have come at the expense
of employment of black women (final column, significant at the 10% level).

Table F.4: Total employment + fraction of assorted subpopulations who are typists/stenographers
                     Log # of       Pct. of white, American         Pct. of white, foreign   Pct. of non-white, American
                 all adults (16+)     Men           Women            Men           Women          Men          Women
  Post-cutover       0.047*           -0.000        0.002            0.000         0.001         -0.000        0.001
                    (0.027)          (0.000)       (0.002)          (0.000)       (0.002)       (0.000)       (0.001)
  Constant         -5.307***          0.001       -0.098***        -0.003***     -0.129***       -0.000       0.015*
                    (0.330)          (0.001)       (0.022)          (0.001)       (0.019)       (0.001)       (0.008)
  N                  11660           11650         11646            11514          10551         9233          8637
  R2                  0.94            0.65          0.88             0.37           0.66         0.36          0.60
  Cities             2915             2915          2914            2884            2805         2326          2299
  Cut over            261              261          261              260            256           232           233

   Notes: Table presents results from a DID regression estimating the changes around dial cutovers in the (log)
   number of adults in a city who are typists/stenographers/secretaries, and the fraction of different subpopula-
   tions who are the same (binning the population by race, place of birth, and sex). All regressions include city
   and year fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and
   0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.

 Table F.5: Total employment + fraction of assorted subpopulations who are waiters/waitresses
                     Log # of       Pct. of white, American         Pct. of white, foreign   Pct. of non-white, American
                 all adults (16+)     Men           Women            Men           Women          Men          Women
  Post-cutover       0.010            -0.000       0.003**           -0.000        0.001         -0.002       -0.004*
                    (0.038)          (0.000)       (0.001)          (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.002)
  Constant         -5.039***          -0.001      -0.037***          -0.007        -0.014        -0.020        0.019
                    (0.346)          (0.003)       (0.012)          (0.005)       (0.015)       (0.040)       (0.019)
  N                  11660           11650         11646            11514          10551         9233          8637
  R2                  0.89            0.63          0.83             0.66           0.50         0.74          0.61
  Cities             2915             2915          2914            2884            2805         2326          2299
  Cut over            261              261          261              260            256           232           233

   Notes: Table presents results from a DID regression estimating the changes around dial cutovers in the (log)
   number of adults in a city who are restaurant or food service workers, and the fraction of different subpopula-
   tions who are the same (binning the population by race, place of birth, and sex). All regressions include city
   and year fixed effects, and log city size x year controls. *, **, *** represent significance at the 0.1, 0.05, and
   0.01 levels, respectively. SEs clustered by city in parentheses.




                                                              67
