                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW WOULD MEDICARE FOR ALL AFFECT HEALTH SYSTEM CAPACITY?
                 EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE FOR SOME

                                         Jeffrey Clemens
                                        Joshua D. Gottlieb
                                          Jeffrey Hicks

                                       Working Paper 28062
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28062


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




This manuscript was prepared for Tax Policy and the Economy volume 35 (forthcoming 2021).
Clemens and Gottlieb are grateful to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research and the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for their hospitality while working on this paper.
Clemens and Gottlieb received support from the National Institute on Aging of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number P30AG012810 to the NBER. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Gottlieb also acknowledges
the hospitality of the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance and support from SSHRC. We
are grateful to Paul Beaudry, Michael Bohm, Nicole Fortin, David Green, Thomas Lemieux,
Robert Moffitt (the editor), Craig Riddell, Dan Sacks, Hugh Shiplett, Munir Squires, our
discussants Adam Shapiro and Ashley Swanson, and audiences at the University of Texas, AEA,
Rome Junior Conference on Applied Microeconomics, Junior(ish) Health Economics Summit,
IZA/SOLE, NTA, Tax Policy and the Economy, and UBC for valuable comments on an earlier
version of this paper, and to Hao Li for research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Jeffrey Hicks. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Would Medicare for All Affect Health System Capacity? Evidence from Medicare for
Some
Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Jeffrey Hicks
NBER Working Paper No. 28062
November 2020
JEL No. H51,I11,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

Proposals to create a national health care plan such as "Medicare for All" rely heavily on reducing
the prices that insurers pay for health care. These changes affect physicians' short-run incentives
for care provision and may also change health care providers' incentives to invest in capacity,
thereby influencing the availability of care in the long term. We provide evidence on these
responses using a major Medicare payment change combined with survey data on physicians'
time use. We find evidence that physicians increase their time spent on capacity building when
remuneration increases, and that they are subsequently more willing to accept new patients---
especially those who may be the residual claimants on marginal capacity. These forces imply that
short-run supply curves likely differ from long-run supply curves. Policymakers need to account
for how major changes to payment incentives would influence the investments that determine
health system capacity.

Jeffrey Clemens                                  Jeffrey Hicks
Department of Economics                          Vancouver School of Economics
University of California, San Diego              University of British Columbia
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                          6000 Iona Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093                               Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
and NBER                                         Canada
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu                             jeffrey.hicks@ubc.ca

Joshua D. Gottlieb
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1307 E. 60th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgottlieb@uchicago.edu
   Investments in a health system's capacity determine the amount of care it can provide.
Countries and regions that have invested in more physicians and more hospital beds provide
more care, as well as more intensive treatments, to their residents (Fisher et al., 2000).
While this marginal care may not always be efficient, the Covid-19 pandemic reveals some
important benefits from having these investments in place, even if high capacity is excessive
under normal conditions (Fisher et al., 2003). To have capacity in place when it is needed, the
health system's incentives must be conducive to forward-looking investments during ordinary
times. So as policymakers consider proposals such as "Medicare for All," it is critical for
them to consider what incentives such systems would create for these investments. We take
up precisely this question.
   At prevailing private-sector prices, government insurance for all 330 million Americans
would likely be unaffordable. To achieve affordability, national health insurance proposals
like Medicare for All have thus assumed significant reductions in payment rates to health
care providers (Chown et al., 2019). Blahous (2018) estimates that provider payments would
fall by 40 percent, or $384 billion per year, under the version of Medicare for All proposed by
Bernie Sanders. Schulman and Milstein (2019) suggest that such cuts would bring payment
rates below hospitals' current costs, requiring them to make major operational changes to
reduce their costs and remain solvent.
   Lowering payments would undoubtedly save money in the short term. But what would
it do to physicians' incentives to invest for the long term? Knowing they face lower pay-
ment rates, would they reduce investments in their practices, and hence in the health sys-
tem's capacity? Existing evidence from the hospital and pharmaceutical industries suggests
that payment rules influence investments in physical capital and innovation (Acemoglu and
Finkelstein, 2008; Finkelstein, 2004; Acemoglu and Linn, 2004). But the health sector is
intensive in labor and human capital. Physicians' investments in their human capital and
entrepreneurial capital may be as consequential as traditional investments for how the mar-


                                              2
ket evolves. We study how a change in the level of government payments to physicians--such
as that which Medicare for All would entail--influences these critical investment outcomes.
    Existing research on physicians' responses to payment rates focuses on the number of
services they provide (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014) and the time they spend treating patients.
An extensive, controversial literature argues for backward-bending labor supply--that when
payment rates are cut, the supply of physician care expands. More recent work tends to find
standard upward-sloping responses.1
    We argue that both of these views miss an important element of physicians' decisions:
how much to invest in future productivity. As the literature on human capital theory has long
understood (Becker, 1962; Ben-Porath, 1967; Mincer, 1974a,b), overall work effort includes
both revenue-generating activities and investments in human capital, which influence future
productivity. These activities are just as important among physicians as elsewhere in the
economy, and provide a natural channel by which government policy can influence the long-
run supply of medical treatments.
    We exploit time use data that divide physicians' overall working time into patient care
hours, which generate revenues, and time spent on other medical activities. These other
activities include the recruitment of new patients, investments in physicians' professional
networks, and investments in continuing education, such as studying to maintain board
certification. Some of these investments augment the physician's human capital while others
build managerial capacity. Both set the stage for increases in care provision over longer
time horizons and increase the physician's future earnings potential. We examine how such


   1
     The classic cites on physician income effects include Rice and Labelle (1989), Rice (1983; 1984), Gruber
and Owings (1996), Yip (1998), and Jacobson et al. (2013). McGuire and Pauly (1991) provide the canonical
model and McGuire (2000) and Chandra et al. (2011) review this literature. The physician literature has
also found evidence of standard upward-sloping labor supply, especially in more recent work (Gruber, Kim
and Mayzlina, 1999; Hadley and Reschovsky, 2006; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Alexander, 2015; Johnson
and Rehavi, 2016; Brekke, Holm°   as, Monstad and Straume, 2017; Foo, Lee and Fong, 2017). Nevertheless,
the traditional view, that physicians have backward-bending labor supply and offset payment cuts with
increased volume, is embedded in policymaking (Codespote et al., 1998).

                                                     3
investments and labor supply vary over a physician's career and in response to government-
induced price shocks.
    The Medicare policy shock we employ changed the price of physicians' output--that is,
the care they provide--differentially across specialties. We find that a substantial reduction
in reimbursements led physicians in adversely affected specialties to reduce their investment
activities. They both allocate fewer hours to non-reimbursable activities and become less
willing to accept new patients.
    Notably, the decline in physicians' willingness to accept new patients is larger for Medicaid
patients than for Medicare patients. This suggests that changes in capacity can significantly
impact patients whose own payments may not change. At baseline, Medicaid is a less attrac-
tive payor than Medicare: it offers physicians lower rates, and requires more cumbersome
paperwork (Gottlieb et al., 2018), so physicians are less likely to treat Medicaid beneficiaries
(Dunn et al., 2020). If physicians prefer to treat patients with Medicare or private insurance,
Medicaid patients may be the residual claimants on excess capacity. Even when an expan-
sion is driven by Medicare rates, this could relax otherwise-binding capacity constraints and
increase access to care for Medicaid patients.
    Our results are consistent and complementary with existing evidence on investments in
physical capacity. The literature finds that both hospitals' and physicians' capital invest-
ments respond positively to payment rates, consistent with standard profit maximization.
Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008), for instance, find that hospitals increase capital intensity
and invest in new technologies when it is profitable to do so. In the physician context,
Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) find that the overall level of Medicare payments influences
physicians' treatment intensity and technology choices.2 In this paper, we find the same for

    2
     Additional related work has considered the effects of reimbursements and other payments on the types
of patients physicians choose to treat (Chen, 2014; Garthwaite, 2012; Baker and Royalty, 2000), the drugs
they choose to prescribe (Carey et al., 2015), the number of staff members they hire (Buchmueller et al.,
2016), on the location of their practices, in particular at early stages of their careers (Leganza et al., 2020),
and whether they enter private practice and/or sub-specialize (Chen et al., 2018).

                                                       4
physicians' investments in their careers. If these investments increase provider capacity in
the future, overall health care supply responses can be very different in the short-run and
long-run. Policy decisions based exclusively on the short-run responses would miss a crucial
part of their impacts.
    Physician behavior has broad implications for government spending and overall eco-
nomic performance. In 2016, the United States spent $725 billion, or 3.5 percent of GDP,
on physician care and similar medical services alone.3 Recurrent concerns about physician
shortages (Cooper et al., 2002; Staiger et al., 2009; Petterson et al., 2012) highlight the need
to understand doctors' investments. Our analysis suggests that some aspects of physicians'
investments in their careers may be quite responsive to government payment policies. While
we are able to examine some important margins, others remain under-explored. More re-
search is needed to understand how physicians choose their specialties, their locations, the
structure of their practices, and the form of their human capital investments.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 1 presents a conceptual
framework for analyzing how reimbursements might shape the scale of physicians' practices.
Section 2 describes the data we analyze, including our measures of on-the-job investments
and labor supply. Section 3 demonstrates that the life cycle behavior of these measures is
consistent with standard human capital theory. Section 4 introduces the Medicare policy
change we analyze and describes our empirical strategy for identifying how investments
and labor supply respond to pricing changes. Section 5 presents the results and section 6
concludes.

   While market size is a different concept from payment levels, an increase in market size has a similar
effect: it can increase the profitability of fixed investments. An important related literature studies this sort
of shock, often using increases in insurance coverage. Finkelstein (2007) finds that hospitals' investments and
even entry decisions depend on the number of patients in an area with generous insurance coverage. Finkel-
stein (2004) finds that investments in new vaccines respond to expected profitability of those investments.
Acemoglu and Linn (2004), and a substantial subsequent literature, finds a similar result for pharmaceuticals.
Clemens and Rogers (2020) find similar effects for prosthetic limbs.
    3
      This comes from the "Physician and Clinical Services" component of the 2018 National Health Expen-
diture Data (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2019).

                                                       5
1     A Conceptual Framework Connecting Reimburse-
      ment Rates to Investments in Physicians' Practices

    Our goal is to analyze how investments in physicians' practices respond to reimburse-
ment rates. Outcomes of potential interest include a practice's capacity and the physician's
willingness to see new patients in the future. These practice-level outcomes in aggregate de-
termine market-wide capacity. We start by outlining a simple model of physician production
and investment that provides a framework for interpreting the subsequent empirical analysis.


1.1    Model with Investments in Physical Capital

    Consider an economy with two types of patients: H and L. Group H has generous
insurance that pays a high reimbursement rate, rH , such as Medicare or private insurance.
Group L has a lower-paying insurance with reimbursement of rL < rH , such as Medicaid.
We abstract from negotiations over these rates and assume they are set administratively.
    Total demand for health care includes QH patients from group H and QL patients from
group L. Since group H offers a higher reimbursement rate, physicians compete with one
another for patients in this group. They compete by investing in quality, which comes from
their investments in productive capacity (Garthwaite et al., 2020). Capacity unused on
high-paying patients can then be used for low-paying patients, and we assume that there are
always enough such patients to consume any care that physicians offer them. We abstract
away from choices of how much care to provide for each patient.
    The investments we have in mind may be investments of time, as in canonical human
capital models, or financial investments in physical capital. In this section, we develop key
intuitions by analyzing a one period model with investments in physical capital. In contrast
with time investments, for which costs depend on time spent on other workplace activities,
the cost of investments in physical capital are denominated in dollars. This yields intuitive


                                             6
analytical results. In section 1.2, we incorporate time investments that may pay off across
multiple time periods.
   Physician j chooses a dollar-denominated investment in her practice's productive capac-
ity, ij , and the price of investment is normalized to one. The total variable cost of supplying
q = qH + qL units of care is (ij )C (qH + qL ) where (i) is a measure of productivity that
physicians can improve through investments. We assume that C is positive and convex, while
(i) > 0 is decreasing and convex--more investment reduces marginal costs but increasing
dollars of investment have decreasing effectiveness at reducing these costs. Finally, suppose
that a physician investing ij in a market in which other physicians invest i-j obtains market
share s(ij , i-j ) of the QH high-paying patients. So the number of group H patients available
                                                          s(ij , i-j )       2 s(ij , i-j )
to this physician is q   ¯H = s(ij , i-j )QH . Presumably              > 0,                 < 0, and
                                                            ij                   i2 j
s(ij , i-j )
             < 0. The physician must also decide on qL , the number of low-paying patients to
   i-j
serve. The physician's profit is:


                        (i, qH , qL ) = qH rH + qL rL - i - (i)C (qH + qL ),                    (1)


and her decisions can be described by maximizing this equation subject to the constraints:


                                           0  qH  q
                                                  ¯H

                                           0  qL

                                           0  i.                                                (2)


   This problem has three different cases, depending on the number of high-paying patients
available, which determines which constraints in (2) bind. In all cases, the physician can
directly choose any nonnegative qL , since we assume demand for care among group L patients
is unsatiated. The cases differ in how many group H patients are available, relative to the


                                                   7
number the physician would like to treat based on the reimbursement rate rH and cost curve.
Denote by q
          ~(i) this "ideal" number, which is defined as the point where rH = (i)C (~
                                                                                   q ). The
first two cases are defined by the relationship between q
                                                        ~(i) and the number of group H
patients available, q
                    ¯H .


Case A

   The first case is when there are many group H patients available, i.e. q
                                                                          ~(i) < q
                                                                                 ¯H . In this
case, the following first-order conditions describe the maximum of (1):


                                     rH                = (i )C (qH
                                                                      
                                                                   + qL ).                     (3)
                           MR of high-paying patient        MC of extra patient

                                                   
                                                  qL =0                                        (4)

                                              1        =       - (i )C (qH
                                                                              
                                                                           + qL )              (5)
                                            price of       cost savings on existing patients
                                          investment             (recall that  (i) < 0)



In these first-order conditions, i                                                         
                                  j reflects the physician's optimal investment decision, qL

                                                                          
reflects the physician's chosen number of group L patients to treat, and qH is the number of
group H patients to treat. Note that, as long as rL < rH , and the physician can choose how
many group H patients to treat, she will not treat any group L patients; the marginal cost
is the same and group L patients pay less. So, in this model, an unconstrained physician
                  
will always have qL = 0.
   Figure 1 shows this case. The solid vertical line at q
                                                        ¯H indicates the number of group
H patients available to the physician for a given level of investment (i     
                                                                        j , i-j ). The dashed

                
orange line at qH shows the number of group H patients that the physician chooses to treat.
               
In this case, qH =q
                  ~(i); i.e., the physician treats up to the point where the marginal cost
curve C is equal to the high reimbursement rate, rH .



                                                           8
Case B

   A second case arises when the market has fewer high-paying patients, but still enough to
crowd out all of the low-paying patients. This is illustrated in Figure 2. Now the physician
can't find enough group H patients to satisfy equation (3). So she is at a corner solution for
both group L patients--of whom she won't treat any--and group H patients, of whom she
will treat as many as she can find, given her investment level. We can express this condition
as q       ¯H  q
   ~ (i) < q   ~(i), where q
                           ~ (i) is defined by rL = (i)C (~
                                                          q ) and is the point below which
she would begin treating some group L patients.
   Recall that the number of high-paying patients available depends on the physician's
investment decision through q
                            ¯H = s(ij , i-j )QH . Using this formula in place of qH in equation
(1), the optimality conditions are:


                       
          qH = q¯
                H = s(ij , i-j )QH                                                                               (6)
           
          qL =0                                                                                                  (7)

           1=     s (i                                
                      j , i-j )QH [rH -  (i )C (qH + qL )]               -        (i )C (qH
                                                                                               
                                                                                            + qL )               (8)
                Net profit of group H patients attracted by investment       cost savings on existing patients
                                                                                   (recall that  (i) < 0)



We assume throughout that each physician is small relative to the market, so we can assume
away strategic interactions. Thus physician j takes other physicians' investment decisions
i-j as given. The first order condition for investment now equates the cost of investment

(normalized to 1) with two gains: the net gain from attracting additional high-paying patients
and the reduction in unit costs on existing patients.
   In Figure 2, the dashed line at q
                                   ~ indicates the number of group H patients the doctor
would like to treat--that is the point where the reimbursement rate equals marginal costs.
Since there are fewer high-paying patients available than she would like to treat, she practices
                              
at the corner solution where qH  ¯H = s(i
                                =q       j , i-j )QH and she treats all available group H



                                                        9
patients. She could increase market share by increasing investment in order to reach q
                                                                                     ~, and
conceivably even move to Case A, but does not because the extra profits from increasing
productivity and market share are lower than the cost of investment.


Case C

   The final case may be the most interesting. When q
                                                    ¯H < q
                                                         ~ , the physician treats all
available group H patients and also some from group L. In this case, the relevant first-order
conditions are those for her two choice variables, i and qL :


                          
             qH = q¯
                   H = s(ij , i-j )QH                                                                                  (9)

        rL         = (i )C (s(i               
                               j , i-j )QH + qL ) .                                                                   (10)
   MR of group L            MC of extra patient
     patients

              1=       s (i                                
                           j , i-j )QH [rH -  (i )C (qH + qL )]               -        (i )C (qH
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                 + qL )               (11)
                     Net profit of group H patients attracted by investment       cost savings on existing patients
                                                                                        (recall that  (i) < 0)


     
Now qL is an interior solution and reflects the physician's chosen number of group L patients
to treat, where the reimbursement rL rate equates to the marginal cost of care. As before,
the first order condition for investment equates the cost of investment (normalized to 1) with
two gains, the first from attracting more high-paying patients and the second from reductions
in unit costs. Appendix A.1. establishes high-level conditions on functional forms such that
these first-order conditions yield a unique allocation.
   Figure 3 illustrates this case. With q
                                        ¯H below q
                                                 ~ , the physician treats some group L
patients. The physician will treat all q
                                       ¯H high-paying patients available, plus the optimal
                             
number of group L patients, qL .
   All three cases are likely to be relevant in some empirical contexts; many physicians don't
treat Medicaid patients while others do (Dunn et al., 2020), and some appear to be at interior


                                                         10
solutions while others are at corners (Brekke et al., 2017; McKnight, 2007). Because we want
to understand the impact of investment on Medicaid patients--and since the empirical work
will suggest that this is the relevant case--we focus on Case C.


Effects of Reimbursement Rate Changes and Demand Shocks

   Focusing on Case C, we now consider the key comparative statics of changes in reim-
bursement rates. An increase in the reimbursement rates for high-paying patients heightens
each physician's desire to compete for a larger share of the high-paying market. Panel A
of Figure 4 illustrates this incentive. Increasing the number of high-rate clients available
to the physician, from qH to qH , directly increases revenue by (qH - qH )(rH - rL ). This
extra revenue accrues as the physician swaps low-rate clients for high-rate clients. When
rH increases to rH , this incentive to acquire high-rate patients rises by (qH - qH )(rH - rH ),
as illustrated by the blue rectangle. It follows that starting from an equilibrium with rH ,
raising the rate to rH will cause physician j to invest more (holding constant, for now, other
physicians' responses).
   In addition to increasing physician j 's market share, the higher level of investment lowers
her marginal cost. The shaded green area between the two marginal cost curves represents
the gains from reduced costs of treating patients. Due to reductions in marginal costs,
physicians may be willing to serve more low-paying patients. This is illustrated by the new
intersection between marginal cost and rL , where the total number of patients is now qH + qL .
The net impact on group L patients from any one physician is unclear: some of them are
displaced by group H patients, while others benefit from the overall expansion of supply.
   We now turn to what happens at the level of the market as a whole. If physicians'
practices are symmetric, the increase in the reimbursement rate will lead to an increase in
overall productive capacity (due to reductions in unit costs for all physicians), but no actual
changes in the number of high-paying patients each physician serves. When all physicians


                                              11
are in Case C, they are treating as many group H patients as they can. Since all group H
patients were already being treated, and there is no scope to increase the aggregate number
of group H patients, all of the growth of any one physician's group H patients is a business
stealing effect. In this setting, the higher investment is guaranteed to translate to more health
care provided to low-paying patients. Low-paying patients are the residual claimants on the
additional productive capacity generated by high-paying sources of insurance coverage.
   The size and distribution of the business stealing effect is less obvious. Panel B of Figure
4 shows what happens to physician j when her competitors increase investment, as they
are likely to do in a response to an increase in rH . If physician j does not also invest, she
will lose at least some of her group H revenue. This is illustrated by the combination of the
larger green rectangle to the left and the red area between rH and rH . Maintaining her initial
market share will thus require physician j to invest, which increases her capacity for group
L patients. The net effect depends on the exact shape of the market share function s(·, ·)
and the distribution of responses across her competitors. So long as all group H patients
were being treated at baseline, however, the supply of care to group L patients will rise
unambiguously following an increase in the high-paying patients' reimbursement rate.
   We next consider how the market responds to an influx of demand, perhaps due to a
pandemic. A pandemic results in an increase in the number of individuals in need of care.
We model the pandemic as a multiplier,  > 1, on the number of individuals desiring care.
Now the physician can treat q
                            ¯H high-paying patients, as illustrated in Figure 5. Physicians
will begin, as before, by serving as many high-paying patients as they can. The pandemic
will thus tend to reduce care access for low-paying patients. Note that a health system that
had high levels of capacity, due to high reimbursements for high-paying patients, will be
better positioned to weather the pandemic while maintaining more supply for low-paying
patients.




                                               12
1.2    Model with Time-Intensive Investments in Human Capital

   We next analyze the effects of reimbursement rates on investments that require the physi-
cian's time. Time investments are central in canonical models of human capital accumulation.
They also map quite directly into one of our primary outcomes of empirical interest. We
generalize physicians' welfare to:


                      j    j     j    j                      1    1
            U ({ (i, qH , qL ), qH , qL }j =1,2 , i) =  (i, qH , qL ) + v (i +  (i)(ql1 + qh
                                                                                           1
                                                                                             ))
                                                             2    2
                                                    +   (i, qH , qL ) + v ( (i)(ql2 + qh
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         )) .     (12)


   Equation (12) modifies equation (1) in two key ways. First, the first period cost function
includes the sum of investment time i and productivity-adjusted treatment time ( (i)(ql1 + qh
                                                                                            1
                                                                                              )).
Second, equation (12) includes a second time period during which first period investments
continue to pay off through productivity in treating patients,  (i).
   In Appendix A, we derive the conditions describing the physician's optimal choice of
investment time and time spent treating low-paying patients. We continue to focus on
Case C from above, defined as before to involve an interior solution with non-zero time
spent treating low paying patients. The key intuitions from the simpler model of dollar-
denominated investments carry through.
   As in the previous section, increases in the reimbursement for treating high-paying pa-
tients result in increases in investment. This is driven, once again, by the increased return to
obtaining a larger share of the high-paying patient pool. In the extended model, this benefit
materializes in both the first and second time periods. Note that this return, which arises
from competition for high-paying patients, breaks the classic Ben-Porath (1967) result that
wages don't affect the life cycle investment pattern. This is because the opportunity cost of
investment time comes from treating a low-paying patient, while the return comes from the



                                                     13
competition for high-paying patients.
    As before, an increase in investment time reduces marginal costs, which will tend to
increase physicians' willingness to serve low-paying patients. With two periods, a rise in H
is more likely to increase qL because the investment response is larger than in a single period
model. This expansion of care to group L is most likely in the second period because the
marginal cost curve of patient care is flatter in period two since no time is lost to investment
(v is convex).


2       Measuring Physicians' On-the-Job Investments and
        Labor Supply

    We use data from the Community Tracking Study (CTS) to study physicians' investment
and labor supply behavior. The CTS measures a variety of characteristics of physicians' prac-
tices and time use, and was conducted over four two-year waves: 1996/97, 1998/99, 2000/01,
and 2004/05. In each wave, the CTS surveyed roughly 12,000 physicians across 60 ran-
domly chosen geographic areas (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999). We use
the restricted-use data, which contain detailed responses to certain questions, plus a linked
identifier that allows us to create a panel of physicians.4 The survey focuses on physicians
whose primary focus is direct patient care; research and federally-employed physicians are
excluded, as are specialties not providing direct patient care. We examine three measures of
investment behavior:
    Non-Patient Hours : Physicians report their weekly total medical hours and the time
spent providing direct patient care. We define non-patient hours as the difference between
total and patient care hours. To clarify the substance of this measure, we present the exact
wording of the questionnaire that is used to elicit time allocation. For total hours, the survey

    4
     Each wave contains a subset of respondents from the previous wave, resulting in an unbalanced panel.
Appendix Table B.2 shows that observable characteristics are balanced across individuals of differing panel
lengths.

                                                    14
asks:

           Thinking of your last complete week of work, approximately how many hours
        did you spend in all medically related activities? Please include all time spent
        in administrative tasks, professional activities and direct patient care. Exclude
        time on call when not actually working.

    For patient care hours, respondents are asked:

           Thinking of your last complete week of work, about how many hours did you
        spend in direct patient care activities? (If necessary, read:) INCLUDE time spent
        on patient record-keeping, patient-related office work, and travel time connected
        with seeing patients. EXCLUDE time spent in training, teaching, or research,
        any hours on-call when not actually working, and travel between home and work
        at the beginning and end of the work day.

    The residual measure of non-patient hours therefore includes training, professional activi-
ties, and only administrative work unrelated to direct patient care.5 This includes obtaining
or maintaining board certification, recruiting patients, building professional relationships,
attending conferences, staying apprised of new treatment procedures, adopting and imple-
menting new physical capital, remaining compliant with evolving medical regulations, hiring
and managing employees, and building overall organizational capacity within one's practice.
Each of these endeavors contribute towards individual human capital and broader practice
capacity over the long run. So we adopt this broad definition of non-patient hours as ongoing
investments throughout the paper.
    Board Certification : Physicians can obtain board certifications in their primary specialty
and sub-specialties, neither of which is legally required to practice medicine. Instead, these
   5
      Research is unlikely to constitute a meaningful component of non-patient hours because the CTS ex-
plicitly excludes doctors focused on research from its samples. The questionnaire wording also excludes from
non-patient hours the time physicians spend on-call but not actually working.

                                                    15
certifications may act as a signal of quality, making the physician more attractive to poten-
tial clients or employers.6 Obtaining board certification entails fees ranging from $1,000 to
$3,000 (Drolet and Tandon, 2017), an initial written and oral exam, re-certifying exams at
intervals of 6­10 years, and other maintenance of certification requirements.7 Given certifi-
cation's voluntary nature, and the associated time and monetary costs, it proxies effectively
for ongoing investments in practice capacity. Appendix Figure B.1 provides evidence that
physicians with board certification have higher earnings than physicians without board cer-
tification.8 This confirms that, at least as a matter of correlation, the continuing education
associated with board certification predicts higher incomes.9
    Willingness to Accept New Patients : Respondents report their willingness to accept new
patients, on a four point integer scale, for each type of patient: Medicare, Medicaid, and
privately insured. We construct a summary index by adding together the response for each
patient type, and rescaling such that it ranges from zero to one. One indicates a complete
willingness to accept new patients of any type, and zero a complete refusal. Building and
maintaining a customer base is one form of ongoing investment physicians often must make
to ensure current and future profitability. As such, a physician's desire to accept new patients
proxies for ongoing investments, and in turn, long-term care supply.10


   6
      In a survey of internists, Lipner et al. (2006) find that a majority of those maintaining certification
report doing so for "positive professional reasons," with a minority reporting that certification is required
by an employer.
    7
      Maintenance of certification (MOC) often entails online training modules in medical knowledge or
activities that are supposed to improve patient quality. For instance, the American Board of Internal
Medicine requires physicians to earn 100 points every five years, by undertaking either online training
modules, or "Quality Improvement/Practice Improvement" activities, each of which typically garners 10­20
points. MOCs became a regular part of certification beginning in the early 2000s.
    8
      This holds both within age groups and when examining surgeons or non-surgeons separately.
    9
      Cassel and Holmboe (2008) provide a history and overview of board certifications. The evidence is mixed
on whether certification affects clinical outcomes, health care costs, or other aspects of care. Lipner et al.
(2013) provides an overview of some of this research, largely correlation-based, and concludes that there are
positive correlations between board certification and knowledge, practice infrastructure, and communication.
Conversely, Gray et al. (2014) and Haynes et al. (2014) find no effect of MOC requirements or re-certification,
respectively, on clinical outcomes.
   10
      Appendix C.2 discusses the details of the original question and how we rescale it.

                                                      16
     In addition to on-the-job investment measures, we examine income-generating patient
care hours, total labor supply, and annual income:
     Patient Care Hours : As described above, patient care hours involve direct face-to-face
time with patients, patient record-keeping and related office work, and travel time connected
with seeing patients. These are the activities that generate revenue for a practice.11
     Total Labor Supply and Income : We measure total labor supply as the time spent on all
medically-related activities. This is the sum of patient care hours and non-patient hours.
Respondents also report their total income net of expenses for the year preceding the survey
wave. So in the 1996/97 survey wave, income is requested for the 1995 calendar year.12
     The restricted-use CTS data provide each respondent's primary specialty at a detailed
level--specifying 126 unique specialties--as opposed to the aggregated categories available
in the public-use version. This allows us to leverage disaggregated variation in Medicare
reimbursement rates across specialties. Similarly, income in the restricted-use data is re-
ported to the nearest $1,000, while the public-use version reports income in $50,000 bins.
Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2 show summary statistics for the variables discussed above,
and for additional variables that describe physicians' practice types.



3        Life Cycle Patterns of Human Capital Investments

     Figure 6 shows cross-sectional life cycle patterns for time-use, willingness to take new
patients, board certification, and annual income. After modest upticks early in physicians'
careers, the investment activities we track decline nearly monotonically with age. This lines
up with theoretical predictions (Ben-Porath, 1967), since the horizons over which investments
    11
      Patient care hours are an imperfect proxy for the supply of medical care. For a given amount of time, a
more efficient doctor can supply more medical care. Thus variation across doctors in treatment hours may
understate variation in medical care supply. Medical care is also vaguely defined. Time spent answering
patients' questions may not constitute medical treatment in the strict sense, but does improve the quality
of service provided.
   12
      The questionnaire phrasing for income is reported in Appendix C.2.

                                                     17
pay off decline with age, and the opportunity cost of time increases when productivity is
high.
   On average, physicians in their late 30s spent just over 11 hours per week on non-patient
hours. This level persists for a number of years until falling to just over 9 hours per week
among those in their late 50s and early 60s. While the gradient is not steep, the pattern is
clear: physicians gradually devote less time to medical activities other than patient care as
they approach retirement. By comparison, patient care hours hit a high mark during the
same age, but do not begin a strong descent until age 60. That non-patient hours decline
earlier than revenue-generating patient hours is consistent with on-the-job investments being
crowded-out when the time horizon for investments to payoff is shorter.
   The willingness to take new patients also decreases nearly monotonically with age. Our
measure declines from just under 0.8 for physicians 29­39 years old to 0.72 for doctors 65 or
older. Because most physicians report taking "all" or "most" new patients of all insurance
types, the index's range is modest. The decline we observe from the youngest physicians to
the oldest physicians is equivalent to 1 standard deviation of the index. To the extent that
a patient relationship is an ongoing commitment, this signals a desire to decrease practice
activity both in the present and in the future.
   Board certification follows a similar trajectory. Figure 6 Panel D shows that 90 percent
of physicians in their late 30s and early 40s are board certified. The share falls to 80 percent
among those in their early 50s, 70 percent among those in their early 60s, and 60 percent
among older physicians. Maintaining board certification, which maps quite directly into the
time investments contemplated by theory, thus matches the predictions well. That said,
board certification rates have risen over time, which would contribute to the observed age
gradient if younger doctors are leading the trend. Furthermore, a precondition for declining
certification rates in old age is the ability to lose one's certification. However, a segment of the
CTS sample hold lifetime certifications which are exempt from re-certification requirements.


                                                18
For both these reasons, the age profile of board certification should be interpreted with
caution. We discuss robustness of the life cycle profiles in Appendix B.1.
   The returns to investments in physicians' practices and human capital may accrue over a
variety of different time horizons. So it is not clear which age groups should be most sensitive
to the expected returns from these different investment activities. As a signal of quality, for
example, board certification may generate returns by both increasing a physician's capacity
to recruit new patients and improving her bargaining position in negotiations with private
insurers. While improved bargaining position may be valuable through the last years of a
physician's career, the need to recruit new patients may decline in advance of retirement.
The precise timing with which the return to board certification might fall below its costs is
thus unclear and may vary substantially across physicians.
   The remaining panels of Figure 6 show life cycle profiles for total hours, patient care
hours, and income. All three exhibit an inverse U-shape. Total hours peak between age 40
and 50, and then begin a steady decline. Patient care hours peak around age 40, remain
steady until age 60, then trend downwards. Finally, income follows the trajectory of labor
supply. It rises until age 50, then begins to decline. Consistent with a point made early by
Heckman (1976), declines in earnings are driven in no small part by declines in labor supply.
   Age is an imperfect measure of career horizon. To further support our interpretation that
non-patient hours reflect ongoing investments, we leverage the panel component of the CTS
to measure the decline in non-patient hours as physicians approach their year of attrition
from the panel.13 The survey does not explicitly measure retirement, but Appendix Figure
B.2 shows that attrition increases steeply with age, from a base hazard rate of 40­45 percent
for mid-career doctors, to 60 percent for old physicians. The steady increase in attrition
rates with age suggests that attrition from the panel among older physicians is partially


  13
    Only the restricted-use version of the CTS provides physician identifiers, enabling us to exploit the
panel component.

                                                   19
attributable to retirement.
    To quantify the relationship between retirement hazard and investment decisions, we
estimate the following descriptive regression:


       yit = 0 + 2 · (Two Years Before Attritionit ) + 4 · (Four Years Before Attritionit )

         + 8 · (Eight or More Years Before Attritionit )

         +  Surgeoni + a,s Ageit × Surgeoni +             it                                             (13)


The outcome variable yit in equation (13) is non-patient hours, either in levels or as a share
of total hours, for physician i of specialty s(i) in survey wave t. We include a fixed effect
 for whether a physician is classified as a Surgeon or Non-Surgeon based on the CTS
classification, and differential age fixed effects a,s for Surgeons and Non-Surgeons.14 The
estimates of interest are the fixed effects for years-to-attrition. The base group is physicians
in their final period in the sample. So the coefficients ^2, ^ 4 , and ^ 8 estimate the differences
in investment levels for physicians 2, 4, or 8 years prior to attrition, relative to those making
their final appearance. If attrition partly reflects retirement, and investments decline in the
years approaching retirement, then the estimates should be positive, and declining towards
zero as the physician approaches attrition.15
    Figure 7 plots the estimates of how years-to-attrition relate to non-patient hours, both in
levels and as a share of total working hours. Both hours measures decline monotonically as an
  14
      Allowing age fixed effects to vary with specialty assuages concerns that the decrease as physicians
approach retirement is driven by differing retirement patterns and different levels of non-patient hours
between Surgeon and Non-Surgeons.
   15
      The four waves of the CTS took place in 1996/97, 1998/99, 2000/01, and then 2004/05. The gap
between waves 3 and 4 slightly complicates the analysis of behavior in the years leading up to attrition from
the sample, as estimated in equation (13) and plotted in Figure 7. To deal with the gap, we use the structure
of fixed effects shown in equation (13): 2, 4, and  8 years prior to attrition. The first two fixed effects
are in 2-year intervals due to the bi-annual frequency of the CTS. The final fixed effect is for 8 or more
years because the difference between third and final CTS wave was 4 years (2000/01 to 2004/05). To avoid
confounding the interpretation of the fixed effects, we restrict the sample to (i) all individuals observed in
the first wave, and (ii) individuals who initially appeared in the second wave, but drop out of the sample
before the final wave.

                                                     20
individual approaches her final year in the panel. This is consistent with the interpretation
of these non-patient hours as activities that contribute to the physician's long-run earnings
capacity. Some of these activities, like the continuing education required to maintain board
certification, can be described as classic investments in human capital. Others, like time
spent cultivating new patient relationships, may more generally set the stage for continued
work in future periods. We will emphasize these interpretations throughout the rest of the
paper.
     Figure 7 also shows that the decline in investments prior to attrition only holds for
physicians aged 60 or greater. For physicians younger than 45, non-patient hours do not
vary with years to attrition.16 So Figure 7 also suggests that higher attrition rates among
older doctors reflect retirement decisions to a much greater extent than among mid-career
physicians.


4        Empirical Model for Testing Comparative Statics

     Having traced out the basic life-cycle pattern of physicians' investment activities, we
next analyze how these investments respond to changes in their expected returns. We rely
on a large Medicare reimbursement change that took place in 1998 and was not reversed.
In order to reduce payment discrepancies and support primary care, Congress eliminated a
policy that had increased reimbursements per unit of effort for surgical procedures relative to
non-surgical services. This change reduced payments for all procedures by 10.4 percent while
increasing payments for non-procedural services by an average of 5 percent.17 Because this
change was almost simultaneously adopted by many private insurers (Clemens and Gottlieb,


    16
       Appendix Figure B.5 shows a similar pattern for total hours worked and patient care hours. Appendix
Figure B.6 reveals a similar pattern for certification status, while physicians' propensity to take new patients
is flat over the years immediately preceding retirement.
   17
      Clemens and Gottlieb (2017) present a more detailed description of the institutional history and decision-
making behind this payment change. In Appendix Figure B.3, we show how the payment rates per unit of
effort (called "Conversion Factors") evolved for surgical and non-surgical care during this time period.

                                                      21
2017), the effect on the average prices--and hence hourly wages--for surgeons relative to
non-surgeons was substantial.18 Forward-looking physicians would thus have anticipated
a large and persistent change in the returns to practicing in surgery-intensive specialties
relative to other specialties.
    We adapt Clemens and Gottlieb's (2017) approach to analyzing this payment shock
to more fully exploit the resulting variation in payments across physician specialties. The
payment change applies at the level of each individual service -- so an office visit experiences
a price increase, while a cataract surgery would face a price decline. Since many specialties
provide a combination of procedural and non-procedural services, each specialty's overall
price change reflects the share of procedures in its output mix.
    To estimate specialty-level average payment changes, we rely on data from the Physi-
cian/Supplier Procedure Summary (PSPS) file released by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. This file reports state-level aggregate data on Medicare's purchases of
care from physicians and other professional suppliers at the service line level. For each state
and individual medical service, the file reports how many services Medicare purchased and
how much it spent. To estimate the overall percent change in payments by specialty, we
look at each specialty's composition of services as of 1997. We take a weighted average
of the Conversion Factor change, where each specialty's weight depends on the share of
Medicare spending that comes from surgical procedures. Denote this weighted average by
ps(i) .19 These values, reproduced in Table 1, provide a specialty-level payment shock and
hence wage shock for forty-six different specialty groups. We use the specialty-level payment
change to estimate two types of regressions. The first is a dynamic difference-in-differences


  18
     The 1998/99 CTS began in August 1998, well after the policy's announcement and implementation.
  19
     An alternative estimate is provided by Congressional Research Service (1998) in Table 2. They provide
two estimates of the percent change in payments by specialty: one that only incorporates the Conversion
Factor change, and one that also accounts for contemporaneous changes in the weights (Relative Value Units)
assigned to different procedures. Our results are quite similar when using either the Congressional Research
Service (1998) estimates or our own calculations.

                                                    22
specification:


   yit = 98-99 ps(i) × 1t=1998-99 + 00-01 ps(i) × 1t=2000-01 + 04-05 ps(i) × 1t=2004-05

           + i 1i + 98-99 1t=1998-99 + 00-01 1t=2000-01 + 04-05 1t=2004-05 + it .          (14)


The unit of observation for this regression is the physician (i)-by-survey wave (t); in other
words, each observation in this regression is one survey response (N = 31,760 in our baseline
regression). Each physician reports her specialty s(i) and the main regressor of interest
is that specialty's Medicare price change ps(i) interacted with survey wave fixed effects.
Physician fixed effects are denoted by 1i and time fixed effects by 1t for each wave t. By
including physician fixed effects, we use only variation in outcomes within a physician. The
omitted time category is the 1996/97 survey wave prior to the policy change; as this is the
only wave of the CTS prior to the policy change, we cannot separately estimate pre-trends.
The resulting coefficients ^98-99 , ^00-01 , and ^04-05 , which we will present graphically, are

our estimates of how the price change impacts physicians' choice of the outcome variable yit
in each time period after the change. We estimate all regressions using survey weights that
account for the CTS sampling design,20 and cluster standard errors at the individual (panel
unit) level to account for auto-correlation of individual-level shocks.
   We also estimate a pooled regression that combines all of the post-implementation survey
waves and controls for flexible age trends. Letting PostImplementationt be a dummy variable
indicating t  1998, we estimate:


                yit =  ps(i) × PostImplementationt + s 1i

                     + 98-99 1t=1998-99 + 00-01 1t=2000-01 + 04-05 1t=2004-05 + it .       (15)



  20
       The survey over-samples primary care physicians and some regions.

                                                    23
5         Empirical Results

5.1         Baseline Results on Investment Margins

     Figure 8 shows the dynamic results we obtain from estimating equation (14) at the
individual level (physician-by-CTS wave). In each panel, 1996/97 is the omitted base year.
Subsequent dots indicate the coefficient for survey waves after the price change, and blue bars
indicate the 95 percent confidence interval. We find that payment increases lead to increased
non-patient hours (panel B) and increases in the propensity to accept new patients (panel
D). The estimates are larger over the medium run than over the short run. In contrast,
Panel A shows no change in patient care hours. The effect on total hours in panel E is the
sum of the effects on patient and non-patient hours, and is positive in 2000/01 but close to
zero otherwise.
     Panel C examines the effect on board certification. Certification may respond to the
payment shock via changes in initial certification or via propensities to re-certify. The effect
of the price change on these margins is identified by the just over 700 changes in certification
status we observe within a physician in the CTS sample.21 Using this variation, we find no
effect of the Medicare price shock on the propensity to be board certified.
     Figure 9 checks whether physicians and specialties that increase their non-patient hours
tend to simultaneously reduce their patient care hours. Panel A shows a binned scatterplot
estimated at the individual physician level, while Panel B aggregates to the specialty level.
We indeed find a strong negative relationship between changes in patient care hours and
non-patient hours. This suggests that, rather than increasing overall labor supply as the
target-income hypothesis would suggest, doctors facing payment cuts reallocate time from
investments towards current earnings.
     The CTS reports two variables for which we can assess the potential relevance of pre-

    21
         Just over 500 of these changes are switches from not-certified to certified

                                                         24
existing trends: net income and annual weeks worked. These variables are reported for
the years prior to the respective survey waves: 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2003. This provides
two pre-periods and two post-periods surrounding the 1998 policy change. Panels A and
B of Figure 10 show the dynamic responses of these variables around the payment change
by estimating equation (14)'s dynamic difference-in-differences model with 1997 as the base
period.22 Changes in weeks of work from 1995 to 1997 exhibit no correlation with the
payment changes enacted in 1998 (panel B), while changes in income were modestly positively
correlated with the subsequent payment changes (panel A). Given the absence of a clear
pattern in these results, it is difficult to know with certainty how these findings might extend
to the outcomes on which we focus.
    We now turn to pooled results that combine all post-implementation waves into a single
period. Each panel in Table 2 reports the coefficient estimates ^ from equation (15) for the

same four outcome variables and 95 percent confidence intervals. The coefficient should be
interpreted as a semi-elasticity, as it relates a percentage change in Medicare reimbursements
(on the right-hand side) to the level of an outcome (such as, in Panel A, patient care hours).
The table also reports the sample means of the outcome variables in the pre-policy period
and uses them to convert the estimates to elasticities.
    The statistically insignificant coefficient of 5.54 in column 1 implies that a ten percent
increase in prices increases total hours worked per week by 0.54, corresponding to an elasticity
of 0.102. We can rule out elasticities greater than 0.23 and smaller than -0.03. Columns 2
and 3 show that this increase is driven by an increase in non-patient hours. We estimate
elasticities of -0.0009 for patient hours and 0.49 for non-patient hours, suggesting moderate
increases in the time physicians spend on activities that build their ongoing capacity.
    Columns 4 and 5 show that physicians also become more willing to take new patients when


  22
     For these regressions, we restrict to physicians that had been practicing for at least two years as of the
survey because the measures of weeks worked and annual income are lagged by one to two years.

                                                      25
prices rise. We estimate that a 10 percent increase in prices results in a 0.016 point increase
in our index (from 0 to 1) of physicians' willingness to take new patients, corresponding to
an elasticity of 0.218. In contrast, there is no effect on the probability of holding board
certification.
   Economic theory makes it quite natural to find upward-sloping supply responses to Medi-
care payments. But it is less obvious how increased payment rates for Medicare patients will
influence treatment for lower-paying patients, such as those insured by Medicaid. Medi-
caid pays less than Medicare, and imposes significant hassle on physicians as well, making
them less likely to treat Medicaid beneficiaries. This characterization is supported by cross-
sectional patterns in physicians' behavior. Using both the CTS and the National Ambulatory
Medical Care Survey (NAMCS),23 we examine physicians' reported willingness to see new
Medicaid patients and the time they spend with patients during office visits. As Table 3
shows, physicians in both surveys report a much lower willingness to see new Medicaid pa-
tients relative to either Medicare or privately insured patients. Among those seen, physicians
also spend less time with Medicaid patients, both unconditionally and conditional on under-
lying diagnoses. Oostrom et al. (2017) also find longer waiting time for Medicaid patients
before office visits, especially where Medicaid rates are lower.
   This descriptive evidence suggests that Medicaid patients can likely be considered the
residual claimants on spare capacity: providers may be unlikely to expand capacity specif-
ically for Medicaid patients, but nevertheless willing to use existing spare capacity for this
population. So when Medicare payments drive a capacity expansion, this subsequent relax-
ation of capacity constraints may incidentally benefit Medicaid patients. In addition, higher
incomes could have a direct impact on physicians' desire to provide care altruistically.


  23
     NAMCS is a CDC survey of office-based physicians, not employed by the federal government, and
principally engaged in patient care. Our sample includes 4,502 physicians between 2003 to 2006. Before
2003, NAMCS did not include survey questions related to physicians' willingness to accept new patients. We
therefore limit the sample to the years 2003 to 2006 to overlap with the later years of the CTS.

                                                   26
    To examine these possibilities, Table 4 decomposes the types of new patients that physi-
cians are willing to accept. Payment declines predict declines in the propensity to accept
new patients for both Medicare and Medicaid patients. Notably, the estimated effect for
Medicaid is twice as strong as for Medicare. This indicates that changes in practice patterns
do not merely affect the supply of care to patients whose payers initiated changes in reim-
bursement rates. Instead, the evidence suggests that increased capacity benefits those who
may have otherwise had the least access to care.
    Table 5 presents results for weeks worked and income. The elasticity of 0.014 for weeks
worked is statistically insignificant and economically modest. The estimated income elasticity
suggests that a ten percent increase in prices causes a 2.5 percent increase in income in the
short-run, but recall that physician income is very poorly measured in survey data (Gottlieb
et al., 2020).
    A final consideration for the interpretation of these results is measurement error. We
proxy for each physician's change in reimbursement rate using the specialty-level estimate
described in section 4. But individual doctors are sure to be heterogeneous in how the
payment change affects their average fees. This would appear as measurement error in our
regressions, attenuating the estimated responses towards zero.24
    The results presented in this section highlight the importance of distinguishing between
revenue-generating work hours and overall labor supply. Revenue-generating patient care
hours exhibit a very modestly negative wage elasticity in the years following the payment
shock, which could be interpreted as slightly backward-bending labor supply. Yet the positive
relation between wages and investments contradicts the notion that physicians scale back
overall work in response to increased wages. This raises the question of how current policy


  24
     The hours variables also likely contain substantial measurement error. One source of error is rounding.
Appendix Figure B.7 demonstrates that the percent of responses that are a multiple of five range from 63
to 81 percent for the hours variables. We expect such measurement error to widen the confidence intervals,
but otherwise be innocuous.

                                                    27
affects long-run service supply. If investments increase the efficiency or quality of care in the
long-run, then price changes will have longer-lasting effects that are missed by examining
short-run responses.


6        Conclusion

     We investigate how changes in Medicare's payment rules affect physicians' investments
in their careers. We find that these investments respond positively to their returns. Over
the medium run, physicians respond to an increase in reimbursement rates by increasing
the time spent on investment activities. Consistent with this time investment, they become
more willing to accept new patients when reimbursements increase. The increase in capacity
seems to especially benefit those most likely to be residual claimants on physician capacity,
such as Medicaid beneficiaries. One reason physicians may be well-positioned to respond to
government payment rules is the structure of the industry. Many physicians run individual
or small practices, and can choose how to allocate their time and resources.25
     Our results imply that policymakers and researchers must pay close attention to physi-
cians' investments in human capital, in the capacity of their practices, and in the length
of their careers. These investments drive the health system's long-run capacity to deliver
services. Because investments respond positively to payment rates, a policymaker seeking
to alleviate a shortage will have long-run success by increasing payment rates rather than
decreasing them. In contrast, payment reductions make sense when one thinks too much
care is being provided.
     These results are an important input for policymakers considering major health system
reforms. A major cut in payment rates would reduce providers' incentives to increase capac-


    25
     In recent years, physician practices have been merging and growing (Welch et al., 2013). But this trend
mostly occurred after the time period we consider (Liebhaber and Grossman, 2007; Robinson, 1998), and
even now one-third of physicians work in small practices (Muhlestein and Smith, 2016). Appendix Table B.1
shows the distribution of practice types for our sample.

                                                    28
ity. This could reduce the amount of care available, and thus the system's slack capacity.
This slack capacity is expensive at normal times, but could have spillover benefits for Medi-
caid patients and in situations when healthcare demand increases.




                                             29
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Amy Finkelstein, "Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
 Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector," Journal of Political Economy, October
 2008, 116 (5), 837­880.

   and Joshua Linn, "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharma-
  ceutical Industry," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2004, 119 (3), 1049­1090.

Alexander, Diane, "Does physician pay affect procedure choice and patient health? Ev-
 idence from Medicaid C-section use," Working Paper 2017-07, Federal Reserve Bank
 of Chicago 2015. Available online at https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/
 working-papers/2017/wp2017-07 (accessed April 12, 2018).

Baker, Laurence C and Anne Beeson Royalty, "Medicaid policy, physician behav-
 ior, and health care for the low-income population," Journal of Human resources, 2000,
 pp. 480­502.

Becker, Gary S., "Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis," Journal of
 Political Economy, October 1962, 70 (5), 9­49.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, "The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 1967, 75 (4, Part 1), 352­365.

Blahous, Charles, "The costs of a national single-payer healthcare system," Mercatus
  Research Paper, 2018.

Brekke, Kurt R., Tor Helge Holm°   as, Karin Monstad, and Odd Rune Straume,
 "Do Treatment Decisions Depend on Physicians' Financial Incentives?," Journal of Public
 Economics, November 2017, 155, 74­92.

Buchmueller, Thomas, Sarah Miller, and Marko Vujicic, "How do providers respond
 to changes in public health insurance coverage? Evidence from adult Medicaid dental
 benefits," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (4), 70­102.

Carey, Colleen Marie, Ethan Lieber, and Sarah Miller, "Drug Firms' Payments and
 Physicians' Prescribing Behavior in Medicare Part D," Unpublished Working Paper, 2015.

Cassel, Christine K. and Eric S. Holmboe, "Professionalism and Accountability: The
 Role of Specialty Board Certification," Transactions of the American Clinical and Clima-
 tological Association, 2008, 119.

Center for Studying Health System Change, "Physician Survey Summary File: User's
 Guide and Codebook," 1999. Community Tracking Study Physician Survey, 1996­1997
 (ICPSR 2597). Available at http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02597.v3.


                                           30
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, "National Health Expendi-
 tures Fact Sheet," https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
 Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NHE-Fact-Sheet 2019.

Chandra, Amitabh, David Cutler, and Zirui Song, "Who Ordered That? The Eco-
 nomics of Treatment Choices in Medical Care," in Thomas G. Mcguire Mark V. Pauly
 and Pedro P. Barros, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2, Amsterdam: North-
 Holland, 2011, chapter 6, pp. 397­432.

Chen, Alice, "Do the poor benefit from more generous Medicaid physician payments,"
 2014. University of Southern California, mimeo.

  , Anthony T Lo Sasso, and Michael R Richards, "Supply-side effects from public
  insurance expansions: Evidence from physician labor markets," Health economics, 2018,
  27 (4), 690­708.

Chown, Jillian, David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Jordan Keener, "The
 Opportunities and Limitations of Monopsony Power in Healthcare: Evidence from the
 United States and Canada," Working Paper 26122, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2019.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D. Gottlieb, "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect
  Medical Treatment and Patient Health?," American Economic Review, April 2014, 104
  (4), 1320­1349.

   and , "In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence on Private Payment Systems,"
  Journal of Political Economy, February 2017, 125 (1), 1­39.

   and Parker Rogers, "Demand Shocks, Procurement Policies, and the Nature of Med-
  ical Innovation: Evidence from Wartime Prosthetic Device Patents," Working Paper
  No. 26679, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Codespote, Suzanne M., William J. London, and John D. Shatto, "Physician
 Volume & Intensity Response," Memorandum to Richard S. Foster, Office of the Actuary,
 Health Care Financing Administration August 13 1998. Available at https://www.cms.
 gov/ActuarialStudies/downloads/PhysicianResponse.pdf (accessed April 12, 2018).

Congressional Research Service, "Medicare: Payments to Physicians," Technical Re-
 port, Congressional Research Service: Education and Public Welfare Division January
 28 1998. Available online at http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall/crsreports/
 crsdocuments/98-75_EPW.pdf (accessed April 12, 2018).

Cooper, Richard A., Thomas E. Getzen, Heather J. McKee, and Prakash Laud,
 "Economic and demographic trends signal an impending physician shortage," Health Af-
 fairs, January/February 2002, 21 (1), 140­154.


                                          31
Drolet, Brian C. and Vikram J. Tandon, "Fees for Certification and Finances of Medical
 Specialty Boards," JAMA, 2017, 318 (5), 477­479.

Dunn, Abe, Joshua D. Gottlieb, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Pietro Tebaldi, "The
 Costs of Payment Uncertainty in Healthcare Markets," 2020. University of Chicago,
 mimeo.

Finkelstein, Amy, "Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the vaccine
  industry," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 527­564.

  , "The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of Medi-
  care," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 1­37.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Th´      er`
                                                  ese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
                     ´
  F. L. Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder, "The Implications of Regional Variations in Medi-
  care Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care," Annals of Internal
  Medicine, February 18 2003, 138 (4), 288­298.

Fisher, Elliott S, John E Wennberg, Therese A Stukel, Jonathan S Skinner,
  Sandra M Sharp, Jean L Freeman, and Alan M Gittelsohn, "Associations among
  hospital capacity, utilization, and mortality of US Medicare beneficiaries, controlling for
  sociodemographic factors.," Health services research, 2000, 34 (6), 1351.

Foo, Patricia K., Robin S. Lee, and Kyna Fong, "Hospital and Physician Prices
  and Treatment Choice in Labor and Delivery," American Journal of Health Economics,
  Summer 2017, 3 (3), 422­453.

Garthwaite, Chen, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Stare, "Endogenous Quality In-
 vestments in the U.S. Hospital Market," NBER Working Paper Series, 2020, 27440.

Garthwaite, Craig L, "The doctor might see you now: The supply side effects of public
 health insurance expansions," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (3),
 190­215.

Gottlieb, Joshua D, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Abe Dunn, "The complexity of billing
 and paying for physician care," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (4), 619­626.

Gottlieb, Joshua D., Maria Polyakova, Kevin Rinz, Hugh Shiplett, and Victoria
 Udalova, "Who Values Human Capitalists' Human Capital? Healthcare Spending and
 Physician Earnings," July 2020. University of Chicago, mimeo.

Gray, Bradley M., Jonathan L. Vandergrift, Mary M. Johnston, James D.
 Reschovsky, Lorna A. Lynn, Eric S. Holmboe, Jeffrey S. McCullough, and
 Rebecca S. Lipner, "Association Between Imposition of a Maintenance of Certification
 Requirement and Ambulatory Care-Sensitive Hospitalizations and Health Care Costs,"
 JAMA, 2014, 312, 2348­2357.

                                             32
Gruber, Jon, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlina, "Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity:
 the Case of Cesarean Delivery," Journal of Health Economics, August 1999, 18 (4), 473­
 490.

Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings, "Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean
 Section Delivery," RAND Journal of Economics, Spring 1996, 27 (1), 99­123.

Hadley, Jack and James D. Reschovsky, "Medicare fees and physicians. medicare ser-
 vice volume: Beneficiaries treated and services per beneficiary," International Journal of
 Health Care Finance and Economics, June 2006, 6 (2), 131­150.

Haynes, John, Jeffrey L. Jackson, Gail M. McNutt, Brian J. Hertz, Jeffrey J.
 Ryan, and Scott A. Pawlikowski, "Association Between Time-Unlimited vs Time-
 Limited Internal Board Certification and Ambulatory Patient Care Quality," JAMA, 2014,
 312 (22), 2358­2363.

Heckman, James J., "A life-cycle model of earnings, learning, and consumption," Journal
 of Political Economy, 1976, 84 (4, Part 2), S9­S44.

Jacobson, Mireille, Tom Y. Chang, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Craig C. Earle,
  "Physician Agency and Competition: Evidence from a Major Change to Medicare
  Chemotherapy Reimbursement Policy," Working Paper No. 19247, National Bureau of
  Economic Research July 2013.

Johnson, Erin and Marit Rehavi, "Physicians Treating Physicians: Information and
  Incentives in Childbirth," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2016,
  8 (1), 115­141.

Leganza, Jonathan, Stephanie Khoury, and Alex Masucci, "Health Professional
  Shortage Areas and Physician Location Decisions," Unpublished Working Paper, 2020.

Liebhaber, Allison and Joy M. Grossman, "Physicians Moving to Mid-Sized, Single-
  Specialty Practices," Tracking Report 18, Center for Studying Health System Change Au-
  gust 2007. Available online at http://www.hschange.com/CONTENT/941.html (accessed
  April 12, 2018).

Lipner, Rebecca S., Brian J. Hess, and Robert L. Phillips, "Specialty Board Certi-
  fication in the United States: Issues and Evidence," Journal of Continuing Education in
  the Health Professions, 2013, 33 (S1), 520­535.

  , Wayne H. Bylsma, Gerald K. Arnold, Gregory S. Fortna, John Tooker, and
  Christine K. Cassel, "Who is maintaining certification in internal medicine--and why?
  A national survey 10 years after initial certification," Annals of Internal Medicine, 2006,
  144 (1), 29­36.



                                             33
McGuire, Thomas G., "Physician Agency," in Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. New-
 house, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
 2000, chapter 9, pp. 461­535.

   and Mark V. Pauly, "Physician response to fee changes with multiple payers," Journal
  of Health Economics, 1991, 10 (4), 385­410.

McKnight, Robin, "Medicare Balance Billing Restrictions: Impacts on Physicians and
 Beneficiaries," Journal of Health Economics, March 2007, 26 (2), 326­341.

Mincer, Jacob, "Progress in Human Capital Analysis of the Distribution of Earnings,"
 Working Paper No. 53, National Bureau of Economic Research August 1974.

  , Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, New York: Columbia University Press for National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 1974.

Muhlestein, David B. and Nathan J. Smith, "Physician Consolidation: Rapid Move-
 ment From Small To Large Group Practices, 2013­15," Health Affairs, September 2016,
 35 (9), 1638­1642.

Oostrom, Tamar, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein, "Outpatient office wait times
 and quality of care for Medicaid patients," Health Affairs, 2017, 36 (5), 826­832.

Petterson, Stephen M., Winston R. Liaw, Robert L. Phillips, David L. Rabin,
 David S. Meyers, and Andrew W. Bazemore, "Projecting US primary care physician
 workforce needs: 2010-2025," The Annals of Family Medicine, 2012, 10 (6), 503­509.

Rice, Thomas H., "The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on Physician-
 Induced Demand," Medical Care, August 1983, 21 (8), 803­815.

  , "Physician-Induced Demand for Medical Care: New Evidence from the Medicare Pro-
  gram," Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, 1984, 5, 129­160.

   and Roberta J. Labelle, "Do Physicians Induce Demand for Medical Services?," Jour-
  nal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, Fall 1989, 14 (3), 587­601.

Robinson, James C., "Consolidation of Medical Groups Into Physician Practice Manage-
 ment Organizations," JAMA, 1998, 279 (2), 144­149.

Schulman, Kevin A and Arnold Milstein, "The implications of "Medicare for All" for
  US hospitals," JAMA, 2019, 321 (17), 1661­1662.

Staiger, Douglas O., David I. Auerbach, and Peter I. Buerhaus, "Comparison of
  Physician Workforce Estimates and Supply Projections," JAMA, October 21 2009, 302
  (15), 1674­1680.



                                           34
Welch, W. Pete, Alison Evans Cuellar, Sally C. Stearns, and Andrew B. Bind-
 man, "Proportion Of Physicians In Large Group Practices Continued To Grow In 2009­
 11," Health Affairs, September 2013, 32 (9), 1659­1666.

Yip, Winnie C., "Physician response to Medicare fee reductions: changes in the volume
 of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgeries in the Medicare and private sectors,"
 Journal of Health Economics, 1998, 17 (6), 675­699.




                                          35
Figure 1: Case A: Physician who treats no group L patients and treats her
preferred number of group H patients
                                                                                 
                                                                                qH          q
                                                                                            ¯H    C
  Marginal costs and reimbursement rates




                                                                                                      rH




                                                                                                      rL




                                                                           Number of patients

                                          
Note: The physician would like to treat qH   high-paying patients, as that is the point where her marginal
costs equal the reimbursement rate. There are q  ¯H patients available, exceeding the ideal amount, so she
                                                                                             
treats exactly the number she would like. Since rL is below her marginal cost when treating qH high-paying
patients, she does not treat any group L patients.




                                                   36
Figure 2: Case B: Physician who treats no group L patients and is at corner solution for
group H patients

                                                      q
                                                      ~ (i)          q
                                                                     ¯H            q
                                                                                   ~(i)                C
  Marginal costs and reimbursement rates




                                                                                                           rH




                                                                                                           rL




                                                                              Number of patients


Note: The physician would like to treat q~ high-paying patients, as that is the point where her marginal costs
equal the high reimbursement rate. But only q  ¯H patients are available, so that constraint is binding and she
only treats q
            ¯H of these patients. Since rL is below her marginal cost when treating all available high-paying
patients, she does not treat any of these lower-paying group L patients.




                                                      37
                                         Figure 3: Case C: Physician who treats some group L patients
                                                                                   
                                                            q
                                                            ¯H               q
                                                                             ¯H + qL                        C
Marginal costs and reimbursement rates




                                                                                                                rH




                                                                                                                rL




                                                                   qL

                                                                                       Number of patients
Note: Once again, only q  ¯H high-paying patients are available, so the demand constraint is binding and she
treats all of these available patients. But now rL is above her marginal cost when treating q ¯H high-paying
patients, so she does treat some of these lower-paying patients. She does so up to the point where her
                                                                     
marginal costs are equal to rL , and this intersection determines qL   and thus the total number of patients
treated.




                                                                        38
                                                          Figure 4: Physician's Investment Decision in Case C
                 Panel A: Investment Payoffs and Response to Reimbursement Rate
                Change
                                                                                 qH    qH          qH + q L                              C
                 Marginal costs and reimbursement rates
                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                              rH

                                                                                                                                              rH




                                                                                                                                              rL


                                                                                                       qH + q L



                                                                                              new L
                                                                                shift H  L                         Number of patients
                                                                      Panel B: Response to Competitors
                                                                                qH    qH          qH + q L                       old C
                 Marginal costs and reimbursement rates




                                                                  qH when
                                                                  competitors                                                              new C
                                                                  invest
                                                                                                                                         rH

                                                                                                                                         rH




                                                                                                                                         rL


                                                                                                     qH + q L



                                                                                             new L
                                                                            shift H  L                            Number of patients
Note: Panel A illustrates the gains from a marginal increase in investment. First, investment increases the
number of high-paying clients available to physician j , allowing her to swap low-paying for high-paying clients
for a net gain of (rH - rL )(qH - qH ) (shown by the green rectangle). Second, investment reduces marginal
costs (from old to new ) (the green area between the new and old curve). If productivity increases enough,
the number of low-paying patients will increase. When rH increases to rH , the incentive to acquire new
group H patients rises by rH - rH (the blue-dashed rectangle). Panel B shows what happens to physician j
when her competitors increase investment, such as in a response to an increase to rH . Now j will lose group
H market share if she doesn't also invest, as illustrated by the combination of the larger green rectangle
and the red area between rH and rH . When j invests in response, her capacity for group L patients. If all
group H patients were being treated before the rate increase, the competitive pressure to invest will increase
supply of care to group L patients.
                                                                                             39
                                         Figure 5: An increase in care demand crowds out group L patients

                                                              qH  qH          qH + qL                         C
Marginal costs and reimbursement rates




                                                                                                                  rH




                                                                                                                  rH




                                                                         qL

                                                                                         Number of patients
Note: Now q  ¯H high-paying group H patients are available, so the physician treats more of them and earns
more. But the equilibrium condition for group L is unchanged: She treats low-paying patients up to the
same point, where her marginal costs are equal to rL . The increase in demand from high-paying patients
thus crowds out some of the low-paying patients, and with a larger increase could crowd out all of them.




                                                                       40
                                  Figure 6: Age Profile of Investment Activities and Labor Supply
                                   Panel A: Non-Patient Hours                                                                                Panel B: Patient Care Hours

                        13                                                                                                        50

                        12
                                                                                                                                  45

                        11




                                                                                                           Hours
  Hours




                                                                                                                                  40
                        10
                                                                                                                                  35
                         9

                                                                                                                                  30
                         8




                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                               9


                                                                                                                                                         4


                                                                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                                                                                             4


                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                4


                                                                                                                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                   -3


                                                                                                                                              -3


                                                                                                                                                        -4


                                                                                                                                                                  -4


                                                                                                                                                                            -5


                                                                                                                                                                                      -5


                                                                                                                                                                                               -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                        -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -8
                             34




                                     39



                                             44



                                                      49



                                                               54



                                                                        59



                                                                                64



                                                                                        69



                                                                                                85




                                                                                                                                  29


                                                                                                                                             35


                                                                                                                                                       40


                                                                                                                                                                 45


                                                                                                                                                                           50


                                                                                                                                                                                    55


                                                                                                                                                                                              60


                                                                                                                                                                                                       65


                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                           -




                                      -



                                              -



                                                       -



                                                                -



                                                                         -



                                                                                 -



                                                                                         -



                                                                                                 -
                        29




                                   35



                                           40



                                                    45



                                                             50



                                                                      55



                                                                              60



                                                                                      65



                                                                                              70
                                                               Age                                                                                                           Age


                                   Panel C: Taking New Patients                                                                                   Panel D: Board Certified

                        .85                                                                                                        1

                        .83                                                                                                       .88
  Taking New Patients




                                                                                                           Proportion Certified

                         .8
                                                                                                                                  .76
                        .78
                                                                                                                                  .64
                        .75

                        .72                                                                                                       .52

                         .7                                                                                                        .4
                             4




                                       9



                                                4



                                                         9



                                                                  4



                                                                          9



                                                                                  4



                                                                                          9



                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                  9



                                                                                                                                                            4



                                                                                                                                                                      9



                                                                                                                                                                                4



                                                                                                                                                                                          9



                                                                                                                                                                                                  4



                                                                                                                                                                                                           9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                           -3




                                     -3



                                              -4



                                                       -4



                                                                -5



                                                                        -5



                                                                                -6



                                                                                        -6



                                                                                                -8




                                                                                                                                     -3




                                                                                                                                                -3



                                                                                                                                                          -4



                                                                                                                                                                    -4



                                                                                                                                                                              -5



                                                                                                                                                                                        -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                -6



                                                                                                                                                                                                         -6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -8
                         29




                                   35



                                            40



                                                     45



                                                              50



                                                                      55



                                                                              60



                                                                                      65



                                                                                              70




                                                                                                                                   29




                                                                                                                                              35



                                                                                                                                                        40



                                                                                                                                                                  45



                                                                                                                                                                            50



                                                                                                                                                                                      55



                                                                                                                                                                                              60



                                                                                                                                                                                                       65



                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                               Age                                                                                                           Age


                                           Panel E: Total Hours                                                                                             Panel F: Income

                        60                                                                                                        250

                                                                                                                                  225

                        55                                                                                                        200
  Hours




                                                                                                           Income




                                                                                                                                  175
                        50
                                                                                                                                  150

                                                                                                                                  125
                        45
                                                                                                                                  100
                             4


                                     9


                                             4


                                                      9


                                                               4


                                                                        9


                                                                                4


                                                                                        9


                                                                                                5
                         -3


                                   -3


                                            -4


                                                     -4


                                                              -5


                                                                       -5


                                                                               -6


                                                                                       -6


                                                                                               -8




                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                  9



                                                                                                                                                            4



                                                                                                                                                                      9



                                                                                                                                                                                4



                                                                                                                                                                                         9



                                                                                                                                                                                                   4



                                                                                                                                                                                                            9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                        -3




                                                                                                                                                  -3



                                                                                                                                                            -4



                                                                                                                                                                      -4



                                                                                                                                                                             -5



                                                                                                                                                                                       -5



                                                                                                                                                                                                -6



                                                                                                                                                                                                        -6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -8
                        29


                                  35


                                           40


                                                    45


                                                             50


                                                                      55


                                                                              60


                                                                                      65


                                                                                              70




                                                                                                                                    29




                                                                                                                                              35



                                                                                                                                                        40



                                                                                                                                                                  45



                                                                                                                                                                            50



                                                                                                                                                                                      55



                                                                                                                                                                                               60



                                                                                                                                                                                                       65



                                                                                                                                                                                                                70




                                                               Age                                                                                                              Age


Note: This figure plots the age profile of investment activities and labor supply. Physicians are binned into
five-year age bins, and the upper tail groups together those aged 70 to 85. For each variable, the mean
values within each bin are plotted. Only data from the 1996-97 wave is used. Source: Authors' calculations
based on data from the Community Tracking Study, 1996/97 wave only (Center for Studying Health System
Change, 1999).



                                                                                                      41
                                                                        Figure 7: Non-Patient Hours Before Retirement


                                                        Non-Patient Hours: Age > 60                                                                    Non-Patient Hours: Age < 45
           Estimated Coefficient   4                                                                                             4




                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficient
                                   3                                                                                             3

                                   2                                                                                             2

                                   1                                                                                             1

                                   0                                                                                             0

                                   -1                                                                                            -1
                                   8 or more                4                        2               0                           8 or more                 4                        2          0
                                                                Years to Attrition                                                                             Years to Attrition
                                       N = 2303                                                                                      N = 10353



                                                  Non-Patient Hours' Share of Total: Age > 60                                                    Non-Patient Hours' Share of Total: Age < 45
42




                                    .06                                                                                           .06
           Estimated Coefficient




                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficient
                                    .04                                                                                           .04

                                    .02                                                                                           .02

                                       0                                                                                             0

                                   -.02                                                                                          -.02
                                     8 or more                  4                        2           0                             8 or more                   4                        2      0
                                                                    Years to Attrition                                                                             Years to Attrition
                                           N = 2303                                                                                      N = 10353



                                                                                 Relative Estimate                                Confidence Interval

     Note: The estimated coefficients from equation (13) are shown above for non-patient hours in levels and as a share of total hours. The base
     group is physicians who are in their final observed period. So coefficients ^2, ^ 4 , and ^ 8 estimate the differences in the outcome variable for
     physicians 2, 4, or 8 years prior to attrition, relative to those making their final appearance in the sample. For physicians age 60 or older,
     weekly non-patient hours decline as they approach their final year in the Community Tracking Study panel. For young physicians, the number
     of years until attrition from the panel does not predict non-patient hours. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community
     Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).
                                                Figure 8: Dynamic Responses to Medicare Fee Change


                                          Panel A: Patient Care Hours                                                                                                    Panel B: Non-Patient Hours
                                                                                                                                                            15
                             10
  Estimated DD Coefficient




                                                                                                                                 Estimated DD Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                            10
                               0
                                                                                                                                                             5

                             -10
                                                                                                                                                             0


                             -20                                                                                                                            -5
                                96-97                  98-99                                      00-01               04-05                                   96-97               98-99             00-01               04-05
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                        Estimated Effect of Fee Change                            95% Confidence Interval                                         Estimated Effect of Fee Change    95% Confidence Interval


                                             Panel C: Board Certified                                                                                                 Panel D: Taking New Patients
                             .2                                                                                                                             .5
  Estimated DD Coefficient




                                                                                                                                 Estimated DD Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                             .1

                                                                                                                                                            .3
                              0
                                                                                                                                                            .2

                             -.1
                                                                                                                                                            .1


                             -.2                                                                                                                            0
                                96-97                 98-99                                       00-01               04-05                                  96-97                98-99             00-01               04-05
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                    Estimated Effect of Fee Change                                95% Confidence Interval                                         Estimated Effect of Fee Change    95% Confidence Interval


                                                                                                             Panel E: Total Hours
                                                                                             20
                                                                  Estimated DD Coefficient




                                                                                             10




                                                                                              0




                                                                                             -10
                                                                                                96-97               98-99                                        00-01               04-05
                                                                                                                              Year

                                                                                                    Estimated Effect of Fee Change                               95% Confidence Interval




Note: This figure plots the estimates of  ^98-99 , ^00-01 , and ^04-05 from equation (14). The coefficients
represent the change in the outcome variable associated with a 1 percentage point increase in the Medicare
reimbursement rate for each wave after the change. Standard errors are clustered at the individual (panel
unit) level and 95 percent confidence intervals are shown in blue. Source: Authors' calculations based on
data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).
                                                                                                                            43
              Figure 9: Changes in Patient Care and Non-Patient Hours
                                                                  Panel A: Individual Physician Changes

                                          15




                                          10
                Change in Patient Hours




                                               5




                                               0




                                           -5




                                          -10


                                                   -30                -20                     -10            0        10   20
                                                                                    Change in Non-Patient Hours


                                                                         Panel B: Specialty Aggregates

                                          4




                                          2
                Change in Patient Hours




                                          0




                                          -2




                                                         Slope: -0.73, Standard Error: 0.10
                                          -4
                                                   -4                       -2                           0        2        4
                                                                                   Change in Non-Patient Hours


Note: In order to investigate whether physicians are trading off patient care against non-patient hours, Panel
A plots the change in patient hours against that in non-patient hours by physician. We restrict the sample to
physicians observed in both the 1996/97 wave at least one subsequent wave. For these physicians, we calculate
the changes in patient hours and in non-patient hours between the 1996/97 response and the average of all
responses in subsequent waves. We display a binned scatterplot of this relationship, by forming 20 equally
sized bins grouped based on the change in non-patient hours. Panel B shows the same exercise, but where
changes are calculated at the specialty level, rather than the individual level. Aggregating to the specialty
level should mitigate the effects of any potential measurement error that might bias the individual-level
relationship shown in Panel A.
                                                                                                    44
             Figure 10: Income and Weeks Worked Responses to Medicare Fee Change
                                             Panel A: Log Income                                                                                   Panel B: Weeks Worked
                             .6                                                                                                   4
  Estimated DD Coefficient




                                                                                                       Estimated DD Coefficient
                             .4
                                                                                                                                  2

                             .2
                                                                                                                                  0
                              0
                                                                                                                                  -2
                             -.2

                                                                                                                                  -4
                             -.4

                                   95                  97                 99                 03                                        95                   97                99                  03
                                                               Year                                                                                                   Year

                                        Estimated Effect of Fee Change   95% Confidence Interval                                            Estimated Effect of Fee Change   95% Confidence Interval


Note: Income and weeks worked are reported for the years 1995, 1997, 1999, 2003, allowing only a narrow
look at potential differing pre-trends. Panels A and B plot the dynamic estimates from equation (14), except
the coefficients of interest are ^95 , ^99 , and ^03 . The coefficients represent the change in the outcome variable
associated with a 1 percentage point increase in the Medicare reimbursement rate for each year relative to
1997. Standard errors are clustered at the individual (panel unit) level and 95 percent confidence intervals
are shown in blue. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study (Center
for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                                                                                                  45
                Table 1: Predicted Medicare Fee Changes by Specialty

 Specialty                             Change (%)        Specialty                           Change (%)
 Cardiac Surgery                            -9.18        Critical Care (Intensivists)             5.41
 Radiation Oncology                         -8.83        Pediatric Medicine                       5.55
 Thoracic Surgery                           -8.08        Preventive Medicine                      5.81
 Plastic/Reconstructive Surgery             -7.45        Addiction Medicine                       5.83
 Colorectal Surgery (Proctology)            -7.25        Hematology                               5.91
 Neurosurgery                               -6.44        Physical Medicine and Rehab.             5.93
 General Surgery                            -5.54        Rheumatology                             6.10
 Orthopedic Surgery                         -5.49        Hematology-Oncology                      6.25
 Surgical Oncology                          -5.09        Medical Oncology                         6.26
 Dermatology                                -4.97        General Practice                         6.36
 Hand Surgery                               -4.90        Pulmonary Disease                        6.62
 Vascular Surgery                           -4.85        Emergency Medicine                       6.76
 Maxillofacial Surgery                      -4.76        Internal Medicine                        6.92
 Ophthalmology                              -3.44        Neurology                                7.11
 Sports Medicine                            -2.87        Family Practice                          7.23
 Gastroenterology                           -2.77        Intensive Cardiac Rehab.                 7.30
 Nephrology                                 -2.59        Neuropsychiatry                          7.50
 Gynecological Oncology                     -2.22        Infectious Disease                       7.85
 Obstetrics & Gynecology                    -0.68        Allergy Immunology                       7.97
 Otolaryngology                              0.11        Geriatric Medicine                       8.00
 Urology                                     0.61        Psychiatry                               8.10
 Osteopathic Manipulative Med.               3.17        Endocrinology                            8.11
 Cardiology                                  4.95        Psychologist, Clinical                   8.37
Note: This table shows the predicted Medicare fee changes by specialty. We estimate these using data
provided in the Physician/Supplier Procedure Summary (PSPS) file released by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. This file reports state-level aggregate data on Medicare's purchases of care from
physicians and other professional suppliers at the service line level. For each state and individual medical
service, the file reports how many services Medicare purchased and how much it spent. To estimate the
overall percent change in payments by specialty, we look at each specialty's composition of services as of
1997. We take a weighted average of the Conversion Factor change, where each specialty's weight depends
on the share of Medicare spending that comes from surgical procedures.




                                                    46
                           Table 2: Changes in Hours and Capacity

                                     Total           Patient      Non-Patient        Taking             Certified
                                     Hours           Hours          Hours          New Patients

 Price Change × Post                   5.54            -0.38          5.25*              0.16**            0.00
                                  [-1.43,12.52]    [-7.86,7.10]   [-0.16,10.66]        [0.05,0.27]     [-0.10,0.10]

 N                                   31,760          31,760           31,760             31,760           31,756
 Outcome Mean (1996/97)              54.48           43.87            10.52               0.74             0.83
 Elasticity                          0.102           -0.009           0.499               0.218           0.002

Note: Estimates from equation (15) are shown for Total Work Hours, Patient Care Hours, Non-Patient
Hours, Board Certification, and Willingness to Take New Patients. The coefficients displayed are from the
interaction between a Post-1997 indicator and the predicted percentage change in Medicare payments by
specialty, scaled to be between zero and one. The coefficients thus represent the change in the outcome
variable associated with a 100 percent increase in the Medicare reimbursement rate. The implied elasticities
are obtained by dividing the coefficient by the mean of the outcome variable in the 1996/97 wave. Standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. Stars indicate coefficients statistically distinguishable from zero,
with **: p < 0.05, : p < 0.10. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking
Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).



               Table 3: Comparison of Care Supply Across Insurer Type

                                                  Medicaid     Medicare        Private      All       N
      CTS (1996 to 2005)
          Accepting New Patients                    0.78          0.88          0.95       0.97      43866
      NAMCS (2003 to 2006)
          Accepting New Patients                    0.71           0.84        0.94        0.96 4502
          Fraction of Visits                        0.12           0.24        0.64        1.00 96794
          Mean Visit Length                        17.58          19.01        18.98      18.81 96794
          Mean Visit Length Adjusted               16.81          18.83        19.20      18.82 96794
Note: This table plots measures of patient care supply for patients with different insurance types. The first
row shows the fraction of physician in the Community Tracking Study that are willing to take at least some
patients. The next four rows report results from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS)
waves from 2003 to 2006. The second row shows the average fraction of physicians willing to take at least
some patients. NAMCS during this period was not designed as physician-level survey; the average willingness
to take-new patients is the raw average across all visit observations. The third row shows the fraction of
visits under each insurer type. The fourth row contains the average length of a visit in minutes. The final
row contains the same after controlling for diagnosis codes in order to account for differences in health across
insurer types. The final column provides the number of physician-year pairs (for willingness to accept new
patients) or the number of visits (for visit statistics) underlying each average. Source: Authors' calculations
based data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999) and
National Ambulatory Care Survey.



                                                       47
             Table 4: Willingness to Take New Patients by Patient Type

                                        New Patients        New Medicare        New Private      New Medicaid
 Price Change × Post                        0.161**             0.141*              0.067             0.275**
                                            (0.057)             (0.072)            (0.075)            (0.087)

 N                                          31,760              31,760               31,760           31,760
 Mean of Dep. Var. (1996/97)                 0.74                0.77                 0.83             0.62
 Implied Elasticity                          0.22                0.18                 0.08             0.44
Note: Estimates from the baseline pooled difference-in-difference are shown for willingness to take new
patients by patient type: Private, Medicare, and Medicaid. The coefficients displayed are from the interaction
between a Post-1997 indicator and the predicted percentage change in Medicare payments by specialty. The
predicted change is scaled between zero and one. The coefficients represent the change in the outcome
variable associated with a 100 percent increase in the Medicare rate. The implied elasticities are obtained
by dividing the coefficient by the mean of the outcome variable in the 1996/97 wave. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. Stars indicate coefficients statistically distinguishable from zero, with **:
p < 0.05, : p < 0.10. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study
(Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                Table 5: Changes in Annual Income and Weeks Worked

                                                       Log Income      Weeks Worked
                      Price Change × Post                  0.25*              0.66
                                                        [0.01,0.50]       [-1.42,2.74]

                      N                                    30,298           30,235
                      Outcome Mean (1996/97)                5.11             47.59
                      Elasticity                            0.251            0.014
Note: Estimates from the baseline pooled difference-in-difference are shown for log income and annual weeks
worked. The coefficients displayed are from the interaction between a Post-1997 indicator and the predicted
percentage change in Medicare payments by specialty. Income and weeks worked are reported for the years
1995, 1997, 1999, 2003, so the Post-1997 indicator captures two survey waves. Respondents that had been
practicing for fewer than 2 years at the time of survey are excluded. The predicted change is scaled between
zero and one. The coefficients represent the change in the outcome variable associated with a 100 percent
increase in the Medicare rate. The implied elasticity for log income is the coefficient itself. The implied
elasticity for weeks worked is obtained by dividing the coefficient by the mean of the outcome variable in the
1996/97 wave. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Stars indicate coefficients statistically
distinguishable from zero, with **: p < 0.05, : p < 0.10. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from
the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                                                      48
Appendix for Online Publication Only
A      Extended Model
    In this appendix we present a model that explicitly incorporates time use, with invest-
ments that take the form of time spent on non-patient care activities. Physicians maximize
utility, as opposed to just profit. We assume that utility is quasi-linear in profit, with convex
disutility from time spent either investing or treating patients. We start with a single period
version of such a model, where utility is described by the equations below:

                 U ( (i, qH , qL ), i, qH , qL ) =  (i, qH , qL ) + v (i +  (i)(ql + qh ))   (A.1)
                                 (i, qH , qL ) = qH rH + qL rL - (i)C (qH + qL ),            (A.2)

Here v (i +  (i)(ql + qh )) is the disutility of labor time. Labor time is the sum of investment
time i and total patient care hours  (i)(ql + qh ) where  (i) represents the time per patient.
It would be straightforward to add scalars on qL and qH to denote different time per patient
across patient types. Investment improves the efficiency with which the physician processes
patients, so  (i) < 0, and lowers the financial cost per patient, so (i) < 0. We assume
that v () is sufficiently convex to avoid corner solutions in time use. Assume that  (i) > 0
and (i) > 0, i.e. returns to time investment are diminishing. Dollar-valued investment
has been removed, so investment only requires the physician's time. Aside from these key
differences, the model remains the same as in the baseline model in section 1 of the main
text.
    A more complicated model would keep dollar-denominated investment. Within such
a model, it would be necessary to discuss complementarity between time investment and
dollar-denominated investments. This extension, however, is not relevant to our key points.




                                                    49
   Taking Case C, where qh = S (ij , s-j ) and qh < q
                                                    ~ , the optimality conditions are:

                                        
                           qH    H = s(ij , i-j )QH
                              = q¯                                                                    (A.3)
                            q  = qH
                                       
                                    + qL                                                              (A.4)
                      rL          = (i )C (q  ) + v (q  , i ) (i) .                                   (A.5)
                 MR of group L               MC of extra patient
                   patients

                    v (q  , i ) = s (i                           
                                      j , i-j )QH [rH -  (i )C (q )] -                                (A.6)
                                     Net profit of group H patients attracted by i

                                   (i )C (q  ) - v (q  , i )  (i )q  +  (i)s (i     
                                                                               j , i-j )QH            (A.7)
                                   cost savings on        Marginal change in patient care time cost
                                  existing patients
                                     ( (i) < 0)


   There are some new terms relative to our baseline model:

  1. v (q  , i ) (i) is the marginal time cost of an extra patient.

  2. v (q  , i ) is the new implicit price of investment. In the dollar-denominated investment
     model, the price of investment is constant.

  3. v (q  , i )  (i )q  +  (i)s (i     
                                   j , i-j )QH is the marginal change in time cost due to (a) the
     changing time per patient and (b) the increase in patients due to recruitment.

  4. In terms of visual exposition, the marginal cost curves illustrated in the figures should
     be reinterpreted as (i)C +  (i)v .

    Combining the two conditions shows that, at the optimum, the net time cost of investment
is equal to the increased profit from swapping high for low paying patients plus the reduced
cost of treating infra-marginal patients.

            v (q  , i )           = s (i                                                     
                                        j , i-j )QH [rH - rL ] -  (i )C (q ) - v (q , i ) (i )q       (A.8)
    Marginal Cost of Investment                           Marginal Benefit of Investment



A.1     High-Level Conditions on Functional Form
              
    Defining qL (i) as the optimal choice of low paying patients conditional on an investment
                                                                                      
level, optimal investment is determined by the intersection of marginal cost M C (i, qL (i)) and
                            
marginal benefit M B (i, qL (i)). In the dollar-denominated investment model, the marginal

                                                           50
cost of investment is constant. In the time investment model, M C can vary with i. For the
first-order conditions to generate a single optimal allocation, we need a single crossing point
of M C and M B with respect to i. Below we outline an intuitive set of sufficient conditions
for this:

  1. Zero investment is never optimal: M C (0) < M B (0) This rules out situations
                                                                            
     where, for instance, (i) =  (i) = 0 and s (0, i-j )QH [rH - rL ] < v (qL (0)), i.e. invest-
     ment is purely a recruitment device, and the time cost of recruitment is less than the
     payoff. Given the large difference between rH and rL in practice, this seems to be a
     reasonable assumption.
                                               dM C (i)                                     
  2. Marginal Cost Slopes Upwards:               di
                                                          > 0. This requires i +  (i)[qH + qL ] to
                                                                                        q 
     be strictly increasing in investment, which means d[ (idi
                                                            )q (i) ]
                                                                     =  (i)q  +  (i) q
                                                                                     i
                                                                                        > -1.

     That is, the reduction in time per patient  (i) has to be sufficiently small relative to
     the increase in new patients. In our reduced-form empirical analysis, this assumption
     appears to hold in the aggregate since total hours weakly increase in response to a
     rate-induced investment increase.
     To express the above condition in terms of model primitives, we need an expression
          q 
     for qi
            . This is derived by totally differential (A.5) with respect to i and re-arranging

     to arrive at:



        q    -  (i)C (q  ) +  (i)v (q  ) +  (i)v (q  ) 1 +  q 
           =                                                                                  (A.9)
        i                 (i)C (q  ) + v (q  ) (i)2
                                                                                             (A.10)
                   Change in Marginal Cost of Patient Care (Given q  ) Due to Increase in i
               =
                                  Slope of Marginal Cost of Patient Care

  3. Marginal Benefit Slopes Downwards dMdi              B (i)
                                                               < 0: There are two components of
     marginal benefit. The first is the business stealing effect of swapping low- for high-
     paying patients s (i      
                          j , i-j )QH [rH - rL ]. An intuitive condition for this term to be down-
     ward sloping is that there be diminishing marginal returns of time investment into
     recruitment s (i     
                     j , i-j ) < 0.

     The second term is the reduction in marginal costs on existing patients - (i )C (q  ) -
     v (q  , i ) (i )q  . Similar conditions are required here, albeit more complex. Totally

                                               51
      differentiating this term with respect to i gives:

                                                               q          q 
                          -  C () +  C () + q  v                  + q v +    v                     (A.11)
                                                               i          i
                                >0         <0                         >0
                                                          <0                      <0

      We need the term inside the bracket to be positive. In the simpler version of the model
      without time use, such that only the first two terms exist, this requires that - > C  ()
                                                                                          C ()
                                                                                               :
      the productivity returns to investment need to diminish faster than the proportional
      increase in marginal costs from an extra patient. With time use, similar logic holds:
      by requiring that the sum of the last three terms be positive, and rearranging, we need
                     q         q 
           -                    v
      that  
                 1-  i
                     q
                         >     i
                               qv
                                  . That is, the investment returns to time efficiency need to
      be sufficiently diminishing compared to the rate at which marginal dis-utility of time
      rises.

    Examining equation (A.9), we can determine when an increase in investment causes an
increase in the total number of patients. Intuitively, if investment shifts out the marginal
cost curve, total patients will increase. The denominator is positive due to convexity, so the
result depends on whether the numerator is positive. In the simple model, the numerator
would be - (i)C (q  ) which is positive since  (i) < 0. With time investment, this is not
guaranteed. The term  (i)v (q  ) 1 +  q  is positive when 1 +  q  > 0 (note the relation
                                                                           q 
                                                                 
to the sufficient condition set out above: 1 +  (i)q +  (i)      > 0). If it is sufficiently
                                                                           i
                                                                           q
positive, the numerator could be negative, which is more likely when v is extremely convex
at the optimal allocation.


A.2     Adding a Second Period
    This section generalizes the model to two periods. Physicians invest in the first period,
which affects productivity and market share in both periods. The physician now maximizes
discounted lifetime utility:


                       j    j     j    j                      1    1
             U ({ (i, qH , qL ), qH , qL }j =1,2 , i) =  (i, qH , qL ) + v (i +  (i)(ql1 + qh
                                                                                            1
                                                                                              ))   (A.12)
                                                            2    2
                                                   +   (i, qH , qL ) + v ( (i)(ql2 + qh
                                                                                      2
                                                                                        )) ,       (A.13)

where  is her discount factor. Investment i is assumed to occur only in period 1 for
simplicity. With quasi-linear utility, the physician will consume everything in the first period,

                                                     52
or everything in the second period, depending on whether interest rates are higher or lower
                                      1                         1
than their discounting 1 + r            . Assuming 1 + r =          implies that the physician is
indifferent between consumption in the two periods, delivering effectively the same outcome
as assuming no borrowing. We will assume this, although it does not generally matter for
studying investment and care provision.
    With two periods, the payoff of investment has doubled assuming no depreciation across
periods of the accrued productivity. Even with depreciation, equilibrium time investment in
the first-time period will be higher than the single period model.
    Because there is no investment in the second period, the second period marginal cost
curve (i)C +  (i)v shifts outward because v is convex in time. This implies that a higher
level of investment in the first period will result in a greater quantity of care for low-paying
patients in the second period, following the condition that rL = (i)C +  (i)v .
    How does an increase in rH beginning in period 1, and applying to both periods, affect
investment? As before, the marginal effect of this policy change on the payoff of investing
(in Case C) comes from rectangle [qh - qh ][rH - rH ]. With two periods, the physician earns
this return twice, causing the investment response to a given reimbursement to be higher.
A higher investment response implies a greater reduction in marginal costs, and therefore
is more likely to increase care provision to low-paying patients. This is especially true for
period 2 because the marginal cost curve is flatter when i = 0. Nonetheless, if S        i
                                                                                             is large
enough relative to the reduction in marginal costs, a reduction in low-paying patient care
will still ensue. But, as in the baseline model, considering market-level responses when all
physicians invest to compete in a zero-sum game to attract high-paying patients, the supply
to low-paying patients will unambiguously expand in the second period.
                                                                  1     1             2    2
    How does the increase in rH affect patient care time  (i)[qH     + qL ] and  (i)[qH + qL ]? This
largely depends on the shape of  (i). Even in period 2 with no investment to crowd out
patient care time, an investment-driven increase in quantity might not increase patient care
hours if the efficiency gain in time per patient ( (i) -  (i )) is sufficiently large.




                                                 53
B      Supplementary Results and Robustness

Appendix Figure B.1: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Certification Status
and Income

                                                                         Income by Age and Certification
                                                   300
                Average Income 1000s (2001 U.S.)




                                                   250




                                                   200




                                                   150




                                                   100
                                                         Old   Middle-Aged   Young                     Old   Middle-Aged   Young

                                                               Non-Surgeon                                    Surgeon

                                                                                       Not Certified
                                                                                       Certified



Note: This figure presents data on the incomes of physicians with and without board certification across age
groups and specialties. At all age groups, and for both surgical and non-surgical specialties, certification
is correlated with higher incomes. 95 % confidence intervals of the means are shown. Source: Authors'
calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study, 1996/97 wave only (Center for Studying
Health System Change, 1999).




                                                                                  54
                                   Appendix Figure B.2: Attrition Rates by Age

                                  .6



                Attrition Rate   .55



                                  .5



                                 .45



                                  .4
                                     4



                                             9


                                                     4


                                                             9


                                                                     4


                                                                             9


                                                                                     4


                                                                                             9


                                                                                                     4


                                                                                                             5
                                  -3



                                          -3


                                                  -4


                                                          -4


                                                                  -5


                                                                          -5


                                                                                  -6


                                                                                          -6


                                                                                                  -7


                                                                                                          -8
                                 29



                                         35


                                                 40


                                                         45


                                                                 50


                                                                         55


                                                                                 60


                                                                                         65


                                                                                                 70


                                                                                                         75
                                                                   Age Group

Note: This figure plots raw sample attrition rates by age group. Doctors aged 40­55 have a hazard rate of
between 0.4 and 0.45, with this rate steadily rising to 0.65 by ages 75­85. This is suggestive of retirement
driving increases in sample attrition for older physicians. Assuming that attrition among doctors aged 45­
49 is unrelated to retirement, and that retirement is the sole reason for increased attrition among older
physicians, then we can infer that 19% of attrition among doctors aged 65­69, and 25 percent among
physicians aged 70­74, is caused by retirement. To see this, note that the 10 percentage point differential
between ages 45­49 and 65­69 is 19% of total attrition for the 65­69 age group. Similarly, the 15 percentage
point differential between ages 45­49 and 70­74 is 25% of attrition among the 70­74 group. Source: Authors'
calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change,
1999).




                                                                  55
         Appendix Figure B.3: Evolution of Medicare Conversion Factors

                                        45
                                                        Surgical
                                        40                      -10.4%
                                                         CTS1                        CTS3              CTS4
                Conversion Factor ($)   35                          CTS2
                                                              +5%
                                                   Non-Surgical
                                        30
                                        25
                                        20
                                        15
                                        10
                                        5
                                        0
                                        1992      1994    1996     1998 2000                 2002     2004    2006
                                                                      Year


Note: This figure is adapted from Clemens and Gottlieb (2017). It plots the evolution of the Conversion
Factors for surgical and non-surgical procedures in the Medicare payment schedule. The dotted circles show
the survey waves of the Community Tracking Study. Original source: Federal Register, various issues

                                             Appendix Figure B.4: Weeks Worked by Age

                                        48


                                        47
                Weeks Worked




                                        46


                                        45


                                        44
                                            4


                                                     9


                                                             4


                                                                     9


                                                                                 4


                                                                                         9


                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                          9


                                                                                                                  5
                                         -3


                                                  -3


                                                          -4


                                                                  -4


                                                                              -5


                                                                                      -5


                                                                                               -6


                                                                                                       -6


                                                                                                               -8
                                        29


                                                 35


                                                         40


                                                                 45


                                                                         50


                                                                                     55


                                                                                              60


                                                                                                      65


                                                                                                              70




                                                                               Age

                                                                      Note:



                                                                         56
                                                      Appendix Figure B.5: Labor Supply Before Retirement


                                                 Total Hours: Age > 60                                                                Total Hours: Age < 45

                                  6                                                                                 6
          Estimated Coefficient




                                                                                            Estimated Coefficient
                                  4                                                                                 4

                                  2                                                                                 2

                                  0                                                                                 0

                                  -2                                                                                -2
                                  8 or more       4                        2            0                           8 or more         4                         2   0
                                                      Years to Attrition                                                                   Years to Attrition
                                      N = 2303                                                                          N = 10353



                                                 Patient Hours: Age > 60                                                             Patient Hours: Age < 45
57




                                  4                                                                                 4
          Estimated Coefficient




                                                                                            Estimated Coefficient
                                  2                                                                                 2


                                  0                                                                                 0


                                  -2                                                                                -2
                                  8 or more       4                        2            0                           8 or more         4                         2   0
                                                      Years to Attrition                                                                   Years to Attrition
                                      N = 2303                                                                          N = 10353



                                                                    Relative Estimate                                Confidence Interval

     Note: The estimated coefficients from equation (13) are shown above for total hours and patient care hours as the outcome variables. Each dot
     represents the difference in the outcome variable relative to the base group that attrits immediately. For physicians age 60 or older, non-patient
     hours decline as they approach their final year in the Community Tracking Study panel. For young physicians, the number of years until
     attrition from the panel does not predict non-patient hours. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study
     (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).
                                                            Appendix Figure B.6: Other Investments Before Retirement


                                                              Certified: Age > 60                                                                            Certified: Age < 45
         Estimated Coefficient   .3                                                                                            .3




                                                                                                       Estimated Coefficient
                                 .2                                                                                            .2

                                 .1                                                                                            .1

                                  0                                                                                             0

                                 -.1                                                                                           -.1
                                 8 or more                   4                         2           0                           8 or more                    4                         2    0
                                                                 Years to Attrition                                                                             Years to Attrition
                                          N = 2303                                                                                      N = 10353



                                                      Taking New Patients Index: Age > 60                                                            Taking New Patients Index: Age < 45
58




                                 .05                                                                                           .05
         Estimated Coefficient




                                                                                                       Estimated Coefficient
                                      0                                                                                             0




                                 -.05                                                                                          -.05
                                  8 or more                   4                        2           0                            8 or more                    4                        2    0
                                                                  Years to Attrition                                                                             Years to Attrition
                                           N = 2303                                                                                      N = 10353



                                                                               Relative Estimate                               Confidence Interval

     Note: The estimated coefficients from equation (13) are shown above for board certification and taking new patients as the outcome variables.
     Each dot represents the difference in the outcome variable relative to the base group that attrits immediately. Source: Authors' calculations
     based on data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).
                                               Appendix Figure B.7: The Magnitude of Round Number Reporting


                                          1


                                          .9
   % of Responses at a Multiple of Five




                                          .8


                                          .7


                                          .6


                                          .5


                                          .4


                                          .3


                                          .2


                                          .1


                                          0
                                                   Non Patient Hours       Patient Hours          Total Hours


Note: This figure plots the percent of responses that are a multiple of five for each of the three hours
variables. Responses with reported hours of zero are excluded from both the numerator and denominator.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying
Health System Change, 1999).




                                                                            59
Appendix Figure B.8:                                                 Cross-Sectional Age Profile of Ownership and Salary
Structure
                            Panel A: Own-Productivity Affects Compensation
                                                                .9




                             Own-Productivity Affects Comp.
                                                                .8




                                                                .7




                                                                .6
                                                                 34



                                                                           39



                                                                                   44



                                                                                              49



                                                                                                         54



                                                                                                                    59



                                                                                                                               64



                                                                                                                                          69



                                                                                                                                                    85
                                                                  -



                                                                            -



                                                                                   -



                                                                                               -



                                                                                                         -



                                                                                                                    -



                                                                                                                                -



                                                                                                                                          -



                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                               29



                                                                         35



                                                                                40



                                                                                            45



                                                                                                      50



                                                                                                                 55



                                                                                                                             60



                                                                                                                                       65



                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                         Age

                                                                                1996/1997        1998/1999       2000/2001        2004/2005



                                   Panel B: Ownership Stake in Primary Practice
                                                                .9
                             Proportion with Ownership Stake




                                                                .8

                                                                .7

                                                                .6

                                                                .5

                                                                .4

                                                                .3

                                                                .2
                                                                     4



                                                                           9



                                                                                    4



                                                                                              9



                                                                                                             4



                                                                                                                     9



                                                                                                                               4



                                                                                                                                              9



                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                -3



                                                                          -3



                                                                                  -4



                                                                                             -4



                                                                                                        -5



                                                                                                                   -5



                                                                                                                              -6



                                                                                                                                         -6



                                                                                                                                                   -8
                                                               29



                                                                         35



                                                                                40



                                                                                            45



                                                                                                      50



                                                                                                                 55



                                                                                                                             60



                                                                                                                                       65



                                                                                                                                                  70




                                                                                                         Age

                                                                                1996/1997        1998/1999       2000/2001        2004/2005



                                                                 Panel C: Remunerated on a Salary Basis
                                                                .9

                                                                .8
                             Proportion Salaried




                                                                .7

                                                                .6

                                                                .5

                                                                .4

                                                                .3

                                                                .2
                                                                     4



                                                                           9



                                                                                    4



                                                                                              9



                                                                                                             4



                                                                                                                     9



                                                                                                                               4



                                                                                                                                              9



                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                -3



                                                                          -3



                                                                                  -4



                                                                                             -4



                                                                                                        -5



                                                                                                                   -5



                                                                                                                              -6



                                                                                                                                         -6



                                                                                                                                                   -8
                                                               29



                                                                         35



                                                                                40



                                                                                            45



                                                                                                      50



                                                                                                                 55



                                                                                                                             60



                                                                                                                                       65



                                                                                                                                                  70




                                                                                                         Age

                                                                                1996/1997        1998/1999       2000/2001        2004/2005




Note: Panel A plots the percent of physicians reporting that their own-productivity affects their compensa-
tion. Panel B plots the percent that are full or partial owners of their practice. Panel C shows the proportion
of physicians that report being remunerated on a salary basis, each by age group. These variables may affect
a physician's incentive and ability to adjust on-the-job investments in response to price changes. Given the
strong correlations with age, these factors could influence the age gradient of how on-the-job investments
respond to Medicare payment changes. Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community
Tracking Study, 1997­98 wave only (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).
                                                                                                    60
                                                Appendix Figure B.9: Age Patterns by Survey Wave
                                     Panel A: Non-Patient Hours                                                                                               Panel B: Taking New Patients
                         12                                                                                                                         .85

                         11                                                                                                                         .83




                                                                                                                              Taking New Patients
                         10                                                                                                                          .8
                          9
  Hours




                                                                                                                                                    .78
                          8
                                                                                                                                                    .75
                          7
                                                                                                                                                    .72
                          6
                                                                                                                                                     .7
                          5
                           34



                                     39


                                               44


                                                          49


                                                                      54


                                                                                  59


                                                                                             64


                                                                                                         69


                                                                                                                    85




                                                                                                                                                      34



                                                                                                                                                                39


                                                                                                                                                                          44


                                                                                                                                                                                     49


                                                                                                                                                                                                54


                                                                                                                                                                                                             59


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        64


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    69


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             85
                            -



                                      -


                                               -


                                                           -


                                                                       -


                                                                                  -


                                                                                              -


                                                                                                          -


                                                                                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                       -



                                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                           -


                                                                                                                                                                                      -


                                                                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                                                                             -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                         29



                                   35


                                            40


                                                        45


                                                                    50


                                                                               55


                                                                                           60


                                                                                                       65


                                                                                                                  70




                                                                                                                                                    29



                                                                                                                                                              35


                                                                                                                                                                        40


                                                                                                                                                                                   45


                                                                                                                                                                                              50


                                                                                                                                                                                                          55


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                       Age                                                                                                                          Age

                                            1996/1997        1998/1999         2000/2001        2004/2005                                                              1996/1997        1998/1999         2000/2001        2004/2005



                                          Panel C: Board Certified                                                                                             Panel D: Patient Care Hours
                           1                                                                                                                        50


                         .88
                                                                                                                                                    45
  Proportion Certified




                         .76
                                                                                                                              Hours




                                                                                                                                                    40
                         .64

                                                                                                                                                    35
                         .52


                          .4                                                                                                                        30
                               4



                                        9


                                                 4


                                                             9


                                                                           4


                                                                                    9


                                                                                              4


                                                                                                              9


                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                         4



                                                                                                                                                                9


                                                                                                                                                                           4


                                                                                                                                                                                     9


                                                                                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                                                                                              9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                           -3



                                     -3


                                               -4


                                                          -4


                                                                      -5


                                                                                 -5


                                                                                            -6


                                                                                                         -6


                                                                                                                   -8




                                                                                                                                                     -3



                                                                                                                                                               -3


                                                                                                                                                                         -4


                                                                                                                                                                                    -4


                                                                                                                                                                                               -5


                                                                                                                                                                                                            -5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -8
                         29



                                   35


                                             40


                                                        45


                                                                    50


                                                                               55


                                                                                           60


                                                                                                       65


                                                                                                                  70




                                                                                                                                                    29



                                                                                                                                                              35


                                                                                                                                                                       40


                                                                                                                                                                                   45


                                                                                                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                                                                                                          55


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                         Age                                                                                                                    Age

                                            1996/1997          1998/1999       2000/2001          2004/2005                                                            1996/1997        1998/1999         2000/2001        2004/2005



                                             Panel E: Total Hours                                                                                                              Panel F: Income
                         60                                                                                                                         250

                                                                                                                                                    225
                         55
                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                              Income
  Hours




                         50                                                                                                                         175

                                                                                                                                                    150
                         45
                                                                                                                                                    125

                         40                                                                                                                         100
                              4



                                     9


                                                4


                                                          9


                                                                           4


                                                                                   9


                                                                                             4


                                                                                                            9


                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                          4



                                                                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                                                                                            4


                                                                                                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                                                                                               9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                          -3



                                    -3


                                              -4


                                                         -4


                                                                      -5


                                                                                 -5


                                                                                            -6


                                                                                                         -6


                                                                                                                   -8




                                                                                                                                                         -3



                                                                                                                                                                -3


                                                                                                                                                                          -4


                                                                                                                                                                                     -4


                                                                                                                                                                                                -5


                                                                                                                                                                                                             -5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -8
                         29



                                   35


                                            40


                                                        45


                                                                    50


                                                                               55


                                                                                           60


                                                                                                       65


                                                                                                                  70




                                                                                                                                                    29



                                                                                                                                                              35


                                                                                                                                                                        40


                                                                                                                                                                                   45


                                                                                                                                                                                              50


                                                                                                                                                                                                           55


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70




                                                                       Age                                                                                                                          Age

                                            1996/1997        1998/1999         2000/2001        2004/2005                                                              1996/1997        1998/1999         2000/2001          2004/2005




Note: This figure plots average weekly patient care hours, and total weekly hours worked, by age group.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Community Tracking Study, 1996/97 wave only (Center
for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                                                                                                                         61
                              Appendix Table B.1: Practice Type

                                                                       Count
                             Solo Practice                             12577
                             Group Practice                            12093
                             Privately-Owned Hospital                   5021
                             Medical School/Univ                        3429
                             Two Physician Practice                     3008
                             Group Model HMO                            1258
                             Free-Standing Clinic                       1150
                             Staff Model HMO                            1134
                             State/local Government Hospital             621
                             State/local Government Clinic               531
                             Other                                       510
                             Integrated Health System                    466
                             PPM                                         455
                             Community Health Center                     367
                             Independent Contractor                      321
                             State/local Government Other                211
                             PHO                                         185
                             Foundation                                  99
                             MSO                                         89
                             Locum Tenens                                89
                             Other Insurance                             79
                             Employer-based Clinic                       74
                             Total                                     43767

This table displays the frequency of different practice types as reported by respondents. Solo practice, two-
physician, and group practice make up the large majority of respondents. Source: Authors' calculations
based on data from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                                                     62
             Appendix Table B.2: Descriptive Statistics by Panel Length

                                                         Number of Times Observed in Panel
                                                          1      2      3          4
      Patient Hours                                      44.26    44.16    44.22        45.04
      Non-Patient Hours                                  9.16     8.80     9.06          8.91
      Total Hours                                        53.50    53.06    53.35        54.02
      Weeks Worked                                       46.81    47.28    47.50        47.50
      Certified                                          0.83     0.86     0.86          0.91
      Taking New Patients                                0.75     0.74     0.73          0.74
      Income                                              167      169      173          187
      Age                                                46.78    47.66    49.39        49.96
      Gender (Male 0 Female 1)                           0.27     0.26     0.23          0.20
      Full/Partial Owner                                 0.50     0.51     0.56          0.61
      Salaried                                           0.56     0.55     0.52          0.48
      Own-Productivity Affects Compensation              0.78     0.78     0.79          0.81
      N                                                  11984    5522     4345          1926

This table reports means by the number of survey waves in which the physician appeared. The maximum is
four, corresponding to being observed in all four survey waves. Source: Authors' calculations based on data
from the Community Tracking Study (Center for Studying Health System Change, 1999).




                                                    63
B.1     Extensions and Robustness Checks
   This section discusses additional extensions and robustness checks.

B.1.1   Cohorts

    First, we investigate whether cohort trends confound the interpretation of the age profiles
from section 3 by plotting the profile of labor supply and investment within each survey wave
in Figure B.9. Encouragingly, the age profiles for patient hours, total hours, taking new
patients, and income are invariant over time. In contrast, the profile for non-patient hours
shifts downwards for all age groups. The late-career decline diminishes slightly, but remains
visible in later waves. The percent decline from age 45-49 to age 60-85 in 1996/97 was
18 percent; in 2000/01, it was 12 percent. Finally, board certification propensity increased
among older age groups, but remained constant among the young. This indicates higher
certification rates among younger cohorts, which would overstate the old-age decline apparent
in 1996/97.




                                              64
C      Data Appendix

C.1     Questionnaire Wording
Total Labor Supply

    The CTS uses the following wording to elicit total hours of work:
          Thinking of your last complete week of work, approximately how many hours
      did you spend in all medically related activities? Please include all time spent
      in administrative tasks, professional activities and direct patient care. Exclude
      time on call when not actually working.

Patient Care Hours

   Immediately after asking about total hours, the following question is asked to measure
patient care hours:
          Thinking of your last complete week of work, about how many hours did you
      spend in direct patient care activities? (If necessary, read:) INCLUDE time spent
      on patient record-keeping, patient-related office work, and travel time connected
      with seeing patients. EXCLUDE time spent in training, teaching, or research,
      any hours on-call when not actually working, and travel between home and work
      at the beginning and end of the work day.

Income

    In each survey wave, respondents are ask to report their income net of expenses for the
calendar year preceding the survey wave:
         During 1995 [authors' note: or 1997, 1999, 2003], what was your own
      net income from the practice of medicine to the nearest $1,000, after expenses
      but before taxes? Please include contributions to retirement plans made for you
      by the practice and any bonuses as well as fees, salaries and retainers. Exclude
      investment income. (If code "2" in # A4, read:) Also, please include earnings
      from ALL practices, not just your main practice. (If necessary, read:) We define
      investment income as income from investments in medically related enterprises
      independent of a physician's medical practice(s), such as medical labs or imaging
      centers.

                                             65
Weeks Worked

   Similarly, respondents report their number of weeks worked in the year prior to the survey
wave:

          Considering all of your practices, approximately how many weeks did you
      practice medicine during 1995 [authors' note: or 1997, 1999, 2003]? Exclude
      time missed due to vacation, illness and other absences. (If necessary, read:)
      Exclude family leave, military service, and professional conferences. If your office
      is closed for several weeks of the year, those weeks should NOT be counted as
      weeks worked.


C.2     Variable Construction
   We winsorize each of the hours variables at 105 hours per week. This is equivalent to 15
hour work days seven days a week. This is a fairly extreme upper bound on what a "usual"
work week can feasibly look like.

Willingness to Accept New Patients

   The original survey asks:

   Medicare:

         Is the practice accepting all, most, some, or no new patients who are insured
      through Medicare, including Medicare managed care patients?

   Medicaid:

         Is the practice accepting all, most, some, or no new patients who are insured
      through Medicaid, including Medicare managed care patients?

   Private:

         Is the practice accepting all, most, some, or no new patients who are insured
      through private or commercial insurance plans including managed care plans and
      HMOs with whom the practice has contracts? This includes both fee for service
      patients and patients enrolled in managed care plans with whom the practice has
      a contract. It excludes Medicaid or Medicare managed care.

                                              66
   All, most, some, and none correspond respectively to 4, 3, 2, and 1 in the survey coding.
We sum the responses to each of the three questions, subtract 3, and divide by 9 so that the
resulting index ranges from 0 to 1.

Board Certification

   In the 1996/97, 1998/99, and 2000/01 waves, we use the derived variable BDCERT.
Physicians are classified into one of four mutually-exclusive categories: (i) Board certified in
any specialty, (ii) Board eligible in any specialty, (iii) Neither, (iv) Not Ascertained. If the
physician fell in group (ii), (iii), or (iv) we classified them as not certified.
   In the 2004/05 wave, the BDCERT variable was replaced by BDCTANY, which sim-
ply classifies respondents into two mutually-exclusive categories: (i) Board certified in any
specialty, (ii) Not board certified in any specialty.

Does Productivity Determine Compensation

  The survey specifically asks physicians if their own productivity influences compensation.
We capture this use a binary variable derived from the answer to the following question:

          I am now going to read you a short list of factors that are sometimes taken
      into account by medical practices when they determine the compensation paid
      to physicians in the practice. For each factor, please tell me whether or not it is
      EXPLICITLY considered when your compensation is determined:
          YOUR OWN productivity
      (If necessary, read:) Examples include the amount of revenue you generate for the
      practice, the number of relative value units you produce, the number of patient
      visits you provide, or the size of your enrollee panel.




                                              67
