                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN LOS ANGELES

                                       Amalia R. Miller
                                        Carmit Segal
                                      Melissa K. Spencer

                                     Working Paper 28068
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28068


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We acknowledge financial support from the IZA COVID-19 Research Thrust and from the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation, through the NBER Gender in the Economy Study Group
Research Grants on Women, Victimization, and COVID-19. We thank Daniel Hamermesh for
helpful comments and Andrew Farquhar, Julia Kothmann, and Matthew Yorkilous for
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amalia R. Miller, Carmit Segal, and Melissa K. Spencer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Domestic Violence in Los Angeles
Amalia R. Miller, Carmit Segal, and Melissa K. Spencer
NBER Working Paper No. 28068
November 2020
JEL No. I18,J12,J16,K14,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Around the world, policymakers and news reports have warned that domestic violence (DV)
could increase as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the attendant restrictions on individual
mobility and commercial activity. However, both anecdotal accounts and academic research have
found inconsistent effects of the pandemic on DV across measures and cities. We use high-
frequency, real-time data from Los Angeles on 911 calls, crime incidents, arrests, and calls to a
DV hotline to study the effects of COVID-19 shutdowns on DV. We find conflicting effects
within that single city and even across measures from the same source. We also find varying
effects between the initial shutdown period and the one following the initial re-opening. DV calls
to police and to the hotline increased during the initial shutdown, but DV crimes decreased, as did
arrests for those crimes. The period following re-opening showed a continued decrease in DV
crimes and arrests, as well as decreases in calls to the police and to the hotline. Our results
highlight the heterogeneous effects of the pandemic across DV measures and caution against
relying on a single data type or source.

Amalia R. Miller                                 Melissa K. Spencer
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Virginia                           University of Virginia
P. O. Box 400182                                 P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904                        Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER                                         mkm8kf@virginia.edu
armiller@virginia.edu

Carmit Segal
Department of Business Administration
University of Zurich
Plattenstrasse 14
CH - 8032 Zurich
Switzerland
carmit.segal@gmail.com
1. INTRODUCTION
This paper uses high-frequency, real-time data from Los Angeles (LA), California, to study how
domestic violence (DV) has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. We focus on LA because
it is unique among major US cities in providing data on multiple DV measures from both police
and non-police sources. We address two main aims. The first is an empirical determination of what
impacts the pandemic and pandemic-related shutdown polices had on DV in LA. The second is
epistemic, about the value and limitations of using readily available real-time administrative data
to learn about the ongoing pandemic.
        The study is motivated by the widespread concern that the COVID-19 pandemic, and
especially that government-mandated restrictions on economic activity and personal mobility,
would increase DV and trap victims with their abusers. The concern has featured prominently in
news coverage of the pandemic going back to the first lockdown in China (Graham-Harrison,
Athens, and Ford 2020; Vanderklippe 2020; Allen-Ebrahimian 2020; Taub 2020; Townsend 2020)
and in policy responses to the pandemic by international organizations (UN Women 2020; FIFA,
EC and WHO 2020) and governments around the world (Kottasová and Di Donato 2020). In the
US, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, passed on March 27, 2020,
included $47 million of supplemental funding to support public policy responses to DV under the
1984 Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (FVPSA; Title III of P.L. 98-457) Program,
an increase of 24% relative to appropriations from FY2020 and FY2019 (Fernandes-Alcantara and
Sacco 2020).1 The expectation that shutdowns in particular will increase DV has also been cited
as a reason against imposing them (Friedman 2020; Lomborg 2020).
        This attention to DV within the scope of COVID-19 analysis and policy is natural given
the significant economic and social costs of DV (Fearon and Hoeffler 2014; Garcia-Moreno and
Watts 2011; Max et al. 2004) and the risks that the pandemic could increase violence. The COVID-
19 pandemic in the US has already been shown to affect a range of behaviors and outcomes that
could affect DV, including mortality risk (Weinberger et al. 2020), unemployment and economic
distress (Bitler, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach 2020), and gender equality (Alon et al. 2020). It is

1
  The FVPSA allocation entailed $45 million to formula grants for shelters and support services for DV survivors
(26% increase) and $2 million to the National Domestic Violence Hotline (17% increase), but no funding for the
Domestic Violence Prevention Enhancement and Leadership Through Alliances (DELTA) program. The CARES Act
also included a moratorium on evictions of certain tenants, including some covered under the 1994 Violence Against
Women Act (VAWA; Title IV of P.L. 103-322), though it did not provide funding for VAWA programs or for crime
victim support under the 1984 Victims of Crime Act (VOCA; P.L. 98-473).

                                                        2
predicted to have severe mental health consequences as well (Pfefferbaum and North 2020; Galea,
Merchant, and Lurie 2020). Prior economics research on DV suggests that these factors might
increase DV incidence (Card and Dahl 2011; Berg and Tertilt 2012).
         A further concern is that the pandemic increased the costs to victims of reporting crimes to
authorities or leaving the household and made it more difficult for victims to access support
services. Lower reporting rates could exacerbate the risk of abuse (Miller and Segal 2019) and
make it difficult for authorities to detect and respond to an increase in violence. If DV increases
but reporting rates are significantly depressed by the pandemic, it is unclear if we should expect
official reports of DV to increase or decrease, and how we should interpret either finding. As a
result, both increases and decreases in reported DV rates could be troubling: the increase in cases
is taken as a sign of increased prevalence while the decrease is a sign of depressed reporting (e.g.,
Stone, Mallin, and Gutman, 2020, Li and Schwartzapfel 2020).
         This difficulty is not limited to the pandemic. Rather, under-reporting is a persistent
challenge for studying and mitigating DV. When possible, researchers have employed two main
strategies to address the measurement challenge. They have either focused on fatal outcomes, such
as homicide and suicide, that are reported nearly universally (Stevenson and Wolfers 2006; Miller
and Segal 2019; Iyengar 2009; Aizer and Dal Bó 2009) or they have relied on data from other
sources, primarily medical records (Aizer 2010; Miller and Segal 2019) and victimization surveys
(Stevenson and Wolfers 2006; Miller and Segal 2019). These sources tend to be distributed only
with substantial time delays (on the order of a year or two), so are not feasible for guiding current
policy.2 Studies relying on police reports have typically assumed no effects on either reporting
(Card and Dahl 2011) or on incidence (Iyer et al. 2012; Muchow and Amuedo-Dorantes 2020) to
interpret results. Unfortunately, neither assumption is plausible in this setting.
         The interpretation of data on reported crimes is further complicated by the fact that it is not
necessary that the pandemic and associated policy responses will increase DV or that they will
lower reporting rates. For example, shutdowns may have lowered violence among ex-partners and
couples who are not cohabiting, by reducing their time spent together. The pandemic may have

2
  These sources also have important limitations when they are available. Fatal outcomes are relatively rare and may
miss substantial variation in non-fatal outcomes. Even larger surveys tend to have relatively few observations of crime
and injury outcomes, preventing any conclusive analysis of smaller metropolitan or non-metropolitan areas. There
may also be concerns that the COVID-19 pandemic is altering survey response rates or inducing additional recall bias
for past crimes. The COVID-19 could also induce changes in rates at which DV victims seek medical care, which
would bias data from hospital or medical records.

                                                          3
also slowed the rate of formation of new relationships, which could also lower (or delay) violence.
There could be a deterrence effect if the expected cost to abusers increased, either because of the
risk of contracting the virus in jail if arrested or because of higher costs to them from having the
relationship end. Reporting rates could have also increased because of increased public attention
to the issue of DV in news articles, such as the ones cited above, and also advertisements and the
dissemination of information about DV risks and support services in official federal, state and local
public health resources related to the pandemic. Reporting by neighbors or other witnesses may
have also increased if they became more aware of, or concerned about, continuing violence during
the shutdown. The potential presence of these offsetting effects implies that the overall impact of
the pandemic in any location will be an average across individuals in that location for whom the
effects may have opposite signs.
       This theoretical ambiguity is also reflected in the inconsistency in the observed effects of
the pandemic on DV. Some cities experienced increases in DV measures, while others saw
decreases (Taub 2020). Emerging academic studies of the pandemic and DV using different
outcomes, data sources, and locations tend to report increased rates of DV during the pandemic:
Leslie and Wilson (2020) and Sanga and McCrary (2020) show increased domestic calls to police
in pooled samples of US cities; Agüero (2021) and Perez-Vincent et al. (2020) show increased
calls to DV hotlines in Peru and Argentina, respectively; Ravindran and Shah (2020) finds
increased DV complaints in India; and Piquero et al. (2020) shows increased domestic incidents
in Dallas. However, the findings have not been universal and studies have reported decreases in
DV crime rates in particular cities (e.g., Bullinger, Carr, and Packham 2020); Silverio-Murillo,
Balmori de la Miyar, and Hoehn-Velasco (2020) finds significant drops in both hotline calls for
DV legal aid and in DV police reports across the 16 municipalities in Mexico City.
       This paper is the first to use multiple measures of DV, including police and non-police
sources, from a single major US city to determine whether variation in findings is coming from
differences across measures or just differences across cities. Our police measures are DV calls for
service, crime incidents, and arrests; our non-police measure is calls to the county DV hotline. We
depict daily variation these outcomes between January 1 and August 24 in the years 2018, 2019
and 2020 using figures that show the three key time periods of pandemic shutdown policy. We
estimate the effects of the shutdown using difference-in-differences comparing average changes
in 2020 between the pre-shutdown period, the initial shutdown (March 19           May 28), and the

                                                 4
period following initial re-opening (May 29                August 24), to changes in prior years, controlling
for variation across months and by day of the week. We focus on shutdowns for our explanatory
variables because they have been the primary state and local policy responses to the pandemic that
are predicted to affect DV.3
         We find significant effects of the initial shutdown on DV, but the direction differs across
the outcomes: DV calls to police and the hotline both increased, but DV crimes decreased. This
divergence within a single city suggests that extreme caution is warranted before extrapolating
from a single outcome measure. Bullinger et al. (2020) examines two DV measures from police
data in Chicago (calls and crimes) and also finds conflicting effects between the two outcomes.
Outside the US, Ivandic et al. (2020) finds increases in both DV calls and crimes in London police
data, but a decrease in crimes involving ex-partners (consistent with expectations). Perez-Vincent
et al. (2020) studies calls to a Buenos Aires DV hotline and finds an increase in calls from DV
victims, but a decrease in calls from police.
         To our knowledge, this paper is also the first to separately measure the effects of the two
initial phases of COVID-19 pandemic policy: shutdown and re-opening. If the economy recovered
somewhat and individual stress levels decreased, we should expect the initial effects of the
shutdown to diminish after restrictions are lifted. To the extent that reporting was suppressed
during the shutdown, there may be a short-term burst of delayed reports after re-opening. Although
we find significant changes between the initial shutdown and the period after initial re-opening in
LA, they are all reductions, which does not support increased reporting. The previous growth in
calls to police and to the hotline recedes during reopening, while the decline in DV crimes further
deepens.
         In addition to studying overall effects, we also examine different categories of police calls
and crimes to examine variation in DV severity. We find that the increase in police calls is




3
  Shutdowns limited mobility, business and social activity, and coincided with school closures. Each of these could
affect DV and DV reporting. As public health guidance shifted on the value of face coverings, mask mandates were
also introduced in several states, mainly in summer of 2020. By October 1, 2020, 34 states and DC had implemented
statewide mask mandates and only one of those (in Mississippi, on September 30) had been removed. California
imposed a mask mandate on June 18, 2020 for indoor settings outside the home. We do not study mask policies
because they are unlikely to directly affect DV. They may contribute indirectly by reducing transmission rates for a
given level of economic activity, and therefore by enabling relaxation of other restrictions. As a result, our examination
of mechanisms in Section 4.4 may capture some effects of mask mandates by including measures of infection rates
and economic activity.

                                                            5
primarily driven by calls for less severe crimes. The estimated drop in crimes is larger in absolute
terms for less serious crimes, but not in proportion to their baseline rates in the prior years.
       Finally, we examine mechanisms related to the pandemic and policy responses that
contribute to the total effects by adding contextual variables to our regression models that measure
key factors associated with the pandemic that could have contributed to the overall effects on DV.
We find that school closures significantly increase all of our measures of DV in LA. The effects
of recent COVID-19 cases are mixed, increasing 911 calls and crimes, but not hotline calls, and
lowering arrests (per population and per crime), consistent with policing intensity dropping in
response to disease risk, but not to shutdown policy itself. Political protests also have mixed
effects, increasing crimes but decreasing hotline calls, with insignificant effects on 911 calls and
arrests. The mobility drop that preceded the shutdown by 5 days is negative and significant for DV
crimes, showing that the decline started before the shutdown. Higher unemployment increases
hotline calls, but not the police measures.
       Although each mechanism is operative on some outcomes, accounting for them leaves most
of the effects of the shutdown unexplained. In some cases (crimes and calls in the post-shutdown
period), the mechanisms go against the direction of the overall effect, so accounting for them
increases the size of the effect, making the unexplained impact larger than the total. Several studies
have estimated heterogeneous effects, by location characteristics or timing of reporting, to
investigate potential subgroups that are more or less affected by the shutdown (Bullinger, Carr,
and Packham 2020; Ivandic, Kirchmaier, and Linton 2020). However, we are not aware of prior
studies that have used contextual variables to decompose the effects of pandemic shutdowns.


2. DATA DESCRIPTION
We focus on LA because of its importance and the depth of publicly available real-time data on
measures of DV. Nearly 4 million people live in the city and an additional 6 million are in the
surrounding county. Relative to the rest of the country, LA experienced early exposure to the
COVID-19 pandemic and responded quickly with strict restrictions. One of the earliest confirmed
COVID-19 cases in the US was in LA in late January (Fox11 News 2020). On March 19th,
California implemented a stay-at-home order and closed all non-essential businesses (California
2020). The city of LA also publishes real-time data from the LA Police Department (LAPD) on
individual 911 calls, crime incidents and arrests that allows researchers to distinguish between

                                                   6
domestic and non-domestic cases, and to categorize both DV calls and crimes by severity. In
addition to the police data, we also obtained a measure of DV in LA that we were not able to obtain
for other cities: calls to a DV hotline. This measure captures DV cases that are not necessarily
reported to police.


2.1      Police Dispatches
Our data source for LAPD dispatches (also referred to as 911 calls or calls for service) is the Los
Angeles Open Data Portal. 4 The data are updated weekly and include dispatch-level information
on call type, dispatch date and time, reporting district, and area of occurrence. We use call type
codes and textual information on call type descriptions to identify domestic-related dispatches.
Specifically, we define a domestic-related call as any call for which the description contains the
phrases Dom Viol or Famil . Within the set of domestic-related calls, we are able to further
identify the nature of calls using call type codes. Domestic-related calls with codes 245 indicate
aggravated assault, 242 indicates simple assault, and 620 indicates dispute. We use this
information to create four variables: all domestic-related 911 calls, domestic and family dispute
calls, domestic aggravated assault calls, and domestic simple assault calls. Call counts are
aggregated at the daily level and presented per 100,000 people within the LAPD jurisdiction. Data
on population ser ed are from the Uniform Crime Report s 2018 La Enforcement Officers Killed
and Assaulted (LEOKA).


2.2      Crime Incidents and Arrests
Our data source for LAPD crime incidents and arrests is also the Los Angeles Open Data Portal. 5
The data are at the incident-level and are updated weekly. For each incident, we observe up to four
different crime codes, the date the incident was reported, and modus operandi (MO) codes. We
make use of all available information to determine if a crime is domestic (i.e., using all four crime
codes plus the MO code). We categorize the severity of incidents by type of crime based on the
most severe crime reported for each incident.

4
  The calls for service data used in this analysis is publicly available at <https://data.lacity.org/A-Safe-City/LAPD-
Calls-for-Service-2020/84iq-i2r6>. Data presented here were downloaded on September 14, 2020.
5
  The crime incident data used in this analysis is publicly available at <https://data.lacity.org/A-Safe-City/Crime-Data-
from-2010-to-2019/63jg-8b9z> and <https://data.lacity.org/A-Safe-City/Crime-Data-from-2020-to-Present/2nrs-
mtv8>. Data presented here were downloaded on September 14, 2020. To the extent that arrest information is added
with some delay, arrest outcomes at the end of our sample period may not reflect ultimate outcomes for those incidents.

                                                           7
         Based on conversations with the LAPD, we have determined that there are two ways that
domestic incidents will appear in the data. The first is with a DV-specific crime code: DV
aggravated assaults are code 236 and DV simple assaults are code 626. The second is using the
MO code of 2000. An MO code of 2000 accompanied by a crime code of 230 indicates DV
aggravated assault, while an MO code of 2000 and a crime code of 624 or 625 indicates DV simple
assault. We also observe non-assault crimes with the MO code 2000. We split these crimes into
two groups: crimes that are more severe than assault and crimes that are less severe than assault.
The more severe crimes are homicide, rape, robbery, and kidnapping. The less severe category
includes thefts, vandalism, threats, and other misdemeanor crimes. We group these crimes into a
category of crimes less severe than assault.
         We use this information to create six variables: all DV crimes, DV assault crimes, DV
aggravated assault, DV simple assault, more severe DV crimes, and less severe DV crimes. Crime
incident counts are aggregated at the daily level and presented per 100,000 people within the LAPD
jurisdiction. We also track whether crimes resulted in an arrest and examine arrest rates per
population, as well as per incident, for various types of DV crimes. Finally, we compare DV
assaults to non-DV assaults. The non-DV assaults are defined as crimes with code 230, 624, or
625 that do not have an MO code of 2000. We divide DV assault crimes by the total number of
assault crimes to obtain the share of assaults that are domestic.


2.3      DV Hotline Calls
The LA County Domestic Violence Hotline, housed within the LA County Department of Public
Health, acts as a switchboard to connect domestic violence victims with local agencies (i.e.,
shelters, legal aid, etc.). Callers to the hotline are prompted to enter their zip code. This information
is then used to transfer their call to a designated DV agency in their area. The hotline is completely
computer operated; callers only speak directly with a person after they are connected with a local
agency. We have data from the hotline on hourly call counts going back to January 2018. 6 Because
the hotline serves the entire county, we use the county population to compute our measure of calls
per 100,000 population.7



6
  We are missing hotline data from April 1-7 and July 1-14 in 2018.
7
  Note that 911 call and crime incident data is for the city of Los Angeles, while the Hotline serves both the city and
the county of Los Angeles.

                                                          8
           Descriptive statistics for our outcome variables are presented in Table 1. We provide means
and standard deviations for outcome variables in 2018 and 2019 to show the pre-pandemic rates.


2.4        Explanatory and Contextual Variables
Our primary explanatory variables for this analysis are the dates of initial shutdown (March 9) and
re-opening (May 29). We pool together the period from May 29 to August 24 as following the
initial shutdown, though we note that there was another shutdown on July 13, followed by re-
opening on September 2, right after our sample period. The additional contextual variables used
to study mechanisms are from several sources. We use data from the New York Times on daily
county-level counts of new COVID-19 infections to create a measure of new infections in the prior
14 days in LA County. 8 Our data on school closures are from the Los Angeles Unified School
District instructional calendars. We measure MSA-level unemployment for non-institutionalized
civilians aged 16 and older from the CPS monthly files (Flood et al. 2020). Because the reference
week for the CPS is generally the calendar week that contains the 12th day of the month, we match
the first 18 da s of the month ith the prior month s CPS and the rest of the da s ith the current
month. We control for the change in mobility, following the coding in Sanga and McCrary (2020),
with an indicator for the date of the major initial national decline in mobility on March 14, 2020.
Finally, we control for political protests and violence using data from the US Crisis Monitor data
compiled by the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED). 9 Our measure captures
the total number of demonstrations (protests and riots) in the county, over the prior 14 days, scaled
to county population.


3. EMPIRICAL APPROACH
Our main analysis centers on the measuring variation in two discrete time periods in the course of
pandemic shutdown policy. The first period is the initial shutdown, when substantial restrictions
to business and personal activity were imposed, which was on March 19, 2020 in LA. The second
period we define is the one following the easing of the restrictions associated with the initial
shutdown. We call the period from May 29 to August 24, 2020 the post (initial) shutdown period.




8
    <https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data>
9
    Accessed at <https://acleddata.com/special-projects/us-crisis-monitor/> on October 14, 2020.

                                                           9
        The pandemic itself could affect economic, social and psychological outcomes, and that
could influence DV incidence or reporting. COVID-19 illness and mortality in a household could
certainly affect DV outcomes, as could heightened fear and anxiety or behavioral responses to the
risk. While it is possible to control for the measured disease burden and implied risk in a local area
using data on new cases (and we do this in our exploration of mechanisms in Section 4.4), it is
difficult to measure the subjective perceptions that individuals hold about those risks. Although
California was among the first states to experience local COVID-19 transmission and deaths, the
cumulative reported case numbers were still below 2.5% of the county population by the end of
our sample period (August 24, 2020). This means that the direct effect of cases may be less likely
to affect DV outcomes than the responses to increased disease risk. Because of that, and the fact
that shutdown policies could shift perceptions about risk and seriousness and increase the salience
of the pandemic in the population, even without changes in cases, it is empirically difficult to
isolate the impact of shutdowns from changes in risk. Rather than attempting to do that, we focus
on estimating the impact of shutdown policy variation, with the understanding that the mandates
can have both direct effects by proscribing certain activities as well as indirect effects related to
shifting perceptions.
    Our basic empirical model takes a day as the unit of analysis and regresses various DV
outcomes, scaled to population, on indicators for days that follow the start of the initial shutdown
(InitialShutdownt) or that follow the initial re-opening (PostInitialShutdownt). The estimation
equation is:
    (1) DV =   +   +  +  +  + 
The  coefficient is a difference-in-differences estimate of the average change in outcomes
between the initial shutdown in 2020 and the earlier part of the same year, compared to the average
seasonal variation between those periods in the two prior years. The  coefficient is the
difference-in-differences estimate for the change in the post-shutdown period, relative to the initial
shutdown period, between 2020 and the two prior years. We include a vector of year fixed effects
 and account for seasonal and within-week variation with month ( ) and day of week ( )
fixed effects.
        Our basic model considers each shutdown period as a whole, notwithstanding the variation
in restrictions during the initial period and following the initial re-opening. We therefore
supplement our regressions with figures that plot daily variation in outcomes and to depict the

                                                 10
variability within each of the three main time periods. The figures show smoothed (7-day moving
average) measures of each of our outcomes of interest over the period from January 1 to August
24. The bold red line in each figure is for 2020. Data from two prior years (2019 and 2018) are
shown (in black and grey) to provide a benchmark for seasonal variation the figures. Vertical lines
depict the start and end of the initial shutdown period.
      After presenting the overall effects of the pandemic shutdowns, using figures and regressions,
we then expand our regression analysis to explore the mechanisms underlying the overall effects.
We do this using data related to potential pathways for the COVID-19 pandemic policy to affect
DV outcomes and then assessing their contributions to the overall impacts we find. In particular,
we estimate an expanded version of equation 1:
      (2) DV =   +   +   +  +  +
                  + 
The second model is the same as the first, with the addition of a vector of controls  containing
these elements: indicator for school closure, including weekends and holidays; MSA-level
monthly unemployment rate; indicator for dates after the initial national mobility drop on March
14, 2020; number of new COVID-19 cases in the county over the prior 14 days, scaled to
population; and the number of political protests and riots in the county over the prior 14 days, per
100,000 people. The interpretation of the  and  coefficients in this model is shifted from the
overall effect of the pandemic policies (in equation 1) to the unexplained portion of the effect that
is not attributable to variables in the included  controls.


4. ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON DV IN LA
4.1      Overall Effects by DV Outcome
This section presents estimates for the total effects on of the shutdown policies on measures of
each of the four types of DV outcomes we observe for LA. These are: (1) 911 calls, (2) crime
incidents and (3) arrests from LAPD data, and (4) calls to the DV hotline. This section contains
the high-level examination of all calls and crimes related to DV; we later examine calls and crimes
separately by severity. For arrests, we first consider total daily DV arrests per population and then
examine arrest propensities at the level of individual DV crime incidents.
         We start with DV-related calls for service. Similar to prior papers, we find an increase in
calls to police related to DV following the initial shutdown in LA. The volume of DV-related

                                                  11
service calls was initially lower in 2020 than in the two earlier years, but there was a clear relative
increase following the initial shutdown (Figure 1, Panel A). However, the initial increase in calls
was followed by a larger decrease in the period immediately following the initial shutdown.
       This pattern is also present in the regression results from equation (1), using the number of
DV-related 911 calls to the LAPD, scaled to population 100,000 people served, reported in column
1 of Table 2. Calls increased by 0.54 per day (s.e. 0.08; a 13% increase relative to the 2018-2019
mean of 4.06 in Table 1) during the initial shutdown period and then declined by 0.69 (s.e. 0.08)
from that relative peak. Comparing the post-shutdown period to the period before the initial
shutdown, we find a significant (p = 0.05, reported in the final row of Table 2) decrease in call
 olume of 0.15, corresponding to 4% of the prior            ears mean. Th is result highlights the
importance of examining evolving public policy and of measuring effects beyond the immediate
shock. The initial impact of the pandemic on DV police calls in LA was not reflective of the long-
term or overall effects.
       The contrast between the estimates for 911 calls and the next results for crime rates
highlights the importance of studying multiple types of data. We find conflicting effects even
within a single city, over the same time periods, and from the same data source. DV calls to police
increased during the initial shutdown period (Figure 1, Panel A), but DV crimes decreased (Panel
B). Furthermore, Panel A shows a reversal of the effect in the post-shutdown period of the effect
on calls, while Panel B shows a continuation of the effect for crimes. Crime rates were initially
similar across the three years (2018-2020), but there was a significant relative decline in 2020
starting in late March that persisted over the summer. The regression estimates in Table 2 (column
2) show a drop of 0.12 (s.e. 0.02) in the initial shutdown period, with a further incremental drop
of 0.08 (s.e. 0.03) afterward. The total change in the post-shutdown period (relative to the pre-
shutdown period) is a drop of 0.21 crimes (p < 0.001), corresponding to a 15% reduction in DV
crimes compared to the 2018-2019 average of 1.34 in Table 1.
       The effects on DV arrests, scaled to population, echo those on DV crimes. Panel A of
Figure 2 shows a relative decline in 2020 during the initial shutdown that increased in size during
the post-shutdown period. The regression estimates in Table 3, column 1, show a small and
statistically insignificant decline of 0.01 (s.e. 0.02) in DV arrests during the initial shutdown,
followed by a significant drop of 0.09 (s.e. 0.02) in the post-shutdown period.



                                                  12
        The pattern for calls to the hotline is closer to the pattern for police calls than for crime
incidents. Figure 3 shows a substantial increase in hotline call volume during the initial shutdown
period with no counterpart in the prior years. The call level continued to grow during the shutdown
period and then decreased sharply around the time of the initial re-opening. In contrast to the
pattern in Figure 1 for police calls, however, the level of hotline calls remained well above average
through the month of August. Regression estimates in Table 2 (column 3) confirm the significant
increase of 0.22 calls (s.e. 0.02), the significant drop of 0.08 calls (s.e. 0.03) and the persistence of
the elevated calls level in the post-shutdown period relative to the pre-shutdown period (0.22-0.08
= 0.14, significant at p < 0.000). The size of the initial increase corresponds to a 152% increase
relative to the mean of .15 calls in 2018-2019 (Table 1). Even the smaller 0.14 increase in the post-
shutdown period reflects 98% more daily calls than the average in the prior two years.
        The estimated effects of the COVID-19 shutdowns in LA differ dramatically across the
outcomes we considered. When comparing calls to police or to shelters, the magnitudes of
estimates are quite different, particularly relative to the average rates of each call type, but the
general directions are the same: first an increase and then a decrease. For crimes, however, the
initial shutdown estimate has the opposite sign and the post-shutdown period shows an
amplification of the initial effect rather than a reversal of it.
        These stark differences, within a single city, highlight the limitation of relying on a single
type or even a single source of data to measure the total impact of the COVID-19 shutdowns on
DV. Nevertheless, these may still be consistent with more subtle impact of the shutdowns on DV.
In the next sections, we use detailed information on DV calls and crimes available from the LAPD
to examine variation within severity categories as we explore the forces driving the divergence
between the two outcomes.


4.2     Analysis of Severity of DV Calls and Crimes
One way to reconcile the initial increase in DV calls and with no corresponding increase in DV
crimes is that increase in calls came from disturbances or conflicts that were not actually criminal
incidents. This could happen, for example, if there was increased reporting of DV to police by
third parties (such as neighbors) who have limited information about the events inside the home
(e.g., as found Ivandic, Kirchmaier, and Linton 2020 in London). They might have been more
likely to call police during the shutdown because they are spending more time at home or because

                                                    13
of exposure to informational campaigns about the danger of increased DV during the pandemic.
Another possibility is that increased publicity around the issue of DV (or heightened concern about
being shut-in with a potential abuser) increased the propensity of first-time (or low severity)
victims to report incidents to police before they escalated to criminal incidents, consistent with
heterogeneous effects found in Leslie and Wilson (2020) and Sanga and McCrary (2020). In that
case, effective police intervention could lower rates of future crimes.
        Both of these stories would result from more 911 calls coming from less severe incidents.
Because we are unable to observe data on the underlying incident when a criminal incident report
is not filed, we first examine severity information contained in the initial service call. The
information could be erroneous for various reasons,10 but it should also be systematically related
to the underlying severity of the incident. We therefore split 911 calls, based on LAPD
classifications, into the broad categories of domestic disputes and DV assaults and examine each
outcome separately with figures and regressions.
        As shown in Panel A of Figure 4, there is a clear increase in calls for domestic disputes
during the shutdown, followed by a dramatic decline after re-opening. This is consistent with the
changes in domestic calls coming from less severe incidents. However, Panel B of Figure 4 also
shows a relative increase in DV calls classified as assaults during the initial shutdown period. The
trendline for DV assaults in 2020 started at a much lower baseline than the lines for the prior two
years. During the shutdown, the 2020 line increased to a level more similar to the prior two years,
and then it declined again following re-opening. If we assume that the earlier baseline would have
persisted absent the pandemic, then there is also a clear increase in calls classified as assaults.
        The estimates for these categories of DV calls are in Table 4. The first column repeats the
overall estimate from Table 2, while the next two columns decompose the estimate into
contributions from domestic disputes (column 2) and assaults (column 3). Both show significant
increases during the initial shutdown, but the magnitude of the increase in disputes is larger than
the one for assault in both absolute terms (0.41 versus 0.13) and relative to the 2018-2019 baseline
mean for that variable (in Table 1; 16% versus 8.4%).
        When we further subdivide calls classified as assaults into simple and aggravated DV
assaults, we find that the increase in assaults is coming from an increase in simple assaults. Column


10
  For example, violence may escalate between the 911 call and time that police arrive at the scene, or third-party
callers may misunderstand the situation.

                                                       14
4 of Table 4 shows an increase in simple assaults of 0.13 (s.e. 0.04) during the initial shutdown
(that is reversed afterward), while column 5 shows an increase in aggravated of only 0.003 (s.e.
0.017). Although calls for simple DV assaults are significantly more common than those for
aggravated DV assaults (Table 1), the estimated increases during the shutdown are proportionally
much larger for simple (10%) than for aggravated (0.8%). This pattern is similarly reflected in
Figure 6, where simple DV assaults are in Panel A and aggravated DV assaults are in Panel B.
       We also examine the severity of crimes recorded by the LAPD and find declines in both
assaults (Panel A of Figure 5) and non-assault DV crimes (Panel B of Figure 5). The point
estimates are negative and significant in both periods for both overall DV assaults and simple
assaults. The point estimates for DV aggravated assaults (-0.020 and -0.018) are smaller than those
for DV simple assaults (-0.055 and -0.059), and not statistically significant. This is reflected in
Figure 6, where Panel A shows a clear decline in DV simple assaults and Panel B for aggravated
DV assaults is much noisier. Despite their lack of significance, the estimated effects for aggravated
assaults are proportionally larger. Relative to average crime levels in 2018-2019, DV aggravated
assaults initially declined by 9.5% and then by a further 8.6%, while simple assaults declined by
6.5% and then 6.9%. In columns 5 and 6 of Table 5, we split non-assault DV crimes into those less
severe than assault and more severe than assault. We find significant declines in those outcomes
during the initial shutdown period with no additional change in re-opening. The point estimates
are larger for less severe crimes, but the effects are proportionally larger for more severe (24.2%)
than for less severe (13.8%) crimes. Overall, these results show reductions in both more and less
severe crimes, with generally larger proportional effects in the more severe categories.


4.3    Interpretation of Overall Effects on DV Outcomes in LA
The results in the previous sub-section indicate that the increase in calls is coming primarily, but
not exclusively, from less severe DV. This could either happen if less severe crimes are more
responsive to the pandemic or if reporting rate increased more for those crimes. Evidence from
victimization surveys shows that reporting rates are higher when the incident is more severe (e.g.,
Miller and Segal 2019, Appendix Table 2C). If the pandemic only lowered the severity threshold
for reporting, it should shift the distribution of reported incidents toward less severe cases. To the
extent that increase in calls is from cases that are less severe than the threshold for a crime, it is
possible to reconcile increased calls with no corresponding increase in crimes.

                                                 15
        But why are reported crime rates falling? One possibility is that crime incidence is
declining. This could happen as a result of increased reporting (or even the expectation of a higher
reporting rate on the part of potential abusers), even of non-crime DV incidents, if police
interventions are effective at deterring escalation or if police assist victims in accessing supportive
social and legal resources in the community. 11
        Community advocacy resources can also be accessed directly by calls to DV shelters
through the hotline we study. In addition to the increase in general publicity around the issue of
DV during the pandemic, there was special attention to the issue of emergency shelter housing for
victims and a well-publicized initiative in the city to provide support services and hotel rooms as
needed to supplement emergency shelter beds. The program, called Project Safe Haven, was
announced by the LA mayor Eric Garcetti in his daily briefing on April 29, 2020 and funded in
part by a $4.2 million donation from the singer Rihanna and Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey. 12 To the
extent that the increased hotline calls in our data also reflect greater use of non-police community
resources, there may be a natural relationship between hotline calls and lower crime. Under this
interpretation of the data in LA, the policy implication is that there was capacity to improve DV
outcomes in the city, through initiatives that increase reporting to police and non-police public
services. The pandemic may have been an impetus in LA and other cities to pay more attention to
DV victims and crime incidence may have decreased.
        In contrast to this optimistic interpretation, it is also possible to explain the pattern in calls
and overall crimes as coming from a decrease rather than an increase in reporting rates, coupled
with an even larger increase in the incidence of violence. If reporting rates were depressed more
for more serious crimes, perhaps among victims with fewer resources to exit the relationship and
access police or other services, we might see an increase in calls for less serious incidents but a
decline for more serious cases. It is impossible to use the publicly available data from LA to
determine how the distribution of calls by severity maps into crime incidents by severity or DV
coding and the extent to which this mapping is affected by the pandemic. It would be possible if




11
   This could happen, for example, through the Domestic Abuse Response Team (DART) partnership program
between the LAPD and local victim advocacy organizations.
12
   See local news coverage at <https://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2020/04/09/rihanna-twitter-ceo-donate-4-2m-to-
shelter-domestic-violence-victims-amid-coronavirus-pandemic/>.

                                                     16
LA provided a common identifier with which to merge the calls and crimes data, but they declined
our request for this information.13
        Another troubling possibility is that crime rates increased, and that is what drove the
increase in reporting, but that police were less responsive and less likely to record domestic
incidents as crimes in official data. Here again, data that tracks DV calls into various outcomes
could shed light on the relevance of the story, but the data are not available to us. One possibility
that we can explore is the effect on arrests.
        One reason that police might avoid recording DV incidents as crimes is that they are
reluctant to arrest abusers. This could be to protect offenders from the increased risk of COVID-
19 infections in jails (Hawks, Woolhandler, and McCormick 2020) or from a desire to minimize
their own exposure to potentially infected individuals. DV arrests per population declined
somewhat during the initial shutdown (in Figure 3, Panel A and Table 3, column 2), consistent
with less policing, but this decline could come from a decrease in crimes. We therefore examine
policing intensity using incident level data on arrests to test if the pandemic depressed arrest rates,
conditional on crime incidents. The incident-level regression estimates for all DV crimes are in
column 2 of Table 3; Figure 2, Panel B shows similar information with the daily (7-day moving
average) share of DV crimes leading to arrests. Neither shows any evidence of lower arrest rates
during the initial shutdown. To examine if the decline is being masked by a shift in the mix of
cases, we also estimate the incident-level arrest model for each of our sub-categories of DV crimes.
The estimates are in the remaining columns of Table 3: assaults in column 3, simple assaults in
column 4, and non-assault crimes in column 5. We see no decline in arrests for any of these
outcomes and the coefficients are generally positive (and insignificant). The initial decrease in DV
crimes is therefore unlikely to be explained by less intensive policing of DV overall. However, we
do find negative estimates for arrest rates in the post-shutdown period, which suggests that less
intensive policing might contribute to the persistence of the decrease in crime rates in the second
period. We return to this in the next section on mechanism.
        Before turning to mechanism, we first place the estimated decline in DV crimes in the
broader context of violent crimes in the city. To increase comparability, we focus on assaults.
Column 2 of Table 6 reports estimated effects of the pandemic on assaults that are not coded as


13
  We also requested records from internal reports maintained by the department on domestic incidents that are not
considered crimes, but that request was also denied.

                                                       17
DV and column 1 repeats the estimates for DV assaults (from column 2 of Table 5). The decrease
in DV assaults is also present for non-DV assaults in the initial shutdown period, and the effect is
substantially larger in magnitude. As a result, the share of assaults attributable to DV actually
increased during the initial shutdown, despite the drop in DV crimes, as shown in column 3. In the
period after the shutdown, DV assaults continued to decrease, while non-DV assaults increased
back toward their pre-shutdown levels (but still lower by 0.17, p = 0.003). During that period, the
DV share among assaults declined and was not significantly different from the pre-pandemic level.
Figure 7 shows this pattern clearly in the smoothed data.


4.4      Examination of Mechanisms
As described above in Section 4.2, and shown in Panel A of Table 2, estimation of the model in
equation 1 revealed significant overall effects of the pandemic on DV calls to police, crimes and
hotline calls. The initial shutdown is associated with increases in DV calls to both the LAPD and
the county hotline but with decreases in DV crimes. This section discusses results from estimation
of equation 2 that includes measures of different components of the pandemic and associated
policy response.
         The estimates for total domestic 911 calls, DV crimes and hotline calls from the expanded
model are presented in columns 4-6 of Table 2.14 Panel B of Tables 3, 4, and 5 show the estimates
for arrests and outcomes measuring subsets of DV calls or crimes. Columns 4-6 in Table 6 show
non-DV assaults and the DV share among assaults.
         School closure has a significant positive effect on the four total measures of DV: calls to
police or the hotline, crimes, and arrests. It also increases DV calls of all types except for
aggravated assault (where there was no overall effect of the pandemic) and DV assault crimes
overall and simple assault. School closure has no estimated impact on non-DV assaults (column 5
of Table 6). This suggests that stress or other factors associated with having children at home lead
to increased DV incidence or reporting. Because the initial shutdown increased the frequency of
school closures, this channel contributes to the increased 911 and hotline calls but does not explain
the decrease in DV crimes.


14
  We also estimated an expanded version of these models with an indicator for observations after the initial re-opening
ended and second shutdown started, on July 13. Because that indicator was not itself significant and did not alter the
estimated effects of the other shutdown or contextual variables for any of the outcomes, we focus on the more
parsimonious model in the tables.

                                                          18
       The other variables have less consistent effects on the DV outcomes. Increased
unemployment in the metropolitan area is not statistically related to any of the 3 main police
outcomes, but it is positively associated with more calls to the DV hotline (and with more non-
assault DV crimes). The mobility drop on March 14 is not significantly related to DV calls to
police or the hotline, but it has a negative and significant point estimate for DV crimes (and for
aggravated DV assaults). This indicates that some of the decline in reported DV crimes preceded
the formal shutdown. COVID-19 cases (per population; new cases in the prior 2 weeks) in the
county are significantly associated with increased DV 911 calls and crimes (as well as with
increased non-DV assaults), but the coefficient on for hotline calls is negative and insignificant.
       Political protests in the county (per 100,000 population) are associated with more DV
crimes (overall, assaults and other DV crimes), but not with non-DV assaults or with DV police
calls or DV arrests (per population or per incident), except for non-assault DV crimes. The estimate
for hotline calls is also significant, but negative. Because protests increased primarily in the post-
shutdown period, the negative effect for hotlines helps explain the decrease in calls in that period.
For crimes, however, the protest effect goes against the continued decrease in crimes in the post
shutdown period.
       Accounting for the various mechanisms reduces the size of the initial increase in 911 DV
calls by 41% (a 0.22 decline from a base of 0.54) and in hotline calls by 45% (a 0.10 drop from a
base of 0.22), leaving more than half of the overall effect unexplained. For DV crimes, the
mechanisms tend to go against the direction of the overall effect, so accounting for them produces
a larger residual effect of the shutdown than otherwise: the estimate increases by 17% (0.02 from
a base of 0.12). The post-shutdown declines in DV police calls and crimes grow larger in
magnitude after accounting for the mechanisms, but the estimate for hotline calls is cut in half.


5. CONCLUSIONS
We find large effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on DV outcomes in LA, using high-frequency,
real-time data from the LAPD and from the count s DV hotline. These effects ar o er time,
with the phases of the public policy response, and they vary across outcome measures. The initial
shutdown increased DV calls to police and to the hotline, but decreased DV crimes and arrests for
those crimes. The re-opening period showed a continued decrease in DV crimes and arrests, as
well as decreases in calls to police and to the hotline. However, while the increase in DV calls to

                                                 19
police from the shutdown period was entirely reversed in the next period, calls to the hotline
remained elevated.
        These types of variation, over time and across outcome measures, within a single city
highlights the challenge that researchers face in attempting to measure the impact of an ongoing
pandemic, or other emergency, on DV rates. Because of the heterogeneous effects within LA, we
caution against using our results to predict effects in other cities.
        Instead, we believe that our analysis highlights the need for greater transparency and
distribution of police data in US cities. We focused on LA largely because of the relatively rich
data provided by the authorities. Other cities that provide public data often provide less detailed
information about calls (e.g., not distinguishing DV assaults from domestic disputes) and crimes
(e.g., only reporting the most severe crime in an incident, only identifying assaults as domestic
crimes) and many other departments provide no real-time public data. Without better data,
researchers and policymakers have a weak evidentiary foundation on which to base their policy
choices and resource allocations in response to the current ongoing pandemic or to future crises.




                                                   20
REFERENCES
Ag ero, Jorge M. 2021. COVID-19 and the Rise of Intimate Partner Violence. World
        Development 137 (January): 105217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105217.
Aizer, Anna. 2010. The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence. American Economic
        Review 100 (4): 1847 59. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.4.1847.
Ai er, Anna, and Pedro Dal B . 2009. Lo e, Hate and Murder: Commitment De ices in Violent
        Relationships. Journal of Public Economics 93 (3): 412 28.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.09.011.
Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethan . 2020. China s Corona irus Quarantines Raise Domestic Violence
        Fears. A ios. March 7, 2020. https://       .a ios.com/china-domestic-violence-
        coronavirus-quarantine-7b00c3ba-35bc-4d16-afdd-b76ecfb28882.html.
Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumse , and Mich le Tertilt. 2020. The Impact
        of COVID-19 on Gender Equalit . 26947. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        https://doi.org/10.3386/w26947.
Berg, Gerard an den, and Michele Tertilt. 2012. Domestic Violence o er the Business C cle.
        1171. 2012 Meeting Papers. 2012 Meeting Papers. Society for Economic Dynamics.
        https://ideas.repec.org/p/red/sed012/1171.html.
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schan enbach. 2020. The Social Safet
        Net in the Wake of COVID-19. 27796. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27796.
Bullinger, Lindse Rose, Jillian Carr, and Analisa Packham. 2020. COVID -19 and Crime:
        Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders on Domestic Violence. 27667. Cambridge, MA:
        National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27667.
California. 2020. E ecuti e Order N-32-20. March 19, 2020. https://         .go .ca.go / p-
        content/uploads/2020/03/3.19.20-attested-EO-N-33-20-COVID-19-HEALTH-
        ORDER.pdf.
Card, Da id, and Gordon B. Dahl. 2011. Famil Violence and Football: The Effect of
        Une pected Emotional Cues on Violent Beha ior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        126 (1): 103 43.
Fearon, James, and Anke Hoeffler. 2014. Benefits and Costs of the Conflict and Violence
        Targets for the Post-2015 De elopment Agenda. Conflict and Violence Assessment
        Paper, Copenhagen Consensus Center, 1 65.
Fernandes-Alcantara, Adrienne L, and Lisa N Sacco. 2020. Domestic Violence in the Conte t
        of COVID-19. Congressional Research Service Report, no. IN11323 (April).
FIFA, EC and WHO Press Release. 2020. FIFA, European Commission and World Health
        Organization Launch #SafeHome Campaign to Support Those at Risk from Domestic
        Violence. Ma 26, 2020. https://        . ho.int/ne s/item/26-05-2020-fifa-european-
        commission-and-world-health-organization-launch-safehome-campaign-to-support-those-
        at-risk-from-domestic-violence.
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. 2020.
         Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Sur e : Version 8.0
        [Dataset]. https://cps.ipums.org/cps/citation.shtml.
Fo 11 Ne s. 2020. First Case of Corona irus Confirmed in L.A. Count . Te t.Article. Fo 11
        Los Angeles City News Service. FOX 11 Los Angeles. January 26, 2020.
        https://www.foxla.com/news/first-case-of-coronavirus-confirmed-in-l-a-county.


                                            21
Friedman, Thomas L. 2020. Opinion Is Trump Tr ing to Spread Co id-19? The New York
        Times, June 16, 2020, sec. Opinion.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/16/opinion/trump-coronavirus.html.
Galea, Sandro, Raina M. Merchant, and Nicole Lurie. 2020. The Mental Health Consequences
        of COVID-19 and Physical Distancing: The Need for Prevention and Earl Inter ention.
        JAMA Internal Medicine 180 (6): 817 818.
Garcia-Moreno, Claudia, and Charlotte Watts. 2011. Violence against Women: An Urgent
        Public Health Priorit . Bulletin of the World Health Organization 89 (1): 2 2.
        https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.10.085217.
Graham-Harrison, Emma, Angela Giuffrida Helena Smith in Athens, and Liz Ford. 2020.
         Lockdo ns around the World Bring Rise in Domestic Violence. The Guardian, March
        28, 2020, sec. Society. https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/mar/28/lockdowns-
        world-rise-domestic-violence.
Ha ks, Laura, Steffie Woolhandler, and Dann McCormick. 2020. COVID -19 in Prisons and
        Jails in the United States. JAMA Internal Medicine 180 (8): 1041.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.1856.
Ivandic, Ria, Tom Kirchmaier, and Ben Linton. 2020. Changing Patterns of Domestic Abuse
        during COVID-19 Lockdo n. SSRN Scholarl Paper ID 3686873. Rochester, NY:
        Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3686873.
I engar, Radha. 2009. Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence from
        Mandator and Recommended Arrest La s. Journal of Public Economics 93 (1): 85
        98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.09.006.
I er, Lakshmi, Anandi Mani, Prachi Mishra, and Petia Topalo a. 2012. The Power of Political
        Voice: Women s Political Representation and Crime in India. American Economic
        Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 165 93.
Kottaso , I ana, and Valentina Di Donato. 2020. Women Are Using Code Words at
        Pharmacies to Escape Domestic Vio lence. CNN. April 6, 2020.
        https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/02/europe/domestic-violence-coronavirus-lockdown-
        intl/index.html.
Leslie, Emil , and Rile Wilson. 2020. Sheltering in Place and Domestic Violence: E idence
        from Calls for Service during COVID-19. Journal of Public Economics 189
        (September): 104241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104241.
Li, Weihua, and Beth Sch art apfel. 2020. Is Domestic Violence Rising During the
        Corona irus Shutdo n? Here s What the Data Sho s. The Marshall Project. Ap ril 22,
        2020. https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/04/22/is-domestic-violence-rising-
        during-the-coronavirus-shutdown-here-s-what-the-data-shows.
Lomborg, Bjorn. 2020. Sa e Li es And A oid A Catastrophic Recession. Forbes. April 9,
        2020. https://www.forbes.com/sites/bjornlomborg/2020/04/09/save-lives-and-avoid-a-
        catastrophic-recession/.
Max, Wendy, Dorothy P. Rice, Eric Finkelstein, Robert A. Bardwell, and Steven Leadbetter.
        2004. The Economic Toll of Intimate Partner Violence against Women in the United
        States. Violence and Victims 19 (3): 259 272.
Miller, Amalia R., and Carmit Segal. 2019. Do Female Officers Impro e La Enforcement
        Qualit ? Effects on Crime Reporting and Domestic Violence. The Review of Economic
        Studies 86 (5): 2220 2247.



                                            22
Muchow, Ashley N., and Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes. 2020. Immigration Enforcement
        Awareness and Community Engagement with Police: Evidence from Domestic Violence
        Calls in Los Angeles. Journal of Urban Economics 117 (May): 103253.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2020.103253.
Perez-Vincent, Santiago M., Enrique Carreras, María Amelia Gibbons, Tommy E. Murphy, and
        Mart n Rossi. 2020. COVID-19 Lockdowns and Domestic Violence: Evidence from
        T o Studies in Argentina. Inter-American Development Bank.
        https://doi.org/10.18235/0002490.
Pfefferbaum, Bett , and Carol S. North. 2020. Mental Health and the Co id-19 Pandemic.
        New England Journal of Medicine.
Piquero, Alex R., Jordan R. Riddell, Stephen A. Bishopp, Chelsey Narvey, Joan A. Reid, and
        Nicole Leeper Piquero. 2020. Staying Home, Staying Safe? A Short-Term Analysis of
        COVID-19 on Dallas Domestic Violence. American Journal of Criminal Justice 45 (4):
        601 35. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12103-020-09531-7.
Ra indran, Sara ana, and Manisha Shah. 2020. Unintended Consequences of Lockdowns:
        COVID-19 and the Shado Pandemic. 27562. National Bureau of Economic
        Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27562.
Sanga, Sarath, and Justin McCrar . 2020. The Impact of the Corona irus Lockdo n on
        Domestic Violence. SSRN Scholarl Paper ID 3612491. Rochester, NY: Social Science
        Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3612491.
Silverio-Murillo, Adan, Jose Roberto Balmori de la Miyar, and Lauren Hoehn-Velasco. 2020.
         Families under Confinement: COVID-19, Domestic Violence, and Alcohol
        Consumption. SSRN Scholarl Paper ID 3688384. Rochester, NY: Social Science
        Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3688384.
Ste enson, Betse , and Justin Wolfers. 2006. Bargaining in the Shado of the La : Di orce
        La s and Famil Distress. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 267 288.
Stone, Ale , Ale ander Mallin, and Matt Gutman. 2020. Fe er Domestic Violence Calls during
        COVID-19 Outbreak Has California Officials Concerned. ABC News, April 25, 2020.
        https://abcnews.go.com/US/fewer-domestic-violence-calls-covid-19-outbreak-
        california/story?id=70336388.
Taub, Amanda. 2020. A Ne Co id-19 Crisis: Domestic Abuse Rises World ide. The New
        York Times, April 14, 2020, sec. World.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/06/world/coronavirus-domestic-violence.html.
To nsend, Mark. 2020. Domestic Abuse Cases Soar as Lockdo n Takes Its Toll. The
        Observer, April 4, 2020, sec. World news.
        https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/04/domestic-abuse-cases-soar-as-
        lockdown-takes-its-toll.
UN Women. 2020. UN Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID-19 on Women. UN Women. April
        9, 2020. https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2020/04/policy-brief-
        the-impact-of-covid-19-on-women.
Vanderklippe, Nathan. 2020. Domestic Violence Reports Rise in China am id COVID-19
        Lockdo n. The Globe and Mail, March 29, 2020.
Weinberger, Daniel M., Jenny Chen, Ted Cohen, Forrest W. Crawford, Farzad Mostashari, Don
        Olson, Virginia E. Pitzer, Nicholas G. Reich, Marcus Russi, and Lone Simonsen. 2020.
         Estimation of E cess Deaths Associated ith the COVID -19 Pandemic in the United
        States, March to Ma 2020. JAMA Internal Medicine 180 (10): 1336 1344.

                                              23
FIGURES


           Panel A: Domestic Dispatches                          Panel B: Domestic Crimes




                   Figure 1: LAPD Domestic Dispatches and Domestic Crimes

Notes: Panel A shows LAPD dispatches for domestic-related 911 calls between January 1 and August
24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Panel B shows domestic crime incidents recorded by the LAPD over the
same period. Calls and crimes are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by
the LAPD. Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial shutdown: beginning March 19 th and ending
May 28th.



          Panel A: Total Domestic Arrests             Panel B: Share of Domestic Crimes with an Arrest




                           Figure 2: LAPD Arrests for Domestic Crimes

Notes: Panel A shows total LAPD arrests for domestic crimes between January 1 and August 24 in 2020,
2019, and 2018. Panel B shows the domestic crimes over the same period that resulted in an arrest.
Arrests in Panel A are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by the LAPD.
Shares in Panel B are also 7-day moving averages. Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial
shutdown: beginning March 19th and ending May 28th.



                                                 24
                   Figure 3: LA County Domestic Violence Hotline Calls

Notes: The figure shows daily calls to the LA County Domestic Violence Hotline between January
1 and August 24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Calls are presented as 7-day moving averages per
100,000 population in Los Angeles County Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial
shutdown: beginning March 19th and ending May 28th.




                                             25
           Panel A: Domestic Disputes                          Panel B: Domestic Assaults




            Figure 4: LAPD Dispatches for Domestic Disputes and Domestic Assaults

Notes: Panel A shows LAPD dispatches for domestic dispute and family fight calls between January 1
and August 24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Panel B shows LAPD dispatches for domestic assault calls over
the same period. Calls are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by the
LAPD. Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial shutdown: beginning March 19th and ending May
28th.




            Panel A: Domestic Assaults                    Panel B: Non-Assault Domestic Crimes




                   Figure 5: LAPD Domestic Assault and Non-Assault Crimes

Notes: Panel A shows domestic assault crime incidents recorded by the LAPD between January 1 and
August 24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Panel B shows non-assault domestic crime incidents over the same
period. Crimes are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by the LAPD.
Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial shutdown: beginning March 19th and ending May 28th.




                                                 26
        Panel A: Domestic Simple Assaults                 Panel B: Domestic Aggravated Assaults




                Figure 6: LAPD Domestic Simple and Aggravated Assault Crimes

Notes: Panel A shows domestic simple assault crime incidents recorded by the LAPD between January
1 and August 24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Panel B shows domestic aggravated assault crime incidents
over the same period. Crimes are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by
the LAPD. Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial shutdown: beginning March 19 th and ending
May 28th.




               Panel A: DV Assaults                              Panel B: Non-DV Assaults




              Figure 7: LAPD Domestic Assault and Non-Domestic Assault Crimes

Notes: Panel A shows domestic assault crime incidents recorded by the LAPD between January 1 and
August 24 in 2020, 2019, and 2018. Panel B shows non-domestic assault crime incidents over the same
period. Crimes are presented as 7-day moving averages per 100,000 population served by the LAPD.
Vertical lines indicate the timing of the initial shutdown: beginning March 19th and ending May 28th.




                                                 27
TABLES

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Los Angeles

                                                                 Mean             Std. Dev.
                                                                         2018-2019
911 calls to police
   All DV calls                                                  4.06                 0.61
   DV assault calls                                              1.59                 0.33
       DV aggravated assault calls                               0.32                 0.10
       DV simple assault calls                                   1.27                 0.28
   Domestic dispute calls                                        2.47                 0.38
   Non-DV assault calls                                          6.40                 0.93
       Non-DV aggravated assault calls                           3.26                 0.58
       Non-DV simple assault calls                               3.15                 0.48

Crime incidents
    All DV crime                                                 1.34                0.25
    DV assaults                                                  1.06                0.22
        DV aggravated assaults                                   0.21                0.079
        DV simple assaults                                       0.85                0.19
    Other DV crime                                               0.27                0.083
        DV crime, more severe than assault                       0.054               0.037
        DV crime, less severe than assault                       0.22                0.08
    Non-DV assaults                                              2.10                0.34
    DV share of assaults                                         0.35                0.05
    DV arrests                                                   0.34                0.11

DV hotline calls                                                 0.15                0.073

Contextual variables for all years
   Monthly MSA unemployment rate                                 0.043              0.0044
   Public schools closed                                         0.49                0.50

                                                                           2020
Contextual variables in 2020
   New COVID-19 Cases, Prior 14 Days                             0.069               0.092
   Political Protests and Violence, Prior 14 Days                0.13                0.22

Notes: Data on 911 calls, crime incidents, and arrests are from the LAPD and computed as daily
rates per 100,000 city population. Hotline calls are daily per 100,000 county population and
from the LA county public health department. Unemployment rate is MSA-level from the CPS.
Public school closure is a daily indicator for public K-12 schools not being in session. COVID-
19 case data are at the county-level from the New York Times and scaled to county population.
Political protest data are a county-level sum over the past 14 days, scaled to 100,000 population,
from the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project. Sample period is from January 1 to
August 24.




                                                      28
Table 2: COVID-19 Shutdown Effects on DV Police Calls, Crimes and Hotline Calls in LA

                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                          911 Calls      Crimes     Hotline Calls   911 Calls       Crimes     Hotline Calls

Initial shutdown           0.540***    -0.119***     0.223***        0.319**      -0.139***     0.123***
                           [0.0834]     [0.0374]     [0.0247]         [0.149]      [0.0530]      [0.0307]
Post initial shutdown     -0.691***    -0.0876**    -0.0806***      -0.936***     -0.428***       -0.0429
                           [0.0829]     [0.0407]     [0.0272]         [0.207]      [0.0974]      [0.0641]
School closed                                                        0.179***     0.0827***     0.0250***
                                                                     [0.0550]      [0.0258]     [0.00875]
Unemployment                                                           -0.125        0.230      1.199***
                                                                      [0.956]       [0.391]       [0.305]
Mobility drop                                                         0.0923      -0.0914**      -0.00805
                                                                      [0.125]      [0.0454]      [0.0197]
COVID-19 recent cases                                                2.078**       1.715***        -0.152
                                                                      [0.817]       [0.394]       [0.201]
Political protests                                                    0.0941       0.357***      -0.121**
                                                                      [0.224]       [0.104]      [0.0612]
Observations                 709          709           709              709          709            709
R-squared                   0.495        0.324         0.588            0.513        0.359          0.619
Pr(shutdown + post) = 0     0.054        0.000         0.000          0.0157         0.000          0.261

Notes: Unit of observation is a day. Outcomes are scaled to 100,000 population in city (columns 1, 2, 4,5) or
county (columns 3, 6). Sample includes January 1 to August 24 in years 2018, 2019 and 2020. Initial
shutdown date is March 19, 2020. Post-initial shutdown is May 29, 2020. All regression models include
fixed effects for month, year and day-of-week. Models in columns 4-6 also include contextual variables for
school closure, unemployment, mobility drop (March 14, 2020), and county level COVID-19 cases (scaled
to population) and number of political protests (per 100,000 population) in the prior 14 days. Robust
standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     29
Table 3: Effects of COVID-19 Shutdowns on DV Arrests and Arrest Rates in LA

                                                             Arrest for DV Incidents
                                                                      Simple    Aggravated   Other DV
                         DV Arrests       All           Assaults     Assaults     Assaults    Crimes

Panel A: Overall Effects, No Contextual Variables
                               (1)           (2)     (3)                (4)        (5)           (6)
Initial shutdown            -0.00835      0.0181   0.0169          -0.000037     0.0228        0.0209
                            [0.0171]     [0.0116] [0.0132]          [0.0315]    [0.0143]     [0.0243]
Post initial shutdown      -0.0923*** -0.0395*** -0.0451***          -0.0357   -0.0460***     -0.0192
                            [0.0166]     [0.0109] [0.0124]          [0.0301]    [0.0133]     [0.0228]
Observations                   709        37,279   29,643             6,047      23,596        7,636
R-squared                     0.324        0.005    0.006             0.011       0.006        0.005

Panel B: With Contextual Variables
                              (7)           (8)          (9)            (10)        (11)         (12)
Initial shutdown           -0.0202        0.0133       0.0162        -0.0475       0.0293     0.00297
                          [0.0338]      [0.0306]     [0.0336]       [0.0863]     [0.0358]     [0.0731]
Post initial shutdown      -0.0444        0.0500       0.0345        -0.0773       0.0610       0.106
                          [0.0332]      [0.0399]     [0.0442]        [0.108]     [0.0478]     [0.0930]
School closed              0.0214*     -0.000574     -0.00415       -0.00107     -0.00389     0.00877
                          [0.0119]     [0.00710]    [0.00807]       [0.0198]    [0.00868]     [0.0148]
Unemployment              -0.00906       -0.0794      -0.0918         -0.165      -0.0830       0.0158
                           [0.188]       [0.128]      [0.144]        [0.338]      [0.157]      [0.278]
Mobility drop              0.00769        0.0255       0.0232         0.0660       0.0176       0.0280
                          [0.0330]      [0.0292]     [0.0322]       [0.0830]     [0.0341]     [0.0698]
COVID-19 recent cases     -0.326**     -0.532***    -0.500***         0.0498    -0.642***    -0.625***
                           [0.135]      [0.0958]      [0.107]        [0.256]      [0.116]      [0.216]
Political protests          0.0291       -0.0370      -0.0139        -0.0278      -0.0107      -0.126*
                          [0.0492]      [0.0334]     [0.0381]       [0.0885]     [0.0420]     [0.0679]
Observations                  709         37,279       29,643          6,047       23,596       7,636
R-squared                   0.334         0.006        0.007           0.012       0.007        0.006

Notes: In columns 1 and 7, the unit of observation is a day and outcome is DV arrests per 100,000
population. All other columns have a DV crime incident as the unit of observation and the outcome is an
indicator for an arrest. Sample includes January 1 to August 24 in years 2018, 2019 and 2020. Initial
shutdown date is March 19, 2020. Post-initial shutdown is May 29, 2020. All regression models include
fixed effects for month, year and day-of-week. Models in Panel B also include contextual variables for
school closure, unemployment, mobility drop (March 14, 2020), and county level COVID-19 cases (scaled
to population) and number of political protests (per 100,000 population) in the prior 14 days. Robust
standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   30
Table 4: Effects of COVID-19 Shutdowns on DV Police Calls by Type in LA

                                                                  Simple     Aggravated
                             All       Disputes      Assaults     Assaults    Assaults

Panel A: Overall Effects, No Contextual Variables
                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)
Initial shutdown            0.540***    0.406***     0.133***    0.130***     0.00252
                            [0.0834]     [0.0585]    [0.0451]    [0.0401]     [0.0168]
Post initial shutdown      -0.691*** -0.534***      -0.156***   -0.130***      -0.0262
                            [0.0829]     [0.0631]    [0.0420]    [0.0378]     [0.0172]
Observations                   709          709         709         709          709
R-squared                     0.495       0.330        0.463       0.425        0.193

Panel B: With Contextual Variables
                              (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
Initial shutdown          0.319**      0.290***       0.0284       0.0812     -0.0529*
                           [0.149]      [0.106]     [0.0827]     [0.0828]     [0.0284]
Post initial shutdown    -0.936***    -0.758***      -0.173*      -0.141*      -0.0320
                           [0.207]      [0.167]     [0.0941]     [0.0856]     [0.0380]
School closed             0.179***     0.117***     0.0639**     0.0556**      0.00828
                          [0.0550]     [0.0377]     [0.0322]     [0.0282]     [0.0114]
Unemployment                -0.125       -0.394       0.249        0.199        0.0497
                           [0.956]      [0.706]      [0.470]      [0.433]      [0.177]
Mobility drop              0.0923       0.0479        0.0459     -0.00220      0.0481*
                           [0.125]     [0.0873]     [0.0799]     [0.0812]     [0.0263]
COVID-19 recent cases     2.078**      1.790***       0.284        0.151        0.133
                           [0.817]      [0.661]      [0.370]      [0.328]      [0.147]
Political protests         0.0941       0.0915      -0.00521       0.0284      -0.0336
                           [0.224]      [0.191]      [0.108]     [0.0979]     [0.0489]
Observations                  709          709          709          709          709
R-squared                    0.513        0.355       0.468        0.430        0.197

Notes: Unit of observation is a day. Outcomes are scaled to 100,000 population. Sample
includes January 1 to August 24 in years 2018, 2019 and 2020. Initial shutdown date is
March 19, 2020. Post-initial shutdown is May 29, 2020. All regression models include
fixed effects for month, year and day-of-week. Models in Panel B also include contextual
variables for school closure, unemployment, mobility drop (March 14, 2020), and county
level COVID-19 cases (scaled to population) and number of political protests (per 100,000
population) in the prior 14 days. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    31
Table 5: Effects of COVID-19 Shutdowns on DV Crimes by Type in LA

                                                     Simple      Aggravated    Less Severe More Severe
                             All        Assaults     Assaults     Assaults     than Assault than Assault

Panel A: Overall Effects, No Contextual Variables
                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
Initial shutdown           -0.119***     -0.076**    -0.055*        -0.020      -0.0305**     -0.0131*
                             [0.037]      [0.034]    [0.029]       [0.014]       [0.0134]    [0.00689]
Post initial shutdown       -0.088**     -0.077**    -0.059*        -0.018       -0.00579     -0.00500
                             [0.041]      [0.036]    [0.030]       [0.014]       [0.0137]    [0.00681]
Observations                   709          709        709            709           709          709
R-squared                     0.324        0.320      0.302          0.101         0.087        0.046

Panel B: With Contextual Variables
                             (7)            (8)          (9)          (10)          (11)         (12)
Initial shutdown         -0.139***      -0.127**     -0.116**       -0.011        -0.0103     -0.00168
                           [0.053]       [0.054]      [0.046]      [0.020]       [0.0334]     [0.0113]
Post initial shutdown    -0.428***     -0.277***    -0.217***      -0.060*      -0.122***    -0.0289**
                           [0.097]       [0.094]      [0.076]      [0.033]       [0.0286]     [0.0141]
School closed             0.083***      0.088***     0.078***        0.009       -0.00293     -0.00194
                           [0.026]       [0.023]      [0.020]      [0.009]      [0.00893]    [0.00430]
Unemployment                0.230         -0.083       -0.193        0.110       0.339***      -0.0260
                           [0.391]       [0.357]      [0.303]      [0.149]        [0.124]     [0.0691]
Mobility drop             -0.091**        -0.018        0.013      -0.031*       -0.0612*      -0.0121
                           [0.045]       [0.048]      [0.041]      [0.018]       [0.0335]     [0.0115]
COVID-19 cases            1.715***      1.123***     0.897***       0.226*       0.458***      0.134**
                           [0.394]       [0.364]      [0.290]      [0.129]        [0.122]     [0.0584]
Political protests        0.357***       0.236**      0.207**        0.028        0.108**       0.0127
                           [0.104]       [0.103]      [0.097]      [0.041]       [0.0420]     [0.0214]
Observations                 709            709          709          709           709           709
R-squared                   0.359          0.348        0.331        0.108         0.117        0.053

Notes: Unit of observation is a day. Outcomes are scaled to 100,000 population. Sample includes January 1
to August 24 in years 2018, 2019 and 2020. Initial shutdown date is March 19, 2020. Post-initial shutdown
is May 29, 2020. All regression models include fixed effects for month, year and day-of-week. Models in
Panel B also include contextual variables for school closure, unemployment, mobility drop (March 14,
2020), and county level COVID-19 cases (scaled to population) and number of political protests (per
100,000 population) in the prior 14 days. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                    32
Table 6: Effects of COVID-19 Shutdowns on DV and Non-DV Assaults in LA

                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)
                              DV        Non-DV     DV Share of      DV       Non-DV      DV Share of
                            Assaults    Assaults    Assaults      Assaults   Assaults     Assaults

Initial shutdown           -0.076**    -0.385***     0.030***     -0.127** -0.438***        0.030**
                            [0.034]      [0.058]      [0.009]      [0.054]   [0.066]        [0.012]
Post initial shutdown      -0.077**     0.216***    -0.044***    -0.277***    -0.042      -0.057***
                            [0.036]      [0.062]      [0.009]      [0.094]   [0.139]        [0.021]
School closed                                                     0.088***     0.007       0.017***
                                                                   [0.023]   [0.036]        [0.005]
Unemployment                                                        -0.083  1.723***       -0.237**
                                                                   [0.357]   [0.651]        [0.102]
Mobility drop                                                       -0.018  -0.130**         0.009
                                                                   [0.048]   [0.060]        [0.011]
COVID-19 recent cases                                             1.123*** 1.393***          0.078
                                                                   [0.364]   [0.538]        [0.080]
Political protests                                                 0.236**     0.013        0.051**
                                                                   [0.103]   [0.183]        [0.026]
Observations                  709         709            709          709       709           709
R-squared                    0.320       0.278          0.115        0.348     0.295         0.138

Notes: Outcomes are scaled to 100,000 population in city. Sample includes January 1 to August 24 in
years 2018, 2019 and 2020. Initial shutdown date is March 19, 2020. Post-initial shutdown is May 29,
2020. All regression models include fixed effects for month, year and day-of-week. Models in columns 4-
6 also include contextual variables for school closure, unemployment, mobility drop (March 14, 2020),
and county level COVID-19 cases (scaled to population) and number of political protests (per 100,000
population) in the prior 14 days. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   33
