                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         STEREOTYPES IN FINANCIAL LITERACY:
                                EVIDENCE FROM PISA

                                         Laura Bottazzi
                                        Annamaria Lusardi

                                       Working Paper 28065
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28065


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Reneè Adams, Claudia Girardone, Paola Giuliano, Andrea Presbitero as well as
seminar participants to the EFiC 2019 Conference in Banking and Corporate Finance, University
of Essex, and 2016 American Economic Association Meeting in San Francisco, CA, for
suggestions and comments. We also thank Gaia Dossi, Nicola Villani and Doina Postica for
excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the European
Investment Bank Institute through its EIBURS initiative. The findings, interpretations and
conclusions presented in this article are entirely those of the authors and should not be attributed
in any manner to the European Investment Bank, its Institute or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Laura Bottazzi and Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Stereotypes in Financial Literacy: Evidence from PISA
Laura Bottazzi and Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 28065
November 2020
JEL No. G53

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine gender differences in financial literacy among high school students in Italy using
data from the 2012 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). Gender differences
in financial literacy are large among the young in Italy. They are present in all regions and are
particularly severe in the South and the Islands. Combining the rich PISA data with a variety of
other indicators, we provide a thorough analysis of the potential determinants of the gender gap in
financial literacy. We find that parental background, in particular the role of mothers, matters for
the financial knowledge of girls. Moreover, we show that the social and cultural environment in
which girls and boys live plays a crucial role in explaining gender differences. We also show that
history matters: Medieval commercial hubs and the nuclear family structure created conditions
favorable to the transformation of the role of women in society, and shaped gender differences in
financial literacy as well.


Laura Bottazzi
Department of Economics
Bologna University
Strada Maggiore 45
40126 BOLOGNA
Italy
and IGIER-Università Bocconi
l.bottazzi@unibo.it

Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
1        Introduction

For individuals to participate in today'
                                       s economy they must be ...nancially literate. Governments
and employers have increasingly transferred the responsibility for saving and investing onto
individuals. For example, the reduction of state-supported pensions in some countries means that
individuals must save in order to provide for their own ...nancial security on retirement. Consumer
credit has become widely available, making it possible for people to borrow at unprecedented
levels. The 2008 ...nancial crisis demonstrated that ill-informed ...nancial decisions-often caused
by a lack of ...nancial literacy-can have tremendous negative consequences (OECD, 2009).
        Financial literacy is particularly important for the young, as they face ...nancial decisions
that have important life-long consequences. One such decision is the investment in education,
i.e., whether or not to go to college and how to pay for it.
        Previous research has documented very low levels of ...nancial literacy in the population
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014). Not only is ...nancial illiteracy widespread, but it is particularly
severe among women (Klapper and Lusardi, 2020). In an analysis of ...nancial literacy in twelve
countries, Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) show that there are strikingly similar patterns by gender.
More recently, data on ...nancial literacy in more than 140 countries show that gender di¤erences
are present everywhere, from developing to advanced economies (Klapper and Lusardi, 2020).
        Most of the empirical studies use surveys that include three to ...ve questions to measure
...nancial literacy. Moreover, the methodology is very similar across the most popular studies; the
questions to measure ...nancial literacy are normally multiple-choice questions, with the option
for respondents to say they do not know the answer, an option that women tend to choose
disproportionately more than men. In this study, we deviate from previous work by focusing on
data from the OECD's Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), which provides
one of the most comprehensive measures of ...nancial literacy available, derived from as many
as forty questions. Moreover, the methodology was designed to take into consideration the
well-documented gender di¤erences in answering survey questions, in particular when related to
complex topics1 . Importantly, we study ...nancial literacy among 15-year-olds, thus looking at the
roots of ...nancial literacy and examining the determinants of ...nancial literacy when knowledge
starts to be shaped and ...nancial decisions become consequential. Our analysis is based on data
from Italy because as many as 1,158 schools participated and completed the ...nancial literacy
assessment, resulting in a large sample of more than 7,000 students. Moreover, Italian girls
    1
        One of the authors of the paper participated in the design of the PISA ...nancial literacy questions.


                                                            1
scored lower than boys on the ...nancial literacy assessment and it is important to explain the
gender di¤erences in ...nancial literacy at this initial stage of life, as gender di¤erences are also
present and large at later stages of the life cycle both in Italy and in other countries. Because
...nancial literacy is the result of choice, we use a model that recognizes how knowledge may be
shaped. As argued in several papers, beginning in adolescence, girls and boys face increased
pressures to conform to stereotypical gender roles that can shape how young people become
...nancially literate. Stereotypes can be rooted in history. To test the predictions of the model,
we make use of the unique data available in PISA, for example about parental background and
socioeconomic status, and we merge that data with additional information that can help explain
the large variation we see in ...nancial knowledge among the young.
    We ...nd that parental background, in particular the role of mothers, matters for the ...nancial
knowledge of girls. Moreover, we show that the social and cultural environment in which girls
and boys live plays a crucial role in explaining gender di¤erences. We also show that history
matters: Medieval commercial hubs and the nuclear family structure created conditions favorable
to the transformation of the role of women in society, and shaped gender di¤erences in ...nancial
literacy.
    We contribute to the literature in several ways. First, we use an as-yet unexploited set of
data and we complement it with a very rich set of information, which includes historical data on
commercial routes, data on the banking system, and indeces of entrepreneurial activities across
the country, providing a unique set of data to study an important topic. Second, we are able
to provide some compelling explanations for the gender gap in ...nancial literacy, not explored
in such detail in the existing literature. Third, we provide ...ndings that can inform policy and
programs. Because we show ...nancial literacy has deep roots in history, culture, and the role
of women in society, strong interventions are required to close such a gap; small incremental
changes are unlikely to be e¤ective.
    Our paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide a literature review. In Section
3, we describe the PISA survey and the level of ...nancial literacy in Italy and we present a
simple empirical model that guides our analysis. In Section 4, we discuss the empirical approach
and our ...ndings. In Section 5, we disentangle ...nancial literacy from mathematical literacy and
discuss our ...ndings. Section 6 contains some robustness checks and discussion on causality.
Section 7 focuses on the e¤ect of ...nancial literacy on students'savings and Section 8 concludes.




                                                 2
2    Literature review

Bucher-Koenen, Lusardi, Alessie, and van Rooij (2014) examine several of the reasons for dif-
ferences in ...nancial literacy levels between women and men and conclude that there is no single
explanation that can satisfactorily address these di¤erences. They also note that gender dif-
ferences are present among both old and young respondents. Other studies on gender gaps in
...nancial literacy, reviewed in Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) and the references therein, show that
there are not yet de...nitive explanations for that phenomenon. One potential reason for these
di¤erences, which has not received enough attention, is related to the measurement of ...nancial
literacy. For example, there is evidence that women and girls are more likely to skip questions in
multiple choice settings (Baldiga 2014, Riener and Wagner 2017). Such behavior can be related
to a desire to avoid competitive settings (Niederle and Vesterlund 2007 and 2010), and con...dence
and willingness to engage in tasks that are ouside of a gender-speci...c domain (Co¤man 2014).
These arguments can be relevant for the measurement of ...nancial literacy because ...nance is
considered primarily a male ...eld (see Boggio et al. 2014). Thus, if women feel uncomfortable
with survey questions on ...nancial literacy, they may answer those questions di¤erently than
men, stating for example they do not know the answer, even when they have some knowledge.
    Driva, Luhrman, and Winter (2016) ...nd that boys who perform better than girls on ...nancial
literacy assessments do think that the returns on ...nancial knowledge are higher for males and
that males are more likely to deal with ...nancial matters at work, showing that gender di¤erences
in ...nancial literacy can also be due to an individual'
                                                       s expectations and interaction with others.
Furthermore, Chen and Volpe (2002) ...nd that female college students are less con...dent in and
enthusiastic about ...nancial topics.
    Girls are also less con...dent about their math abilities, even if there is no di¤erence in test
performance (Weinhardt 2017). Since many of the ...nancial literacy assessment questions involve
math, this could also contribute to the measured gender gap in ...nancial literacy. Guiso et al.
(2008) document a gender gap in math among 15-year-olds in the PISA test scores. The results
vary widely by country and there is a high correlation of the gender gap in math with several
gender equality measures at the country level. Speci...cally, the gender gap in math disappears
in a society with a greater gender equality. Dossi et al.(2019) show that socialization at home
can explain a non-trivial part of the observed gender disparities in mathematics performance
and document that maternal gender attitudes correlate with those of their children, supporting
the hypothesis that preferences transmitted through the family impact childrens'behavior.

                                                 3
   An important work that provides useful insights is the survey by Giuliano (2017) on the role
that history plays in inuencing contemporary gender norms and gender di¤erences. She argues
that gender roles emerge as a response to speci...c historic circumstances and are highly persis-
tent, even after the circumstances have changed. There are also strong transmission channels
from parents to children. Thus, if women were not historically responsible for ...nancial decision
making and children witnessed that behavior in their parents, the historic pattern of behavior
might persist, even amidst changed circumstances. Filipiak and Walle (2015) compare individu-
als who live in matrilineal versus patriarchal environments in India and ...nd no gender di¤erences
in the matrilineal environment. They show that a sizable portion of the di¤erence in ...nancial
literacy between women living in matrilineal and patriarchal societies remains unexplained and
suggest nurture as a potential reason for those di¤erences.
   It is important to study gender di¤erences, because ...nancial literacy matters for ...nancial
behavior; those who are less ...nancially literate save less and accumulate lower amounts of
wealth, are less likely to invest in the stock market and be savvy in their investment decisions
and are more likely to mismanage debt (see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014 for a review). Women
on average are found to own less wealth (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell 2008, Neelakantan and
Chang 2010), to be less likely to own stocks and more likely to invest in ...xed-income securities
(see Almenberg and Dreber 2015; Bajtelsmit and VanDerhei 1997). Additionally, there are
gender di¤erences not only with respect to long-term saving and investment behavior, but also
with respect to short-term objectives and behavior. For example, women are found to be more
...nancially fragile, i.e., less con...dent about their capacity to handle an unexpected expense (see
Hasler and Lusardi (2019)). Gender di¤erences are also found in access to and usage of ...nancial
service. Alesina et al. (2013) examine credit conditions of self-employed and small business
owners in Italy and show that female borrowers systematically get worse credit conditions, even
after controlling for risk characteristics and bank ...xed e¤ects. Bucher-Koenen et al. (2019)
show that ...nancial advisors systematically sell more expensive ...nancial products to women.
Female bank clients are more frequently o¤ered expensive bank-owned mutual funds, and are
less likely to get rebates on the front loads. Thus, it is important to explain not only whether
gender di¤erences exist, but also whether they are linked to behavior and whether this link is
already present when people start making ...nancial decisions.




                                                 4
3        Methodological Approach

3.1       Data

To understand the determinants of ...nancial literacy in Italy and explain the gender di¤erences
that exist among 15-year-old students, we use data from a variety of sources. The main data
are taken from the PISA 2012 ...nancial literacy assessment, which was the ...rst large-scale
international survey to measure the ...nancial literacy levels of 15-year-old students enrolled
in the compulsory education system. In addition to student performance data, PISA collects
information about student and school backgrounds through questionnaires that are completed
by students, heads of school, and, in some countries, like in Italy, parents.
        Since its ...rst wave in 2000, PISA has tested 15-year-old students' skills and knowledge in
three key domains: mathematics, reading, and science.
        In 2012, PISA introduced an optional ...nancial literacy assessment, which became the ...rst
large-scale international initiative to assess youths'...nancial literacy. A sample of students were
selected at random from the schools that completed PISA's core assessments to participate in
the the ...nancial literacy assessment2 . The relative di¢ culty of each test question was assessed
using scores based on the proportion of students answering it correctly. To help users interpret
what students'scores mean in substantive terms, PISA scores are divided into ...ve pro...ciency
levels: Students in Level 1 are considered not ...nancially literate; Level 2 is the international
baseline pro...ciency level. Level 5 indicates high pro...ciency. Students at each level are expected
to be pro...cient at the preceding level.
            In Italy, 7,068 students in 1,158 schools completed the ...nancial literacy assessment. The
PISA sample from Italy is much larger than the samples from other countries and that makes
the study particularly relevant.
        One striking feature of the PISA data is that Italy is the only country where, on average,
male Italian students score higher in ...nancial literacy than female students. However, as shown
in Figure 1, boys tend to perform better than girls in ...nancial literacy in other countries, when
accounting for students'competencies in other subjects. After accounting for students'perfor-
mance in mathematics and reading, for example, boys perform better than girls in Australia,
the Flemish Community of Belgium, Croatia, Estonia, Italy, Latvia, Poland, Shanghai-China,
    2
    In general 8 students were chosen at random from each school. As many as forty questions are used to
measure ...nancial literacy and questions are designed to minimize gender di¤erences in performance resulting
from the format of the questions (see the discussion in Lusardi (2005)).



                                                     5
Slovenia, the Slovak Republic and the United States. This means that among boys and girls of
similar ability in mathematics and reading, boys perform better in ...nancial literacy than girls.
As much of the ...nancial literacy assessment involve math, we check, in Section 5, whether our
results and analyses is robust when we control for students'math literacy score.
       Girls and boys are not equally represented among high- and low-performing students. Figure
2 shows that only 5.14% of boys and 1.5% of girls perform at Level 5, while 13.94% of boys
and 15.57% of girls does not reach the baseline level of ...nancial literacy pro...ciency (Level 2).
At Level 1 the performance in ...nancial literacy of girls is higher than that of boys, although
the di¤erence is small and not statistically signi...cant. On the contrary, this di¤erence becomes
negative at Level 5 and Level 4, though the group of students who reach that level is small.
These facts are common to some of the OECD countries and economies participating in PISA3 .
       A second striking feature of the PISA data is the large regional di¤erence in ...nancial lit-
eracy in Italy: the di¤erence between the best-performing region (Alto Adige) and the worst
performing one (Calabria) is 92 score points, about as large as one pro...ciency level. Interest-
ingly, lowest-performing regions also have the largest performance di¤erence between boys and
girls4 . Figure 3 shows that gender di¤erences in ...nancial literacy are not necessarily concen-
trated in regions with the lower income per capita, but they are also present in top-performing
regions; in other words, boys are more likely than girls to perform well on ...nancial literacy
in many regions in Italy, although, when we examined ...nancial literacy scores aggregated by
four macroeconomic areas (Northeast, Northwest, Center, and South and Islands), the largest
di¤erence in performance between boys and girls is found in Italy'
                                                                 s South and Islands area. In
this macro region, the average score of boys and girls is similar to that of Colombia, the country
that ...nished last in the ...nancial literacy assessment. Thus, gender di¤erences tend to be largest
where ...nancial literacy is lowest.
       We try to explain this pattern of ...nancial literacy by combining PISA data with data from
other sources, creating a unique and rich set of information on the ...nancial literacy of young
people in Italy that is guided by a simple model which is reported below. We have gathered
information on variables that might a¤ect students'accumulation of knowledge at the regional
   3
      See OECD (2014a)
   4
      This result is not inconsistent with Figure 2 that shows that gender di¤erence in ...nancial literacy is higher
at the highest pro...ciency level. For example, take Calabria, which is one of the worst performing region in terms
of ...nancial literacy scores. In Calabria, no students reach Level 4 or 5 pro...ciency and girls perform less well than
boys at all pro...ciency levels. In Valle d' Aosta, few students are at Level 1 and the distribution is concentrated
at Level 3, where there is not a statistically signi...cant di¤erence in the performance of boys versus girls.




                                                           6
level as well as data on opinions and attitudes toward gender roles from both the Italian National
Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) and the Survey on Discriminations by Gender, Sexual Orientation
and Ethnic Origin. We also used data from the Bank of Italy, in particular the Survey of
Household Income and Wealth (SHIW), and the Gender Equality Index developed by Amici
and Stefani (2013). We gathered information from the Excelsior Survey, developed by the
Excelsior Information System, which is one of Italy's main sources of information on labor
market forecasts. Moreover, we used the historic data constructed by Bertocchi and Bozzano
(2015a) on provinces whose main cities were on medieval commercial routes or hosted a fair
or a bank in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. We also used the data by Bertocchi and
Bozzano (2015b) and Duranton, Rodriguez-Pose and Sandall (2007) on provinces where the
nuclear family was the prevailing family type in the Middle Ages. We describe below how we
have used this information to construct the variables that we use in our empirical work.
    What can explain these pervasive gender di¤erences5 ? We examine this question with the
empirical model reported in the next section that can serve as guidance for our empirical work.


3.2    An empirical model of gender di¤erences

To explain di¤erences in ...nancial literacy, we have to consider models that contemplate multiples
sources of inuence, including from the economic and social environment. We also have to
recognize that ...nancial literacy is not exogenous but that it responds to stimuli and incentives,
starting early in life. As noted in Lusardi (2015), even the rich set of information provided in the
PISA data is not enough to explain the large di¤erences one observes among 15-year-olds. One
needs to dig deeper than what is normally done in the traditional models of ...nancial literacy,
that typically consider socioeconomic background.
    An extensive literature focuses on the importance and persistence of cultural norms for
economic decisions (Alesina and Giuliano 2010, 2014; Bisin and Verdier 2011). For example,
gender norms can explain some of the di¤erences in women'
                                                        s labor market outcomes over time
and across countries (see Fortin 2005, 2015, and the surveys by Bertrand 2010; Fernandez 2011).
The gender intensi...cation hypothesis (Hill and Lynch 1983) contends that, beginning in ado-
lescence, girls and boys face increased pressures to conform to stereotypical gender roles, which
   5
     The ...nancial literacy gender gaps might not appear as large. However, as shown by Lusardi and Mitchell
(2014), relatively small ...nancial literacy gaps a¤ect individual choices signi...cantly. Moreover, as discussed by
Adam and Kirchmaier (2016) in the case of math, gaps may be symptomatic of bigger gender gaps that manifest
themselves over time as documented by Fryer, Jr. and Levitt (2010).




                                                         7
in turn causes them to develop increasingly di¤erentiated gender-role identities, attitudes, and
behaviors. Hence, during adolescence girls and boys are pushed to adopt culturally sanctioned
gender-role identities. These pressures are thought to come from a variety of sources and are
intended to prepare adolescents for their adult roles as women and men. More speci...call, so-
cial psychology has emphasized the role of the same-sex parent and of the teachers in shaping
gender-role identity during adolescence (Carlana 2019, Olivetti et al.2020). Our data allows us
to understand whether ...nancial knowledge is correlated with the parents and teachers attitudes
as well with the environment in which girls and boys live.
    Equation (1) shows our empirical model6 :

                                  K
                                  X                                   f
                                                                      X
                        j
                       fi;r   =         bi;k xi;k +   dj
                                                       0   xS
                                                            i;r   +         dj    p      j
                                                                             2;p fi;r + d3 cei;r   (1)
                                  k=1                                 p=m

    where i denotes an adolescent who is a student and belongs to a network r (regions), whose
gender j=g for girls and j=b for boys. The level of ...nancial literacy, fj
                                                                          i;r is a function of multiple

variables as follows: 1. the student'
                                    s observable characteristics xi;k ; 2. the family background
   p
fi;r that includes the ...nancial literacy of the parents; 3.her/his skills, xS
                                                                              i;r , acquired at school

that foster the acquisition of ...nancial literacy 4.the cultural environment where the student
lives, denoted by cei;r .
    Also, note from Equation (1) that we expect that the role of same-sex parent in shaping the
...nancial literacy of girls and boys is di¤erent, that is we expect dj
                                                                      2;p to be di¤erent between boys

and girls.
                        j
    In measuring f      i;r we    focus on levels of educational achievement as reected by the PISA
...nancial literacy score. Speci...c measures for each of the adolescents'characteristics come from
information provided by the PISA survey combined with data from other sources, as will be
explained in more detail in the next section.
    Family background inuences educational achievement by providing a basic set of attitudes,
behavior patterns, and relevant educational inputs, all of which are usually highly correlated
with a family'
             s socioeconomic status.
    Type and quality of schools can be relevant as well when it comes to explaining dif-ferences in
...nancial literacy. A strand of the literature has focused on the relationship between school qual-
   6
     Equation (1) can be derived from a more formal model of choice by girls and boys relying on a preference
speci...cation that is standard in economic models of conformity (see, among others, Akerlof 1980; Bernheim, 1994;
Kandel and Lazear, 1992; Fershtman and Weiss, 1998; Patacchini and Zenou, 2016).



                                                                  8
ity and students'achievement. School quality has typically been proxied by several observable
indicators such as teacher-pupil ratios, teacher education, teacher experience, teacher salary, or
expenditure per pupil. Overall, the link between school re- sources and test scores appears to be
relatively weak (Hanushek, 1997; Hanushek, 2002; Krueger, 2003). The "school e¤ectiveness"
research comes to a similar conclusion: school type matters, but not as much as do non-school
factors such as the home environment (Mortimore, Sammons, Stoll, Lewis, and Ecob, 1988;
Stiefel, Schwartz, Rubenstein, and Zabel, 2005; Teddlie and Reynolds, 2000; West and Pennell,
2003). Levacic and Vignoles (2002) ...nd that the impact of school resources is small and very
sensitive to misspeci...ca- tion. Dearden, Ferri, and Meghir (2002) suggest that while the pupil-
teacher ratio has no signi...cant impact, teacher quality may be relevant but is very di¢ cult to
measure. The PISA survey contains questions that can help us control for teacher'
                                                                                s ability.
    One of the main issues with estimating family and school e¤ects is that some of the cross-
sectional variation may be the result of self-selection. Families may self-select into schools
based on their income and residential and educational preferences. A family with talented
children may decide to live near a school that is considered to be of particularly high quality.
Families themselves can invest more in the education of their children, if the children are talented.
Addressing these self-selection issues is hard, and this will be discussed in detail in the empirical
section. One advantage of working with Italian data is that the Italian school system is less
a¤ected by some of these issues; school quality does not vary dramatically by family income
level or location as it does in some countries, such as the United States. Italian families do not
choose their housing depending on the quality of the schools. Moreover, public schools are not
considered of lower quality than private schools and the di¤erence between students attending
the two types of schools rests mainly on the socioeconomic status of the family, something we
can control for7 . We will discuss these issues in more detail later.


3.3           Variables

To carry out the empirical work, we need information on a large set of ...nancial literacy determi-
nants to be able to explain some of the gender di¤erences in ...nancial literacy.In this section, we
describe the sources of the variables used in the empirical estimation (refer to the data appendix
    7
      Bertola and Checchi (2013) show how in Italy private school enrolment leads to worse subsequent performance
in further education or in the labor market. Using Italian data they also show that private schools attract a worse
pool of students and that publicly funded schools are better suited to foster progress by more talented students.
Such a evidence contrasts sharply with standard views and evidence from Anglo-Saxon countries.



                                                        9
and Tables A2, A3, and A4 for descriptive statistics).
   In the previous section we have identi...ed and categorized the factors that may a¤ect the
di¤erence observed in the ...nancial literacy performance of boys and girls in four groups.
   The ...rst group is made up of individual characteristics,xi;k , that includes students'age at
the time of the survey (AGE); their gender (FEMALE); whether they have ever repeated a grade
(REPEAT); their immigrant status (IMMIGRANT). We also have information on the language
spoken at home, and if it is not Italian (LANG_Foreign).
                                                                     p
   The second group of variables refers to the family background. fi;r We measure the socioe-
conomic status of the family (ESCS) using the index developed by PISA, which is based on
indicators such as the occupational and educational status of parents and an index of home
possessions that measures family wealth and the educational resources available at home, such
as books, a desk, and a computer. Students are considered socioeconomically advantaged if they
are among the 25% of students with the highest PISA index of social, economic, and cultural
status in their region or economy.
   These are the variables emphasized in the PISA report (OECD, 2014b) and are also consid-
ered some of the traditional determinants of ...nancial literacy, in particular among young people
(see also Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010). We also constructed an alternative measure of the
economic status of the family using the Bank of Italy `
                                                      s Survey of Income and Wealth (SHIW) by
computing the average net disposable income of each family and matching the two data sets on
the basis of the job category of each parent. The PISA survey provides a rather comprehensive
description of the professional status of parents and we can use that information to identify the
family gender role di¤erences in ...nancial literacy. The variable HOUSEWIFE is equal to 1 if the
mother'
      s occupation (as reported by students) is equal to "housewife"; 0 otherwise. We de...ne a
variable indicating whether the mother has a ...nancial career (MOTHER_Fin.), if the mother'
                                                                                           s
occupation (as reported by students) is de...ned as a "managerial or ...nancial career". A similar
variable indicating whether the father has a ...nancial career (FATHER_Fin), is de...ned if the
father'
      s occupation (as reported by student) is de...ned as a "managerial or ...nancial career".
   The third group of variables is related with the di¤erent characteristics of the school attended
by the students. PISA classi...es schools into two categories: private or public ( PRIVATE,
PUBLIC ) and speci...es their location as village or town (population of less than 100,000),
city (population greater than 100,000 but less than one million), or large city (population of
more than one million). Schools are also divided into lower secondary schools (i.e., MIDDLE


                                               10
SCHOOL) and upper secondary school. The latter include technical schools, vocational schools,
and high schools (LYCEUM). We control for the proportion of girls in the school (PROP_Girls),
which is an index based on the enrollment data provided by the school principal.
   We use other information regarding the school where student are enrolled, such as the pro-
portion of math teachers (TEACH_Math), which is computed by PISA by dividing the number
of math teachers by the total number of teachers; the index of cognitive stimulus (COGNITIVE)
in mathematics, reported by the school principal, which measures how active the teachers are
in teaching math.
   We also use ...ve items measuring teacher behavior when giving instructions as computed
in the main PISA 2012 survey. In particular, we consider two kinds of teacher behavior: (i)
whether the teacher asks students to present their own thinking or reasoning at some length
(TEACH_Think); and (ii) whether the teacher asks questions to check whether students have
understood what was taught (TEACH_Quest). Response categories were "Every lesson," "Most
lessons," "Some lessons," and "Never or hardly ever".
   Finally, the last group of variables are related to the local environment, cei;r : Since the local
environment can inuence positively or negatively the decision to acquire economic and ...nancial
knowledge we have gathered information on the cultural environment at the regional level. We
expect that, in regions where people use media that are more sophisticated, discuss frequently
about politics or are more active politically, the acquisition of ...nancial knowledge is easier.
MEDIA_Soph is a variable that measures the percentage of people watching TV, listening to
radio, and reading newspapers (higher value=higher sophistication, i.e., more newspaper, more
radio, less TV) in 2012. POL_Talk is the percentage of people who talk about politics every day.
ACT_Pol is the percentage of people who attended a political meeting, took part in a political
parade, or volunteered for a political party. We then control for other local characteristics
that should incentivize the acquisition of ...nancial literacy. ENTR is the number of "Individual
entrepreneurs, owners, or members of family business working as shareholders/partners" over the
total population. Calculations are based on data from the Bank of Italy'
                                                                       s SHIW. BANKS is the
number of bank branches per 1,000 inhabitants; FINANCE_Firms, the number of ...rms in the
...nancial sector over the population. From the Excelsior survey, we derive the projected hiring in
the ...nancial sector (JOB_Fin) (non-seasonal jobs) over total non-seasonal projected hiring for
2012 and the projected hiring for people with an administrative/commercial quali...cation over
total projected hiring (JOB_Adm) for 2012. On the contrary, the existence of di¤erent beliefs


                                                11
regarding the role of women in society and in the economy might increase the cost of acquiring
...nancial knowledge. Gender di¤erences at the regional level are captured by the Gender Equality
Index developed by Amici and Stefani (2013). An alternative index is the Italian Gender Gap
Index (IGGI) by Bozzano (2012), which is formulated by taking into account several measures
of gender equality, such as access to economic resources, political and public power, educational
attainment, and health. Of these four dimensions we use only the ...rst two, as there is no
regional heterogeneity in the educational attainment and health. We also use the Stereotype
Index which is based on a survey on prejudice by gender, sexual orientation, and ethnic origin,
which was carried out for the ...rst time in 2011 thanks to an agreement between ISTAT and the
Department of Equal Opportunities. We use only four questions from the survey. The survey
asks whether the interviewee agrees with these statements: (1) That it is mainly the man who
has to take care of the economic needs of the family, (2) that it is the man who makes the most
relevant decisions in the family, (3) that it is more important for men than for women to have
a university degree, and (4) that men are less suitable for household chores.
   Finally, we used some historical variables that have been found to be related to the gen-
der gap in Italy in other works. Bertocchi and Bozzano (2015a) computed the percentage of
provinces in a region (COMM_Route) whose main city was on a Medieval commercial route or
hosted a fair or a bank in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. As shown by Bertocchi et
al.,(2015a) back in medieval Italy, the e¤ect of trade on the promotion of women'
                                                                                s education
run through two parallel and mutually reinforcing channels that reected fundamental economic
incentives. Bertocchi and Bozzano (2015b) and Duranton, Rodriguez-Pose, and Sandall (2007)
also constructed a variable measuring the nuclear family structure (NFS), which reports the
percentage of provinces in a given region in which the nuclear family was the prevailing family
type during the Middle Ages. The nuclear family structure is de...ned as one in which children
form independent families once they reach adulthood (Todd, 1990). From Bertocchi and Boz-
zano (2015b), we compute the percentage of provinces per region which were in the ...rst (1stQ)
and fourth quantile (4thQ) of female primary school enrollment in 1861.
   As described above, the reasons for di¤erences in ...nancial literacy among the young are
many and result from di¤erent inuences. Traditional models have not been able to explain the
gender di¤erences we observe in the data. The rich information that we have available allows
us to go many steps further than other studies have done so far by both being more speci...c
about what speci...c parts of the socioeconomic background matters and considering a wider set


                                               12
of potential inuences.


4        Results

We turn now to the empirical results. We start with some basic speci...cations and then enrich
the estimation by adding the new variables we have available in our data set.
        Table 1 presents our baseline speci...cation and results8 .
        In column (1), we regress the ...nancial literacy score on the gender dummy (FEMALE),
controlling for regional ...xed e¤ects, as the survey is representative at the regional level. The
estimates con...rm that female respondents score worse than their male schoolmates do, -12.46
points lower, on average. When we add controls for school type, student characteristics, family
characteristics, and intra-regional school location, as reported in column (2), the gender dummy
continues to be negative and highly statistically signi...cant; girls score worse than boys and the
gap is, on average, 19 points: roughly 4% less than males. All speci...cations include regional
...xed e¤ects.
        As discussed earlier, we need to go beyond these characteristics to explain why girls are
less ...nancially literate than boys. Before we do so, we note that the estimates reported in
Table 1 show a few important ...ndings that also speak of the quality of the data. For example,
many of the estimates have the expected sign or the sign reported in other works. Speci...cally,
older students know more. Students who repeat a year (thus, are academically poorer) perform
worse on ...nancial literacy measures. Students from an immigrant background or who speak
a di¤erent language at home do worse on ...nancial literacy measures-a ...nding that appears in
many other countries (OECD, 2014b) and in studies of adult populations (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2014) as well. Financial literacy knowledge varies by school type: students enrolled in technical,
professional, and vocational schools perform 4% to 15% worse on ...nancial literacy than students
attending lyceums. Students in private schools (which in Italy are normally not of higher quality
than public schools and are often considered remedial and attended by students who do poorly
    8
     The whole sample for Italy is of 7.068 observations and we use 4651 observations in our regressions, that is 65%
of the sample. In fact, the number of observations drops dramatically when we control for school location, parents'
education and teachers'subject of expertise and behavior. Note that the information on mothers'professional life
is missing for a relevant number of students and the information on fathers' job is missing either because of no
response or because there is no father in the household. Ideally, we would like to control for total family size and
for the characteristics of siblings.The average score in ...nancial literacy is slightly higher in the restricted sample
we use (480 instead of 466) but the distribution of observations in the ...ve pro...ciency levels of girls and boys is
not a¤ected, especially at the top levels of e¢ ciency. We lose observations for the students in the low e¢ ciency
level where the di¤erence in ...nancial literacy scores, among girls and boys is not statistically signi...cant.



                                                          13
in public schools) score 4% lower than students in public schools. Interestingly, students in
schools where the proportion of girls is higher perform worse, while students in schools with
higher proportions of math teachers score better. As found in all other countries participating
in the PISA ...nancial literacy assessment, higher socioeconomic status positively a¤ects ...nancial
literacy scores, and it explains 8% of the variance of the di¤erence in ...nancial literacy between
girls and boys in Italy. Finally, having a mother who is a housewife is negatively associated with
...nancial literacy, even after controlling for many variables relating to the family. It implies that
having a working mother increases the score of boys and girls by 19 point on average.
       These initial estimates, given the richness of the data, start telling a story about the determi-
nants of ...nancial literacy. To understand the relevance of our model we proceed with a variance
decomposition. Our model explains 36% of the variance of the di¤erence in ...nancial literacy
between girls and boys. In particular students' characteristics explain 5.5% of the variance,
and family characteristics 9%. When we add school and professor characteristics we are able to
explain 26% of the variance, and we go to 36% when we add controls for the environment where
students live, that is, regional ...xed e¤ect and some indices of cultural gender bias.
       Columns (3) to (6) report the estimates by macro regions. All the results remain roughly
unchanged and the gender di¤erence continues to be large; girls have much lower scores than
boys, even in the Northeast, which is the macro area where students attain the highest PISA
score. Even after accounting for many variables, the gender di¤erence remains largest in the
South and the Islands, where students perform the worst overall. Interestingly, this is the only
macro area where the index of socioeconomic status is statistically signi...cant. Thus, gender
di¤erences are present everywhere in Italy, an indication of the depth of this issue.
       One might wonder whether these factors a¤ect achievement di¤erently at di¤erent points
of the test score distribution. For example, while gender matters for average test scores, is it
also relevant at the top and bottom of the distribution? In short, we not only can address the
question does gender matter? but also, for whom does it matter?
       To do so, we perform quantile regressions, which estimate the e¤ect of the explanatory
variables on the dependent variable at di¤erent points of its distribution9 . Our regression spec-
i...cation follows the standard speci...cation of column (2) of Table 1.
       The quantile regression results reported in Table 2 shows that there are di¤erences across the
distribution of the ...nancial literacy score. At the lower end of the distribution, the coe¢ cient
   9
    We do not use the ...ve levels because there are too few students at the top levels, but ...ndings are overall
similar when we use that speci...cation and combine levels 4 and 5.


                                                       14
for gender is negative and statistically signi...cant. However, it is negative and much larger at the
median and at the 0.75 and 0.90 quantiles. Thus, the di¤erence in performance of boys and girls
widens as we move up the score distribution. Another important result relates to the coe¢ cient
estimate on the index of socioeconomic status. In the quantile regressions, the coe¢ cient is
positive and insigni...cant at the lower percentiles, but it is relatively large and signi...cant for
the upper tail of the distribution, suggesting that this factor is particularly important for high
levels of ...nancial literacy.
    A notable result is also the importance of math teachers, as seen in both the OLS and the
quantile regressions. The value of the coe¢ cients varies between 1.96 in the OLS regression and
2.26 in the quantile regression. The estimates in the OLS regression implies that a 10% increase
in the proportion of math teachers in schools leads to 4% average gain in individual test scores;
the results for the quantiles is similar except that the gain is 4.5% for the 0.90 quantile and less
for lower quantiles.
    Our ...ndings so far show that girls tend to perform worse than boys do, even after controlling
for student, family, and school characteristics. A possible issue is whether our results are a¤ected
by selection on observables. Using an analysis of pairs, matched on a conditional probability
of being female (propensity score), we assess the e¤ect of the baseline characteristics on the
...nancial literacy score. A propensity score (for being female) is calculated from the baseline
characteristics. The analysis is reported in the Appendix, Table A1. The results con...rm the
main ...ndings of our analysis.


4.1    Parents

We now attempt to dig deeper and consider the e¤ect that parents have on the acquisition of
...nancial knowledge of children. We look at whether parents who work in the ...nancial sector -
in particular if the mother or father has a career in ...nance - inuence the acquisition of ...nancial
literacy and, if they do so, whether their inuence is di¤erent depending on the sex of their kids.
For example, mothers working in ...nance might be more likely to pass their gender roles views
to their daughters. In particular, it is the mothers' human capital (rather than whether they
work or not) that could drive gender norms and the ...nancial literacy acquisition.
    Table 3, column (1) reports the results of our baseline speci...cation for comparison. Column
(2), shows that girls who have a mother who works in ...nance are much less disadvantaged in
their ...nancial knowledge. Fathers'careers are less consequential; neither girls'nor boys'...nancial


                                                 15
knowledge is a¤ected by having a father with a career in ...nance. When we split the sample
between boys and girls and re-estimate the main model, our results are strongly con...rmed
(column (3) and (4) in Table 3). These results indicate that the parental "role model" mainly
a¤ects girls. In particular, the gender role model of mothers increases the daughters'...nancial
knowledge score by more than 5%.
   This is an important ...nding given the potential relevance of the role of parents, and it sheds
some light on how girls acquire ...nancial literacy.


4.2    The local environment

We now turn to examine in more detail how regional factors explain gender di¤erences in ...-
nancial literacy. The smallest geographical unit we can identify is the region, and the main
regional characteristics we control for are explained in Section 3. We expect that in regions
where political interest, active political participation, and media sophistication - the latter be-
ing an index whose value is higher when people report reading newspapers rather than watching
TV as a mean of news acquisition - are higher, students will be more active socially and poten-
tially more interested in ...nancial issues and, therefore, more knowledgeable. Table 4a columns
1-3 show that our intuition was only partially correct. Interestingly, most of the e¤ects work
through gender. Political participation does not a¤ect boys' ...nancial literacy scores but de-
creases girls'scores. Media sophistication does not a¤ect boys'performance but does positively
a¤ect girls'performance. In regions where people actively participate in political life, girls are
less knowledgeable of ...nance, while in regions where the cultural level (as captured by media
sophistication) is higher, the gender gap in ...nancial literacy is (slightly) lower.
   We further control for the presence of bank branches, ...nancial ...rms, and entrepreneurs, as
they might turn students'attention and interest toward ...nancial topics and incentivize them to
seek ...nancial knowledge. We also control for the projected percentage of hiring in the ...nancial
sector and for the projected percentage of hiring of people with an administrative/commercial
quali...cation, and we interact these measures with the female dummy, as better job perspectives
on the ...nancial sector might inuence choices and interests of adolescents. In all cases, we
...nd that a greater number of ...nancial intermediaries and job opportunities increases ...nancial
literacy levels among all students, but more so among girls. Yet, the economic e¤ect of these
variables is small. On average, these regional characteristics increase girls'...nancial knowledge
by only a few percentage points.


                                                 16
   Table 4b examines the ...nancial literacy gender gap in an historical perspective. We control
for the percentage of provinces in a region that were on a medieval commerce route. Bertocchi
and Bozzano (2015a) ...nd that medieval commercial hubs created conditions favorable to the
transformation of the role of women in society, with more egalitarian cultural norms and beliefs
transmitted through the generations. In the second column of the table, we focus on the inu-
ence of the family structure, following Bertocchi and Bozzano (2015b), with an indicator that
measures the structure of the family. The nuclear family structure (NFS) is de...ned as one in
which children form independent families once they reach adulthood (Todd, 1990). Bertocchi
and Bozzano (2015b) ...nd that this family structure is a major driver of the education gender
gap, with a higher female to male enrollment ratio in upper primary schools associated with
living in a community with a predominantly nuclear family structure.
   The ...ndings in Table 4b show that history matters when it comes to ...nancial literacy:
moving from the region Campania to Piemonte, i.e., moving from the 25th to the 90th percentile
of the distribution of historical percentage of provinces on commercial routes, increases the
average PISA score of girls by 73 points, a¤ecting the correspondent gender di¤erence, but only
marginally.
   Interestingly when we control for the Stereotype Index, which measures incidents of discrim-
ination by gender, the di¤erence in ...nancial literacy between girls and boys dis- appears. More
precisely, both men and women who live in regions where people conform to cultural stereotypes
have lower ...nancial literacy. However, girls who live in regions in which the Stereotype Index
is one standard deviation below the average, i.e., regions where the cultural attitude is in favor
of more gender equality, have ...nancial literacy that is 23 points higher than that of boys.
   Our results support recent ...ndings showing that stereotypes can explain gender gaps in
various domains (Bordalo et al. 2015, Lavy and Sand 2015). Dossi, Figlio, Giuliano, and
Sapienza (2018) show that girls growing up in a gender-biased family score, on average, 3
percentage points lower on math exams than girls raised in other types of families.
   We also examine the e¤ects of controlling for a Gender Equality Index (GEI), an indicator
that considers four dimensions: work, income, political and economic representation, and use of
time among women. We ...nd evidence that in regions where the index is high, boys' ...nancial
literacy is lower, while girls'...nancial literacy is signi...cantly and marginally higher. This is also
what we ...nd when we control for the Italian Gender Gap Index (IGGI) developed by Bozzano
(2012), an index which focuses more on women's political participation. However the two indexes


                                                  17
are highly correlated.
    To summarize, many factors explain why young women grow up to learn less about ...nance
and money matters. While explanations linked to demographic characteristics, quality of schools
and teachers, and socioeconomic background are important, they are not enough to explain the
...nancial literacy gender gap, as many other studies have also shown. Our work is unique in
showing that we need to look more closely at the role of women in society, which is deeply rooted
in history. Stereotypes strongly inuence how young girls relate to ...nance. Moreover, parents
are role models for children, and we ...nd that girls learn about ...nance from mothers who work in
...nancial ...elds. Some of these explanations are powerful enough to fully account for the gender
di¤erences seen across students and regions of Italy.


5    The role of math literacy

As discussed in the introduction, and in Section 3, in numerous countries the gender di¤erence
in ...nancial literacy is a¤ected by math literacy. As ...nancial literacy requires some mathematics
skills, we now examine whether much of the lack of ...nancial literacy and gender di¤erence in
...nancial literacy is attributable to math illiteracy, which we know a¤ects many Italian students.
    In Table 5, we see students'...nancial knowledge at di¤erent quantiles of math literacy. The
di¤erence in ...nancial literacy between boys and girls disappears when we compare adolescents
who have high math literacy: At the 90th percentile of math literacy, there is no di¤erence in
...nancial literacy levels of female and male students. This result could also be due to the low
number of observations in this percentile interval and to the low number of girls as well: they
represent only 30% of the students in the 90th percentile of math literacy.
    We then replicate the regression of Table 4b, adding the math literacy score index as an
explanatory variable. As expected, the math literacy index plays an important role in explaining
the ...nancial knowledge of students. Interestingly, we are now able to explain 57% of the variance
of the ...nancial literacy gap, although the main results do not change; our base speci...cation
continues to show that the di¤erence in ...nancial literacy scores between girls and boys remains
statistically signi...cant. In particular, Table 6 shows that history continues to be a relevant
explanatory factor. Regions with a high proportion of provinces that were historically on a
commercial route, or characterized by greater political and economic representation of women,
measured by the GEI index, or by greater access to economic resources, political and public



                                                18
power measured by the IGGI index, perform better. This ...nding is not completely surprising
because several of the questions that comprise the ...nancial literacy assessment are not related
to math or to calculations.
    The most interesting results are shown in column (2). When we control for the percentage
of provinces in a given region in which the nuclear family was the prevailing family type during
the Middle Ages, no di¤erences in ...nancial literacy between boys and girl is detected. On the
contrary, boys have lower ...nancial literacy scores in the regions where the percentage of NFS
is higher. This result is in line with Duranton et al.(2007), i.e., people living in regions with
an egalitarian nuclear family structure tend to have a lower level of education, with no gender
di¤erence in level of education. Column (3) shows the Stereotype Index, controlling for math
literacy. This index captures the stereotype culture in Italian regions. The results are striking: in
regions with very low levels of the Stereotype Index, girls perform (slightly) better than boys on
the ...nancial literacy assessment. This e¤ect vanishes, and is even reversed, in regions with high
levels of the Stereotype Index; in other words, in regions where individuals think that women do
not have to work and provide ...nancial support to the family, boys demonstrate higher ...nancial
literacy than girls.


6     Robustness checks

In this section, we perform a number of checks that show that our ...ndings are robust. Speci...-
cally, we look closely at school e¤ects, the inuence of the family and the local environment.


6.1   More on school e¤ects

When looking at school e¤ects, we can distinguish between the organization of the school and
the teaching method. Our base speci...cation includes controls for the type of school (lyceum,
technical, professional, or vocational) and for private or public designation. As discussed in
Section 4, students enrolled in a lyceum perform much better on the ...nancial literacy assessment.
However, this result may be due to the more elite students choosing to attend a lyceum, which
is perceived in Italy as one of the best types of schools. Moreover, our baseline speci...cations
highlight the relevance to the ...nancial literacy scores of the proportion of girls and number
of math teachers at a school. We take the proportion of girls at school as a measure of the
type of school attended: the classic lyceum, which is dedicated to humanistic studies such


                                                 19
as latin, ancient greek, italian, history, and philosophy tends to attract more girls, while the
scienti...c lyceum, dedicated to scienti...c studies and more oriented toward mathematics, physics,
chemistry, biology, earth science, and computer science tends to attract more boys. As PISA
does not allow us to distinguish among di¤erent types of lyceum, we classify them based on the
number of math teachers over the total number of instructors in the school. We then classify as
"scienti...c" all of the lyceums where the proportion of math teachers is higher than 17%, which
is the average percentage of math professors in the lyceums. To address a possible selection
bias on unobservables, we perform a Heckman selection model estimation. In the ...rst stage, we
estimate the probability of a student selecting enrollment in a scienti...c lyceum, controlling for
the variables in our base speci...cation but including, as an identi...cation variable, the number
of scienti...c lyceums per inhabitant at the regional level. The hypothesis is that the supply
of scienti...c lyceums (per capita) a¤ects the students who go to that type of school, as Italian
students do not tend to move away from their hometown when attending high school. Table
7 shows the result of the ...rst and second stages of the Heckman estimation. Students from
families with high socioeconomic status are more likely to enroll in lyceums, while students who
have repeated a grade tend to enroll in professional and technical schools. Interestingly, the
estimated coe¢ cients, apart for the one of lyceum in the second stage, are not di¤erent from
the one shown in column (1). In short, there is no evidence of selection.
   We turn next to the examination of whether school practices a¤ect student performance. In
Table 8, we look at the e¤ect of teaching practices. First, we look at the measure of teacher
behavior when giving instructions, as provided by PISA.
   Students were asked to report the frequency with which the teacher asks them to present their
thinking or reasoning at some length in math lessons (TEACH_Think) or how often the teacher
asks questions to check whether they understand what is being taught (TCH_Quest). The ...rst
column of Table 8 reports the baseline speci...cation, as the questions on teaching methodology
were asked only to a subsample of PISA respondents. Interestingly, as seen in columns (2) and
(3), girls who report higher levels of cognitive stimulus in their math lessons perform nearly as
well (the di¤erence is of roughly 2%) as boys on the ...nancial literacy assessment.
   We then look at the index of cognitive stimulus in math (COGNITIVE), which measures
the extent to which teaching strategies encourage students to think more deeply in order to ...nd
solutions and to focus on the method used for reaching the answer rather than on the answer
itself. Interestingly, girls' ...nancial knowledge is a¤ected positively by the index of cognitive


                                                20
stimulus.


6.2      More on family inuence

Children can acquire knowledge about money management by discussing money matters (e.g.,
talking about spending, saving, banking, and investments) within the family. We construct the
variable DISCUSS_Family, which is equal to 1 if the student reports dis- cussing money matters
with parents/guardians "Almost every day" or "Once or twice a week" and 0 for the remaining
classi...cations: "Once or twice a month," "Never or hardly ever".
      Parents may inuence the ...nancial knowledge of their children by discussing ...nancial topics
with them. In table 9, we assess whether students' ...nancial literacy is a¤ected both by the
discussion of issues related to money with their parents and with their friends. Information for
these interactions was obtained via questions asked to a sub-sample of respondents only. Hence,
when we control for these variables, the number of observations drops substantially. For that
reason, Table 9 reports, in column (1), the baseline speci...cation estimated on the same sub-
sample. Column (2) reports the importance and inuence of the family on the development of
children's knowledge: discussing money-related issues within the family increases the ...nancial
literacy score by almost 16 points for both boys and girls. This ...nding is reinforced when we
split the sample between male and female students (columns (3) and (4)).


6.3      More on local environment

There is a concern of reverse causality with the Stereotype Index estimates reported in Table 4b
and Table 6b. The opinion on the role that women play in the family and in society might be
a¤ected by their ...nancial illiteracy, which is reected in the performance of younger women. In
order to solve the causality issue we rely on the work by Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013), that
studies the historical origins of current di¤erences in norms and beliefs about the appropriate
role of women in society10 . In their work, they test the hypothesis that traditional agricultural
practices have inuenced the historical gender division of labor and the evolution and persistence
of gender norms. In particular they test whether, consistent with the hypotheses of Boserup
(1970), the descendants of societies that traditionally practiced plough agriculture have lower
rates of female participation in today's workplace and a greater prevalence of attitudes favoring
gender inequality. On the basis of their work, we instrument the Stereotype Index exploiting
 10
      We thank Paola Giuliano for having suggested us the use of these instrumental variables.


                                                        21
one determinant of historical plough use that has been emphasized in the anthropological litera-
ture: the type of crops grown in a particular location (Pryor, 1985). Pryor (1985) has classi...ed
crops into those whose cultivation bene...ts greatly from the adoption of the plough, which in-
clude wheat, te¤, barley and rye (plough positive crops) and those whose cultivation bene...ts
less (plough-negative crops), which include sorghum, and millet. We use the same two instru-
ments constructed by Alesina et al (2013). We measure geo-climatic conditions that impact the
suitability of a location for growing both plough positive and plough negative crops using the
information on the suitability of a location for their cultivation from the FAO'
                                                                               s Global Agro-
Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2002 database (Fischer et al., 2002). The database reports suitability
for the cultivation of numerous crops for 5 arc-minutes by 5 arc-minute grid-cell globally, and in
our case for Italy. The data are then combined with the speci...c growing requirements of crops,
to produce a measure of whether the crop can be grown productively in a location. The two
instruments are then constructed by computing the ratio of the amount of land suitable for the
production of these cereals with the total arable land, for each Italian region.11 .
         Table 10 reports the estimates using the constructed instrumental variables. Columns 2 and
4 report the ...rst stage estimates which show that the historical suitability for the cultivation
of plough-positive cereals is always positively correlated with the Stereotype Index, while suit-
ability for the cultivation of plough-negative cereals is generally negatively correlated with the
Stereotype Index. The F-test for joint signi...cance of the two instruments is also reported in the
table and it is strongly signi...cant.
         The IV estimates, reported in columns 1 and 3 con...rm the estimates of Table 4 and Table 6.
Higher values of the Stereotype Index, instrumented, are associated with lower ...nancial literacy
both for girls and for boys, even when we control for the math ability.


7         Savings and ...nancial literacy

Finally, we want to understand if ...nancial literacy a¤ects teenagers'behavior. We already know
that adults ...nancial literacy a¤ect their saving behavior (Guiso et al(2008), Lusardi and Mitchell
(2014)) but we have less evidence for the adolescents. Existing studies of ...nancial education
among adolescents ...nd that these programs tend to increase savings. Bruhn et al. (2013)
...nd long-term e¤ects on savings one year after a two-year long ...nancial education program
    11
         We refer to Alesina et al. (2013) for a deep explanation of the instrumental variables construction.




                                                            22
and Berry, Karlan and Pradhan (2015) ...nd similar short-term e¤ects, after a nine-month long
program.
       The PISA data gives us the opportunity to check whether existing ...nancial knowledge a¤ects
adolescents saving and intertemporal choices as it records students'attitude toward money. We
have constructed two variables that represent individuals'propensity to save. The ...rst variable
(PSAVE_A) is equal to 1, if students answer "Which of these statements about saving money
best applies to you?" with one of the following: "I save the same amount of money each week or
month," "I save some money each week or month, but the amount varies," "I save money only
when I have some to spare," or "I save money only when I want to buy something," and it is
equal to 0 if the student answers "I do not save any money". The second variable (PSAVE_B)
is equal to 1 if students answer "If you don'
                                            t have enough money to buy something you really
want (for example , an item of clothing , sports equipment . etc,.), what are you most likely
to do?" with "I save up to buy it" and equal to 0 otherwise. As these questions were asked to
only half of a non-overlapping sample of students taking the ...nancial literacy survey, we had to
construct two variables that are de...ned for half of the sample.
       Table 11 looks at saving behavior. In columns (1) and (2) we use de...nition PSAVE_A
while columns (3) and (4) consider de...nition PSAVE_B. The table shows that girls tend to
save less, although the dummy female is statistically signi...cant only at 10 percent and only for
one de...nition of saving. This result might appear counter-intuitive, as women tend to adopt a
more parsimonious behavior12 . However, from the PISA survey, we also know that girls have
less pocket money. Therefore, the negative sign can be interpreted as evidence of a liquidity
constraint. Indeed, when we dig deeper into this result we ...nd that 70% of the adolescents
that answer that they have no money to spare are girls. If we discard these observations the
negative coe¢ cient on female become positive but not statistically signi...cant. Interestingly,
boys with higher ...nancial literacy do not save more. On the contrary, when we restrict the
sample only to girls the e¤ect of ...nancial literacy is statistically signi...cant and economically
relevant: on average ...nancially literate girls have 18 percent higher probability to save to cope
with future contingencies (PSAVE_A)13 . Moving from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile
in ...nancial literacy increases the probability of saving by 3 percent and it increases by 5 percent
  12
    We thank Claudia Girardone for having raised this important issue.
  13
    To avoid issues of reverse causality due to the possible e¤ect that savings has on ...nancial literacy we have
instrumented the ...nancial literacy score with the math score index. We do not ...nd any evidence of endogeneity.
The estimations are available upon request




                                                       23
the probability of saving to buy goods without incurring into debt.
    We ...nd the result extremely interesting.


8           Conclusions

We use new and unexploited data on the ...nancial literacy of high school students in Italy
to study the di¤erences in the ...nancial literacy between boys and girls. Italy is an interesting
country to study, not only because Italian students score particularly low on the ...nancial literacy
assessment but also because Italy is the only country among those that participated in the 2012
PISA assessment that displays a gender di¤erence in the average ...nancial literacy score. Our
empirical work con...rms the ...ndings of previous studies but also advances our knowledge and
understanding of the determinants of the gender di¤erences in ...nancial literacy. First, we are
able to document the impact of the family, in particular the role of the mother, on the ...nancial
knowledge of girls. Second, we are able to demonstrate that the social and cultural environment
in which girls and boys live plays a crucial role in explaining gender di¤erences. Moreover, we
show that history matters: Medieval commercial hubs and the nuclear family structure created
conditions favorable to the transformation of the role of women in society, and in those regions
today, we see higher ...nancial literacy among youths, and among girls as well.
    In future work, we plan to use other waves of the PISA data, such as from the 2015 and
2018 assessments, to examine not only improvements over time but the persistence of gender
di¤erences. Unfortunately, the 2015 data is representative only at the macro area level (south,
central, north-east, north-west) and not at the regional level, limiting a possible comparison with
the 2012 survey. Looking at later waves will be particularly useful as, while ...nancial literacy
instruction in school is not mandatory, there are many more ...nancial literacy programs and
initiatives that have been organized for students and parents.

                                           Appendix

    A.1. Selection issues
    Our ...ndings on Tables 3 and 4 show that girls tend to perform worse than boys, even after
controlling for student, family, and school characteristics. A possible issue is whether our results
are a¤ected by selection on observables. Using an analysis of pairs, matched on a conditional
probability of being female (propensity score), we assess the e¤ect of the baseline characteristics
on the ...nancial literacy score. A propensity score (for being female) is calculated from the

                                                 24
baseline characteristics. One of the most common and easiest to implement and understand
methods for selection is the k: one nearest neighbor matching (Rubin, 1973). Nearest neighbor
matching estimates the average treatment on the treated (ATT), as it matches control individuals
to the treated group and discards controls who are not selected as matches. In its simplest
form, 1:1 nearest neighbor matching selects for each treated individual i the control individual
with the smallest distance from individual i. We use a k:1 matching where k=1,2,5. We also
perform a Kernel matching; for each treated subject, a weighted average of the outcome of all
non-bene...ciaries is derived. The weights are based on the distance of the non-bene...ciaries'
propensity score to that of the treated subjects, with the highest weight given to those with
scores closest to the treated unit. The results of the propensity score show that the di¤erence
in ...nancial literacy score between girls and boys ranges in the interval 21 to 27 points, roughly
a score 5% to 6% lower for girls (TableA1). These results con...rm the ...nding of our previous
analysis.




                                                25
References

 [1] Adams, R. B. and T. Kirchmaier 2016 Women on Boards in Finance and STEM Industries.
    American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2016, 106(5) 277­281

 [2] Akerlof, G.A.,1980. A theory of social custom, of which unemployment may be one conse-
    quence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 749-775.

 [3] Alesina A., Giuliano P., 2010, The Power of the Family. Journal of Economic Growth, 15(2),
    93-125.

 [4] Alesina, A., Giuliano P., 2014 Family Ties, Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, 177-215.

 [5] Alesina A., Giuliano P., Nunn N., 2013, On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
    Plough, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469-530.

 [6] Almenberg J., Dreber A., 2015, Gender, Stock Market Participation and Financial Literacy,
    Economics Letters, 137, 140-142.

 [7] Amici M. and Stefani M.L., 2013, A Gender Equality Index for the Italian Regions. Bank
    of Italy Occasional Paper No. 190

 [8] Bajtelsmit VL., VanDerhei JL., 1997, Risk Aversion and Pension Investment Choices. Po-
    sitioning Pensions for the Twenty-First Century, 45(2), 66.

 [9] Baldiga K., 2014, Gender Di¤erences in Willingness to Guess, Management Science 60(2),
    434-448.

[10] Bernheim D . 1994 A theory of conformity, Journal of Political Economy 102 (S), 841 877

[11] Bertocchi G., Bozzano M., 2015a. Women, Medieval Commerce, and the Education Gender
    Gap, Journal of Comparative Economics, 44, 2016, 496-521.

[12] Bertocchi G., Bozzano M., 2015b. Family Structure and the Education Gender Gap: Evi-
    dence from Italian Provinces, Special Issue on the Determinants of Gender Gaps, CESifo
    Economic Studies 61, 2015,

[13] Bertola G., Checchi D., 2013, Who Chooses which Private Education? Theory and Inter-
    national Evidence, Labour, 27(3), 249-71.


                                                26
[14] Bisin A., Verdier T., 2011, The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization. In
    Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1, 339-416.

[15] Boggio, C., Fornero, E., Prast, H. M., Sanders, J. 2014, Seven Ways to Knit Your Portfolio:
    Is Investor Communication Neutral?, CeRP Working Paper Series, 140/14.

[16] Bordalo,P. Co¤man K., Gennaioli N. and Shleifer,A. 2016. Stereotypes, The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, vol 131(4), pages 1753-1794

[17] Boserup, E., 1970, Woman's Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen and
    Unwin Ltd.

[18] Bozzano, M., 2012. Assessing Gender Inequality among Italian Regions: The Italian Gender
    Gap Index. Rivista di Politica Economica, 103, 255-300.

[19] Bruhn M., de Souza Leão L., Legovini A., Marchetti R., Zia B., 2013, The Impact of High
    School Financial Education: Experimental Evidence from Brazil, The World Bank.

[20] Bucher-Koenen, T., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R. and van Rooij, M., 2014. How Financially
    Literate are Women? An Overview and New Insights. NBER Working Paper No. 20793.

[21] Bucher-Koenen T., Hackethal A., Koenen J., Laudenbach C., 2019, Do Seemingly Smarter
    People get Better Advice?. Available at SSRN 2572961

[22] Carlana M., 2019, Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers'Gender Bias, The Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 134(3), 1163-224.

[23] Chen H., Volpe RP., 2002, Gender Di¤erences in Personal Financial Literacy Among College
    sStudents, Financial services Review, 11(3), 289-307.

[24] Co¤man K., 2014, Evidence on Self-Stereotyping and the Contribution of Ideas, The Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1625-1660.

[25] Dearden, L., Ferri, J., and Meghir, C., 2002. The E¤ect of School Quality on Educational
    Attainment and Wages. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1), 1­20.

[26] Dossi, G., Figlio, D.,Giuliano P. and Sapienza P., 2017, Born in the Family: Preferences for
    Boys and the Gender Gap in Math, mimeo



                                               27
[27] Driva, Luhrman, and Winter,2016,Gender di¤erences and stereotypes in ...nancial literacy :
    O¤ to an early start, Economics Letters, Vol. 146, 09.2016, p. 143-146.

[28] Duranton G., Rodríguez-Pose A., Sandall, 2007, Family types and the persistence of regional
    disparities in Europe, Working Papers 2008-07, Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados
    (IMDEA) Ciencias Sociales

[29] Fershaim C. and Weiss Y.,1998, Social status and economic performance:             A sur-
    vey,European Economic Review 42 (1998) 801 ­820

[30] Filipiak U., and Walle Y., 2015, The Financial Literacy Gender Gap: A Question of Nature
    or Nurture?, Courant Research Centre: Poverty, Equity and Growth-Discussion Papers,
    No. 176.

[31] Fischer, G., H. van Nelthuizen, M. Shah, and F. Nachtergaele, Global Agro-Ecological
    Assessment for Agriculture in the 21st Century: Methodology and Results, Rome:Food
    and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2002.

[32] Fornero,E. and Monticone C., 2011. "Financial Literacy and Pension Plan Participation in
    Italy," CeRP Working Papers 111, Center for Research on Pensions and Welfare Policies,
    Turin (Italy)

[33] Fortin NM., 2005, Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour-Market Outcomes of Women
    across OECD Countries, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21(3), 416-38.

[34] Fortin NM., 2015, Gender Role Atitudes and Women'
                                                     s Labor Market Participation: Opting-
    out, Aids, and the Persistent Appeal of Housewifery, Annals of Economics and Statis-
    tics/Annales d'Économie et de Statistique, 117/118, 379-401.

[35] Fryer, Jr., Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt (2010) An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap
    in Mathematics American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (April 2010): 210­240

[36] Giuliano P., 2017, Gender: An Historical Perspective, National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search, No. w23635.

[37] Guiso L., Monte F., Sapienza P., Zingales L., 2008 Culture, Gender, and Math. Science-New
    York the Washington, 320(5880), 1164.



                                              28
[38] Hanushek, Eric A., 1997, Assessing the E¤ects of School Resources on Student Performance:
    An Update. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19/2, 141-164.

[39] Hanushek, Eric A., 2002, Evidence, Politics, and the Class Size Debate. In: Lawrence
    Mishel and Richard Rothstein (ed.), The Class Size Debate. Washington DC. Economic
    Policy Institute, 37-65.

[40] Hill, J.P. and Lynch, M.E., 1983, The Intensi...cation of Gender-Related Role Expectations
    during Early Adolescence, Girls at puberty, Springer, Boston, MA, 201-228

[41] Kandel, E.,and Lazear, E. P. (1992). Peer Pressure and Partnership. Journal of Political
    Economy, 100, 801-817

[42] Karlan DS., Berry J., Pradhan MP., 2015, The Impact of Financial Education for Youth in
    Ghana, Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper, 1048.

[43] Klapper, L., Lusardi, A., and van Oudheusden, P., 2015. Financial Literacy Around the
    World. Insights from the Standard & Poor'
                                            s Ratings Services Global Financial Literacy
    Survey. http://media.mh....com/documents/2015-Finlit_paper_17_F3_SINGLES.pdf

[44] Klapper L., Lusardi A., 2020, Financial Literacy and Financial Resilience: Evidence form
    around the World, Financial Management, Vol. 49, 589-614.

[45] Krueger A.B., 2003. Economic Considerations and Class Size," Economic Journal, 113(485),
    F34-F63

[46] Lavy, V. Sand, E. ,2018. On the origins of gender gaps in human capital: Short- and long-
    term consequences of teachers'biases,Journal of Public Economics, vol 167, pages 263-279

[47] Levacic R.,Vignoles A., 2002. Researching the Links between School Resources and Student
    Outcomes in the UK: A Review of Issues and Evidence, Education Economics, 10(3), 313-
    331.

[48] Lusardi A., Mitchell OS., 2008, Planning and Financial Literacy: How do Women Fare?,
    American Economic Review, 98(2), 413-17.

[49] Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. 2010. Financial Literacy among
    the Young. Journal of Consumer A¤airs, 44 (2): 358­380.


                                              29
[50] Lusardi, A., Mitchell O.S., 2014. The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory
    and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1), 5-44.

[51] Lusardi, A., 2015a. Risk Literacy." Italian Economic Journal, 1(1), 5-23.

[52] Lusardi, A. 2015b. "Financial Literacy Skills for the 21th Century: Evidence from PISA."
    Journal of Consumer A¤airs, 49(3), 639-659.

[53] Mortimore, P., Sammons, P., Stoll, L., Lewis, D. & Ecob, R.,1988,. School Matters, the
    Junior Years. Wells, Open Books.

[54] Muriel N., Vesterlund L., 2007, Do Women Shy away from Competition? Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, Vol. 122(3), 1067-1101.

[55] Muriel N., Vesterlund L., 2010, Explaining the Gender Gap in Math Test Scores: The Role
    of Competition, Journal of Economic Perspective, 24(2), 129-144.

[56] Neelakantan U., Chang Y., 2010, Gender Di¤erences in Wealth at Retirement, American
    Economic Review, 100(2), 362-67.

[57] OECD, 2009, Education at Glance 2009, Paris.

[58] OECD, 2014a, Education at Glance 2014, Paris.

[59] OECD, 2014b. PISA 2012 Results:               Students and Money (Volume VI): Fi-
    nancial Literacy Skills for the 21st Century,          PISA, OECD Publishing,       Paris.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264208094-en

[60] Olivetti,C, Patacchini,E and Y Zenou 2020."Mothers, peers, and gender-role iden-
    tity"Journal of the European Economic Association 18 (1), 266-301

[61] Patacchini, E., and Y. Zenou 2016, nocial networks and parental behavior in the intergen-
    erational transmission of religion,Quantitative Economics 7(3), 969-995

[62] Pryor, Frederic, 1985,The Invention of the Plow, Comparative Studies in Society and His-
    tory, 27(4), 727­743

[63] Riener G., Wagner V., 2017, Shying away from Demanding Tasks? Experimental Evidence
    on Gender Di¤erences in Answering Multiple-Choice Questions, Economics of Education
    Review 59(C), 43-62.

                                              30
[64] Rubin D.B., 1973. Matching to remove bias in observational studies. Biometrics. 29:159­184.

[65] Stiefel, L., Schwartz, A. E., Rubenstein, R. & Zabel, J., 2005. (Eds.) Measuring School
    Performance and E¢ ciency: Implications for Practice and Research (67-92). NY: Eye on
    Education, Inc

[66] Teddlie, C., and Reynolds, D., 2000. School e¤ectiveness research and the social and be-
    havioural sciences. In C. Teddlie, & D. Reynolds (Eds.)

[67] Todd, E., 1990, L'invention de l'
                                     Europe, Paris: Seuil.

[68] West, A. and Pennell, H., 2003. Underachievement in schools School concerns. Routledge
    Falmer, London, UK.




                                              31
               Table A1: Propensity Score Matching
Financial Literacy Score                  Coefficient             z         P>|z|

NNM 1:1                                   -22.08***            -5.53         0.00

NNM 2:1                                   -21.05***            -5.99         0.00

NNM 5:1                                   -21.71***            -6.92         0.00

Kernel (no weights)                       -23.02**             -2.63         0.01

Kernel (weights)                          -27.13***            -10.16        0.00
NOTE: The table computes the difference in financial literacy score between girls and
boys using a propensity score (for being female) matching calculated from the baseline
characteristics. NNM refers to nearest neighbour matching with j: h population
weights. Kernel (no weights) is Kernel (Epanechnikov) matching, without common
support and without population weights.
** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                               Table A2: Description of the Main Variables
Variable                   Name of the Variable                Source                  Definition
Age of student                    AGE                     OECD PISA (2012)             The age of a student (AGE) was calculated as the dif-
                                                                                       ference between the year and month of the testing and
                                                                                       the year and month of a student's birth. Data on stu-
                                                                                       dent's age were obtained from both the questionnaire and
                                                                                       the student tracking forms. If the month of testing was
                                                                                       not known for a particular student, the median month of
                                                                                       testing for that country was used in the calculation.


City Dummy                        CITY                    OECD PISA (2012)             School is located in a city of 100,000 to about one million
                                                                                       people.


INDEX for Cognitive            COGNITIVE                  OECD PISA (2012)             Nine items measuring cognitive activation in mathemat-
activation in Math                                                                     ics lessons (COGNITIVE) were used in the Main Survey
lessons                                                                                of PISA 2012. The list below shows the questions start-
                                                                                       ing from which the index was built. Response categories
                                                                                       were "Always or almost always", "Often", "Sometimes" and
                                                                                       "Never or rarely". All items were reversed, so the higher
                                                                                       difficulty corresponds to the lower frequency of the event
                                                                                       in the classroom. a) The teacher asks questions that make
                                                                                       us reflect on the problem; b) The teacher gives problems
                                                                                       that require us to think for an extended time; c) The
                                                                                       teacher asks us to decide on our own procedures for solving
                                                                                       complex problems; d) The teacher presents problems for
                                                                                       which there is no immediately obvious method of solution;
                                                                                       e) The teacher presents problems in different contexts so
                                                                                       that students know whether they have understood the
                                                                                       concepts; g) The teacher asks us to explain how we have
                                                                                       solved a problem; f) The teacher helps us to learn from
                                                                                       mistakes we have made; h) The teacher presents problems
                                                                                       that require students to apply what they have learned to
                                                                                       new contexts; i) The teacher gives problems that can be
                                                                                       solved in several different ways.


% of provinces which          COMM_Route                Bertocchi et al. (2015)        Calculated as the number of provinces whose main city
were on a medieval                                                                     was on medieval commercial routes or was the seat of a
commercial route                                                                       fair or a bank in the thirteen to fourteen century over total
                                                                                       number of provinces in the region.


Discuss money with           DISCUSS_Family       OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   Variable equal to 1 if, when asked "How often do you
parents every day or                                                                   discuss money matters (e.g. talk about spending, sav-
once or twice a week                                                                   ing, banking, investment) with parents/guardians or other
                                                                                       adult relations?", the student ticked one of the following
                                                                                       boxes: "Almost every day" or "Once or twice a week". It is
                                                                                       equal to 0 if the student ticked one of the following: "Once
                                                                                       or twice a month", "Never or hardly ever".
                                  ESCS                    OECD PISA (2012)             The PISA index of economic, social and cultural status
Index of economic, so-                                                                 (ESCS) was derived from the index of highest occupa-
cial and cultural status                                                               tional status of parents (HISEI), the index of highest ed-
                                                                                       ucational level of parents in years of education according
                                                                                       to ISCED (PARED), and the index of home possessions
                                                                                       (HOMEPOS). The index of home possessions (HOME-
                                                                                       POS) comprises all items on the indices of WEALTH,
                                                                                       CULT POSS and HEDRES, as well as books in the home
                                                                                       recoded into a four-level categorical variable (0-10 books,
                                                                                       11-25 or 26-100 books, 101-200 or 201-500 books, more
                                                                                       than 500 books).
Variable                  Name of the Variable                 Source                 Definition
Parent expects finan-          EXP_Fin           OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   This variable is equal to 1 if the parent/guardian who
cial career (broad def-                                                               completed the parents' questionnaire indicated a "man-
inition)                                                                              agerial or financial career" (see attached file on definition
                                                                                      of financial career) when asked: "What occupation do you
                                                                                      expect your child to have when they are about 30 years
                                                                                      old?".


Father has a financial        FATHER_Fin         OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   This variable is equal to 1 if the father's occupation (as re-
career (broad defini-                                                                 ported by student) is defined as a "managerial or financial
tion)                                                                                 career" (see attached file on definition of financial career).



Female                          FEMALE                   OECD PISA (2012)             Dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is a female and
                                                                                      equal to 0 if is a male.


Number of firms in          FINANCE_Firms              ISTAT, own elaboration         Firm census (number of active units in the financial sec-
the   financial sec-                                                                  tor) and population data for year 2011.
tor/population


Gender equality index             GEI                 Amici and Stefani (2013)        The indicator considers four dimensions: work(counting
                                                                                      both employment and unemployment), income, political
                                                                                      and economic representation and use of time.
Mother housewife              HOUSEWIFE          OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   Dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother's occupation
                                                                                      (as reported by student) is equal to "housewife" (ISCO
                                                                                      classification code 9701), and 0 otherwise.


IGGI                             IGGI              Bozzano (2012), own elaboration.   Italian Gender Gap Index. The indicator is based on four
                                                                                      dimensions: The health and survival dimension, The ed-
                                                                                      ucational attainment dimension, The economic participa-
                                                                                      tion and opportunity dimension, The political participa-
                                                                                      tion dimension. We consider only two dimensions: eco-
                                                                                      nomic and political participation.


Immigration status            IMMIGRANT                  OECD PISA (2012)             The student is either a second generation immigrant (born
                                                                                      in the country of assessment but whose parent(s) were
                                                                                      born in another country) or a first-generation immigrant
                                                                                      (born outside the country of assessment and whose parents
                                                                                      were also born in another country).


Other language spoken        LANG_Foreign                OECD PISA (2012)             Dummy variable equal to 1 if the language spoken at home
at home                                                                               by the student is different with respect to the language of
                                                                                      assessment for that student, and 0 otherwise.
Variable                                Name of the Variable                    Source                       Definition
Professional school                    PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL        OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.         school=3


Projected % of hirings for                   JOB_Adm                        Excelsior survey                 % over total projected hirings for year 2012
people with an administra-
tive/commercial        qualification
(at any level, from qualifica
professionale to laurea degree)


Projected % of hirings in the finan-          JOB_Fin                       Excelsior survey                 % over total non seasonal projected hirings for year 2012
cial sector (non seasonal jobs)


Large City Dummy                           LARGE_CITY                     OECD PISA (2012)                   School is located in a city of > 1,000,000 people


Lyceums                                      LYCEUM               OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.         school=1


Number of lyceums per 1,000 in-          LYCEUMS per cap.                        ISTAT                       Number of licei high school in the region in 2011 over total
habitants                                                                                                    population in 2011, multiplied by 1,000.


Media sophistication index                  MEDIA_Soph                  ISTAT, own elaboration               index of % people watching tv, listening to radio, reading
                                                                                                             newspaper (higher value=higher sophistication, i.e. more
                                                                                                             news paper, more radio, less tv). Index created through
                                                                                                             Principal Component Analysis of the three items above.
                                                                                                             Data taken for year 2012.


Middle school                            MIDDLE SCHOOL            OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.         school=4


Mother has a financial career              MOTHER_Fin             OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.         This variable is equal to 1 if the mother's occupation (as
(broad definition)                                                                                           reported by student) is defined as a "managerial or fi-
                                                                                                             nancial career" (see attached file on definition of financial
                                                                                                             career).



Nuclear Family Structure                        NFS            Bertocchi et al. (2015) and Duranton (2007)   Calculated as the number of provinces where, in the mid-
                                                                                                             dle ages, the nuclear family was the prevailing family type
                                                                                                             over total number of provinces in the region. The nuclear
                                                                                                             family structure is defined as one where there is total
                                                                                                             emancipation of children in adulthood to form indepen-
                                                                                                             dent families made simply of a couple and their children.
                                                                                                             (Todd, 1990)).


Private school                           PRIVATE SCHOOL                   OECD PISA (2012)                   As reported by the school principal.


Proportion of girls in the school            PROP_Girl                    OECD PISA (2012)                   The index of the proportion of girls at school is based
                                                                                                             on the enrolment data provided by the school principal,
                                                                                                             dividing the number of girls by the total number of girls
                                                                                                             and boys at a school.


Probability to save A                        PSAVE_A                      OECD PISA (2012)                   Variable equal to 1, if students answer "Which of these
                                                                                                             statements about saving money best applies to you?" with
                                                                                                             one of the following: "I save the same amount of money
                                                                                                             each week or month," "I save some money each week or
                                                                                                             month, but the amount varies," "I save money only when
                                                                                                             I have some to spare," or "I save money only when I want
                                                                                                             to buy something," and it is equal to 0 if the student
                                                                                                             answers "I do not save any money."
Variable                    Name of the Variable   Source                               Definition

Probability to save B       PSAVE_B                OECD PISA (2012)                     Variable equal to 1 if students answer " save
                                                                                        money to buy" when asked "If you don't have
                                                                                        enough money to buy something you really
                                                                                        want (e.g. an item of clothing, sports equip-
                                                                                        ment) what are you most likely to do?". The
                                                                                        possible answer are buying the item anyway
                                                                                        with money that should be used for something
                                                                                        else; trying to borrow from a family member;
                                                                                        trying to borrow from a friend; not buying it.


Student    repeated     a   REPEAT                 OECD PISA (2012)                     Variable equal to 1 if student has repeated a
grade                                                                                   grade in at least one level of schooling and
                                                                                        equal to 0 if "No, never" was chosen at least one
                                                                                        time, given that none of the repeated grade
                                                                                        categories were chosen. The index is assigned
                                                                                        a missing value if none of the three categories
                                                                                        were ticked in any of three levels.


Stereotype Index            Stereotype Index       ISTAT (2011)                         Derived from considering 4 questions of the IS-
                                                                                        TAT survey on discrimination by gender, sex-
                                                                                        ual orientation and ethnic origin. The survey
                                                                                        asks whether the interviewed agrees with the
                                                                                        statement 1. "It is mainly the men that have
                                                                                        to take care of the economic needs of the fam-
                                                                                        ily"; 2. "It is the man that takes the most rel-
                                                                                        evant decisions in the family."; 3. "It is more
                                                                                        important for men than for women to have a
                                                                                        university degree"; 4. "Men are less suitable
                                                                                        for household chores."


Percentage of math          TEACH_Math             OECD PISA (2012)                     The percentage of mathematics teachers was
teachers in the school                                                                  computed by dividing the number of mathe-
                                                                                        matics teachers by the total number of teach-
                                                                                        ers times 100. Principals were asked to report
                                                                                        the number of full-time and part-time teach-
                                                                                        ers at their school. The number of part-time
                                                                                        teachers contributed 0.5 and the number of
                                                                                        full-time teachers 1.0 to the estimated num-
                                                                                        bers of teachers at school.



The teacher asks ques-      TEACH_quest            OECD PISA (2012).                    The student was asked he following ques-
tions to check whether                                                                  tion (ST79f): "How often does it happen in
we have understood                                                                      your mathematics class that the teacher asks
what was taught                                                                         questions to understand whether you under-
                                                                                        stood what was taught?" The possible answers
                                                                                        were "Every lesson"; "Most lessons"; "Some
                                                                                        lessons"; "Never or hardly ever". The vari-
                                                                                        able takes value 1 when the student replied
                                                                                        "Every lesson" or "Most lessons", 0 when the
                                                                                        student replied "Some lessons" or "Never or
                                                                                        hardly ever".


The teacher asks me         TEACH_think            OECD PISA (2012).                    The student was asked the following question
or my classmates to                                                                     (ST79b): "How often does it happen in your
present our thinking                                                                    mathematics class that the teacher asks you
or reasoning at some                                                                    or your classmates to present your thinking
length                                                                                  or reasoning at some length?" The possible
                                                                                        answers were "Every lesson"; "Most lessons";
                                                                                        "Some lessons"; "Never or hardly ever". The
                                                                                        variable takes value 1 when the student replied
                                                                                        "Every lesson" or "Most lessons", 0 when the
                                                                                        student replied "Some lessons" or "Never or
                                                                                        hardly ever".


Technical school            TECHNICAL SCHOOL       OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   school=2


Vocational school           VOCATIONAL SCHOOL      OECD PISA (2012), own elaboration.   school=5
 Table A3: Descriptive Statistics of Individual-Level Variables, by Gender.
Variable                                      Name of the Variable                  Males                                  Females
                                                                     N      Mean SD         Min     Max     N      Mean SD         Min     Max
Lyceums                                       LYCEUM                 2237    0.42   0.49      0        1    2414    0.67    0.47     0        1
Technical School                              TECHNICAL SCHOOL       2237   0.41    0.49      0       1     2414   0.20     0.40     0       1
Professional School                           PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL    2237   0.11    0.31      0       1     2414   0.10     0.30     0       1
Middle School                                 MIDDLE SCHOOL          2237    0.02   0.13      0       1     2414   0.01     0.10     0       1
Vocational School                             VOCATIONAL SCHOOL      2237    0.05   0.21      0       1     2414    0.02    0.15     0       1
City Dummy                                    CITY                   2237    0.23   0.42      0        1    2414    0.21    0.41      0       1
Large City Dummy                              LARGE_CITY             2237    0.04   0.19      0        1    2414    0.04    0.20      0       1
Age of student                                AGE                    2237   15.76   0.29    15.25   16.25   2414   15.76    0.29   15.25   16.25
Student repeated a grade                      REPEAT                 2237    0.14   0.35      0        1    2414    0.08    0.28      0       1
Index of economic, social & cultural status   ESCS                   2237    0.10   0.92     -2        3    2414    0.05    0.94   -2.44    2.53
Immigration status                            IMMIGRANT              2237   0.06    0.24      0       1     2414   0.06     0.23     0       1
Other language spoken at home                 LANG_Foreign           2237    0.20   0.40      0        1    2414    0.15    0.36      0       1
Private School                                PRIVATE SCHOOL         2237   0.05    0.22      0       1     2414   0.04     0.19     0       1
Proportion of girls in school                 PROP_Girl              2237    0.39   0.22    0.00     0.98   2414   0.59     0.19     0       1
Proportion of math teachers in school         TEACH_Math             2237    0.12   0.06      0        0    2414    0.12    0.05    0.01    0.33
Mother Housewife                              HOUSEWIFE              2237   0.18    0.38      0       1     2414    0.19    0.39     0       1
Mother has a financial career                 MOTHER_Fin             2237   0.05    0.21      0       1     2414   0.06     0.24     0       1
Father has a financial career                 FATHER_Fin             2237   0.06    0.24      0       1     2414    0.06    0.23     0       1
Parent expects a financial career             EXP_Fin                1817    0.07   0.26      0        1    2013    0.05    0.22      0       1
             Table A4:Descriptive Statistics of Regional-Level Variables
Variable                                            Name of the Variable    N     mean     sd    min    max
Media Sophistication                                MEDIA_Soph             4651    0.15   1.58 -2.05 2.97
Political Interest                                  POL_Talk               4651   15.68    2.26 11.20 19.80
Active Political Participation                      ACT_Pol                4651   -0.02   1.28 -1.70 3.37
Entrepreneur                                        ENTR                   4651    0.07    0.02 0.03 0.16
Bank Branches                                       BANKS                  4651   59.64   20.14 24.40 93.50
Number of firms in the financial sec-               FINANCE_Firms          4651    0.08    0.02 0.05 0.19
tor/population
Projected % of hirings in the financial sector      JOB_Fin                4651   0.02    0.01   0.01   0.04
(non seasonal jobs)
Projected % of hirings for people with an ad-       JOB_Adm                4651   0.14    0.03   0.09   0.19
ministrative/commercial qualification (at any
level, from qualifica professionale to laurea de-
gree)
Number of lyceums/thousand inhabitants              LYCEUMS per cap.       4651   0.05    0.01   0.03   0.07
% of provinces which were on a medieval Com-        COMM_Route             4187   0.55    0.31    0      1
mercial route
Nuclear family structure                            NFS                    4651   0.54    0.48    0      1
                                Table A5: Correlation between Main Variables
Variables                          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)     (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)     (14)    (15)
(1) FEMALE                           1
(2) AGE                        -0.0016         1
(3) REPEAT                      -0.095   -0.0403       1
(4) ESCS                       -0.0235     0.021 -0.1403       1
(5) IMMIGRANT                  -0.0114   -0.0273   0.112 -0.1282      1
(6) LANG_Foreign               -0.0673   -0.0002 0.0875 -0.2254 0.2874                 1
(7) PRIVATE SCHOOL             -0.0332   -0.0167 0.0495 0.0036 0.0116             0.0573       1
(8) City                       -0.0212    -0.005 0.0007 0.1083 0.0442            -0.0465 0.0802        1
(9) Large_City                  0.0092   -0.0091 0.0059 0.1003 -0.0168           -0.0748 0.0049 -0.1059         1
(10) PROP_Girl                  0.4255    0.0383 -0.0918 0.0886 -0.0362          -0.0769 -0.0919 -0.039     -0.01      1
(11) TEACH_Math                 0.0183    0.0146 -0.1547 0.2388 -0.0264          -0.1315 0.0074 0.0417     0.067 0.0925        1
(12) HOUSEWIFE                  0.0129   -0.0256 0.0356 -0.3118 0.0549            0.0287 -0.0209 -0.0592 -0.0147 -0.0476 -0.0700      1
(13) Stereotype Index           0.0122   -0.0196 -0.077 -0.0711 -0.0784          -0.1042 -0.1328 -0.0733 -0.0101 0.0176 0.0931 0.2373         1
(14) GEI                       -0.0133    0.0242 0.0723 0.0826 0.0868             0.0774   0.107   0.055 0.0585 -0.0195 -0.0702 -0.2355 -0.9708    1
(15) IGGI                      -0.0147    0.0278 0.0704 0.0862 0.0812             0.0267 0.0961 0.0383 0.0716 -0.0184 -0.0574 -0.2185 -0.9463 0.9807                         1
NOTE: The table reports the correlation between the controls of our basic specification. REPEAT is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade. ESCS is an
index of student`s economic, social and cultural status; LANG_Foreign indicates if the language spoken at home is not the Italian language; PROP_Girls indicates the Proportion
of girls enrolled in the school; TEACH_math is the percentage of Math Teachers in school; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother is a housewife; Stereotype
Index is an index of the peoples` beliefs in stereotypes; GEI is the Gender Equality Index; IGGI is the Italian Gender Gap Index based on four dimensions of which we take two:
Political and Economic participation.
Figure 1: Gender differences in Financial Literacy performance, before and
after accounting for mathematics and reading performance.




 NOTE: Countries and economies are ranked in ascending order of the score-point difference in fi-
 nancial literacy performance between boys and girls, after accounting for mathematics and reading
 performance.
    Figure 2: Proficiency in Financial Literacy among Girls and Boys.




NOTE: The figure reports the average percentage of girls and boys by level of financial literacy
proficiency. Level 5 is achieved by students with the highest score, Level 1 is achieved by students
with the lowest score. The legend reports the average difference in the financial literacy score of girls
and boys who achieved each level.
Figure 3a: Difference in Financial Literacy Score between girls and boys.




NOTE: The Figure reports the financial literacy gap between girls and boys by Region. Regions
with darker color are those where the financial literacy gap between boys and girls is higher. Data
Source: OECD


                      Figure 3b: Income per capita by Region




NOTE: The Figure reports the income per capita by region. Regions with darker color are those
where the income per capita is higher. Data Source: ISTAT
        Table 1: Regression with Student, School and City Characteristics.

Dependent Variable              (1)             (2)               (3)                  (4)               (5)                        (6)
Financial Literacy Score   Only region    Basic student   Italy: North-West    Italy: North-East    Italy: Center        Italy: South & Islands
                           dummies        controls
FEMALE                       -12.46***       -18.96***           -15.84**             -12.71**        -16.72***                  -24.67***
                               (-3.71)         (-5.67)            (-2.06)              (-2.07)          (-3.02)                    (-6.13)
TECHNICAL SCHOOL                             -21.88***            -14.32                 -7.02         -27.20**                  -30.38***
                                               (-4.05)            (-1.34)              (-0.78)          (-2.30)                    (-3.06)
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL                           -62.3***          -73.17***            -50.74***        -55.60***                  -65.37***
                                               (-7.26)            (-4.33)              (-2.90)          (-3.52)                    (-4.80)
MIDDLE SCHOOL                                 -48.20**         -120.29***           -137.27***          -43.15*                    -10.28
                                               (-2.20)            (-5.88)              (-3.03)          (-1.82)                    (-0.33)
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL                            -71.57***          -95.37***            -62.02***        -54.69***                 -177.62***
                                               (-6.51)            (-6.22)              (-3.66)          (-2.99)                   (-10.15)
AGE                                            11.70**             11.39                  3.36             4.60                   16.45**
                                                (2.03)            (1.03)                (0.41)           (0.39)                    (2.09)
REPEAT                                       -40.38***           -19.47**            -36.29***        -57.64***                  -50.47***
                                               (-8.41)            (-2.07)              (-4.33)          (-6.54)                    (-5.67)
ESCS                                            3.92**              0.80                 -1.13             2.64                   8.85***
                                                (2.27)            (0.23)               (-0.35)           (0.84)                    (3.26)
IMMIGRANT                                     -15.43**             6.89                -21.42*          -17.66*                    -10.44
                                               (-2.10)            (0.53)               (-1.77)          (-1.80)                    (-0.68)
LANG_Foreign                                   -10.24*          -57.35***                -9.37            -6.37                      1.07
                                               (-1.76)            (-3.34)              (-1.06)          (-0.57)                    (0.11)
PRIVATE SCHOOL                                -20.53**            -14.82                -20.31           -17.18                     -0.67
                                               (-2.07)            (-0.77)              (-1.38)          (-0.83)                    (-0.06)
CITY                                             2.43              -1.30                  0.18            10.22                     1.23
                                                (0.51)            (-0.10)               (0.03)           (1.15)                    (0.15)
LARGE CITY                                       -2.44              0.09                                   1.94                    -19.61
                                               (-0.24)            (0.01)                                 (0.19)                    (-0.99)
PROP_Girls                                     -16.21*             4.85               -12.22             -35.24                    -22.26
                                               (-1.71)            (0.28)              (-0.75)           (-1.52)                    (-1.30)
TEACH_Math                                     1.96***              0.52             2.16***            2.98***                   2.50***
                                                (4.48)            (0.70)              (2.59)             (3.53)                    (3.03)
HOUSEWIFE                                    -18.76***           -20.20**            -20.70**          -18.16**                   -13.35**
                                               (-4.39)            (-2.17)             (-2.33)           (-2.26)                    (-2.40)
Region dummies                  YES            YES                YES                  YES              YES                        YES
Adjusted_R2                     0.09           0.36               0.34                 0.30             0.35                       0.33
N                               4651           4651                806                 1273             912                        1660
Omitted region                                                   Liguria            Alto Adige         Umbria                    Basilicata
NOTE: The table reports our basic specification for the whole country and for different macro regions. Column (1) include controls for region fixed ef-
fects. Column (2) includes region's fixed effects and our basic control variables. Columns (3), (4), (5) and (6) shows our basic specification for dif-
ferent macro geographical areas.   REPEAT is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade.         ESCS is an index of student`s
economic, social and cultural status; LANG_Foreign is equal to 1 if the language spoken at home is not the Italian language; PROP_Girls indi-
cates the Proportion of girls enrolled in the school; TEACH_Math is the percentage of Math Teachers in school; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy vari-
able equal to 1 if the mother is a housewife.        The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
             Table 2: Quantile regressions with Student Basic Controls.


Dependent Variables                     (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                     (5)
Financial Literacy Score            10th pctl        25th pctl        50th pctl        75th pctl               90th pctl
FEMALE                               -15.81**        -14.48***         -16.04***        -23.42***               -25.99***
                                      (-1.96)          (-2.62)           (-2.78)          (-5.47)                 (-4.22)
AGE                                     10.74           10.99              9.64           13.58*                   12.68
                                       (0.81)           (1.2)            (1.43)            (1.9)                  (0.89)
REPEAT                              -35.77***        -37.91***         -42.97***        -43.71***               -40.79***
                                      (-2.96)          (-3.89)           (-6.04)          (-5.62)                 (-3.71)
ESCS                                     3.98             3.8              3.28             3.92                   7.75*
                                       (0.78)           (1.3)            (1.23)           (1.44)                  (1.93)
IMMIGRANT                              -19.26          -17.11            -13.58           -10.58                   -9.95
                                      (-1.05)          (-0.99)           (-1.15)           (-0.8)                 (-0.98)
LANG_Foreign                            -11.4          -10.39            -12.44            -11.1                   -8.68
                                      (-0.97)          (-0.99)           (-1.48)           (-1.4)                 (-0.91)
PRIVATE SCHOOL                         -33.36          -30.47            -18.67           -19.67                  -19.41
                                      (-1.23)           (-1.2)           (-1.47)           (-1.5)                 (-1.31)
PROP_Girls                              -13.1           -4.59            -16.67          -24.91*                  -17.68
                                      (-0.66)          (-0.28)           (-1.28)          (-1.88)                 (-0.84)
PROP_Math                             1.92**          1.97***           1.98***          2.26***                 2.12***
                                       (2.56)          (2.63)            (3.27)           (4.11)                  (2.58)
HOUSEWIFE                             -18.58*         -18.06**         -19.38***         -16.2**                 -15.22*
                                      (-1.95)          (-2.54)           (-3.21)          (-2.29)                 (-1.92)
Region dummies                          YES              YES              YES              YES                     YES
School dummies                          YES              YES              YES              YES                     YES
School location dummies                 YES              YES              YES              YES                     YES
N                                       4651             4651             4651             4651                    4651
NOTE:: The table shows our basic specification at different quantiles of the distribution of the financial literacy scores. REPEAT is
a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade. ESCS is an index of student`s economic, social and cultural sta-
tus; LANG_Foreign indicates if the language spoken at home is not the Italian language; PROP_Girls indicates the Proportion of
girls enrolled in the school; TEACH_Math is the percentage of Math Teachers in school; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if the mother is a housewife. The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                  Table 3: The Effect of Parents` Financial Career.


Dependent Variable                        (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)
Financial Literacy Score
FEMALE                                -19.14***      -20.19***       female=1       female=0
                                        (-5.72)        (3.36)
MOTHER_Fin                               6.09           -5.96         15.66**          -7.58
                                        (0.95)         (0.95)          (2.01)         (-0.84)
FATHER_Fin                               -4.28          -4.11           -0.81          -5.18
                                        (-0.81)        (7.79)         (-0.11)         (-0.71)
MOTHER_Fin*FEMALE                                      19.93
                                                      (10.71)
FATHER_Fin*FEMALE                                        0.3
                                                      (11.43)
Region dummies                           YES             YES            YES             YES
School dummies                           YES             YES            YES             YES
Basic student controls                   YES             YES            YES             YES
Adjusted_R2                              0.36            0.36           0.35            0.37
N                                        4651            4651           2414            2237
NOTE: The table shows the importance of mother`s and father`s financial or managerial careers on students`
financial literacy score. Column (1) reports our basic specification adding financial career for both parents.
In column (2) we replicate the previous regression adding interactions with the FEMALE variable. In col-
umn (3) and (4) we perform the regression with sub-sample of males and females respectively. MOTHER_Fin
and FATHER_Fin are dummy variables equal to 1 if mother`s and father`s occupation is "managerial or fi-
nancial". The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                       Table 4a: The Effect of the Regional Environment.

 Dependent Variable                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
 Financial Literacy Score
 FEMALE                              -19.22    -35.37***     -20.20***     -36.67***     35.82***     -52.15*** -34.53** -51.84***
                                    (-5.60)      (-2.25)       (-6.14)       (-3.95)      (-4.84)       (-3.65)  (-4.18)   (-3.24)
 MEDIA_Soph                            0.90         2.60         2.62          2.65          2.56          2.71    2.47      1.13
                                     (0.36)       (1.18)       (1.20)         (1.21)       (1.16)        (1.24)   (1.22)   (0.51)
 POL_Talk                              1.22         0.68         1.22          1.20          1.22          1.15     1.27     2.05
                                     (1.04)       (0.52)       (1.05)         (1.03)       (1.05)        (0.99)   (1.17)   (1.74)
 ACT_Pol                           -5.45***     -5.42***        -3.32       -5.42***     -5.45***      -5.42*** -5.47*** -4.89***
                                    (-3.26)      (-3.24)       (-1.54)       (-3.23)      (-3.26)       (-3.24)  (-3.29)   (-2.91)
 ENTR                                 0.44          0.43         0.45          -0.91        0.47          0.49      0.44    -1.51
                                     (0.43)       (0.41)       (0.43)        (-0.70)       (0.45)        (0.47)   (0.42)   (-1.24)
 BANKS                              0.80***      0.81***      0.81***        0.80***      0.66***       0.79***  0.81***  0.79***
                                     (4.19)       (4.21)       (4.22)         (4.14)       (3.48)        (4.11)   (4.40)   (4.07)
 FINANCE_Firms                        -0.27        -0.31        -0.31          -0.06        -0.31         -2.28    -0.45    -1.11
                                    (-0.15)      (-0.17)       (-0.17)       (-0.03)      (-0.17)       (-1.12)  (-0.33)   (-0.64)
 JOB_Fin                                                                                                           -2.86
                                                                                                                  (-0.78)
 JOB_Adm                                                                                                                     1.23
                                                                                                                           (1.14)
 MEDIA_Soph*FEMALE                  3.34*

                                    (1.72)

 POL_Talk*FEMALE                                  1.05
                                                 (1.02)

 ACT_Pol*FEMALE                                                -4.07*
                                                               (-1.85)

 ENTR*FEMALE                                                                  2.50*
                                                                              (1.9)

 BANKS*FEMALE                                                                              0.30**
                                                                                           (2.32)

 FINAN_Firms*FEMALE                                                                                     4.44**
                                                                                                        (2.27)
 JOB_Fin*FEMALE                                                                                                       6.40*
                                                                                                                      (1.69)

 JOB_Adm*FEMALE                                                                                                                    2.23*
                                                                                                                                   (1.95)
 Region dummies                      NO           NO            NO            NO            NO           NO           NO            NO
 School dummies                      YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES          YES           YES
 Basic student controls              YES          YES           YES           YES           YES          YES          YES           YES
 Adjusted R2                         0.35         0.35          0.35          0.35          0.35         0.35         0.35          0.35
 N                                   4651         4561          4651          4651          4561         4561         4561          4561

NOTE: The table shows the impact of the regional environment characteristics and their interaction with FEMALE on students` financial
literacy score. MEDIA_Soph is a regional level index of the % of people watching TV, listening to radio, reading newspapers; POL_Talk
indicates the % of people who talk about politics at the regional level; ACT_Pol indicates the % of people who attend political events
at the regional level; ENTR is the proportion of entrepreneurs over the total regional population; BANKS is the number of banks for ev-
ery 1000 inhabitants in the region; FINANCE_Firms is the number of financial firms over the total regional population; JOB_Fin is the
projected % of hirings in the financial sector at the regional level; JOB_Adm is the projected % of hirings for people with administra-
tive/commercial qualification at the regional level. T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           Table 4b: Historical Determinants of the Local Environment.


Dependent Variable                          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)
Financial Literacy Score
FEMALE                                 -41.23***       -18.51***        22.20***       -47.09***       -90.88**
                                         (-3.82)        (-3.79 )         (1.09)          (-3.56)       (-2.52)
COMM_Route                              4.07***
                                         (9.22)
COMM_Route*FEMALE                       0.42***
                                         (1.97)
NFS                                                     -0.52***
                                                         (-4.45)
NFS*FEMALE                                                -0.01
                                                         (-0.11)
Stereotype Index                                                        -8.96***
                                                                         (-8.98)
Steretype Index*FEMALE                                                   -1.30**
                                                                         (-2.15)
GEI                                                                                     6.28***
                                                                                         (9.11)
GEI*FEMALE                                                                               0.78**
                                                                                         (2.04)
IGGI                                                                                                   15.45***
                                                                                                       (9.25)
IGGI*FEMALE                                                                                            1.55*
                                                                                                       (1.95)
Region dummies                             YES             YES            YES             YES          YES
School dummies                             YES             YES            YES             YES          YES
Basic student dummies                      YES             YES            YES             YES          YES
Adjusted R2                                0.36            0.36           0.36            0.36         0.36
N                                          4651            4651           4651            4651         4651
NOTE: The table shows the relevance of the historical determinants of the regional culture and their interaction with FEMALE
on students` financial literacy score. COMM_Route is the % of provinces which were on a medieval commercial route; NFS
indicates the presence of a Nuclear Family Structure; Stereotype Index is an index capturing peoples` beliefs in stereotypes; GEI
is the Gender Equality Index; IGGI is the Italian Gender Gap Index based on four dimensions of which we take two: Political
and Economic participation. The T - statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table 5: Financial Literacy at different Quantiles of Math Literacy.


Dependent Variables                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)
Financial Literacy Score             10th pctl       25th pctl       50th pctl       75th pctl       90th pctl
FEMALE                                -17.00***       -13.61***      -13.15***         -9.26*           -10.3
                                        (-4.85)         (-3.81)        (-3.62)         (-1.84)         (-1.33)
TECHNICAL SCHOOL                      -19.97***       -17.42***         -10.29          -5.14           -2.64
                                        (-3.64)         (-3.33)        (-1.62)          (-0.6)         (-0.19)
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL                   -53.75***       -50.22***       -28.15**         -13.97           -5.85
                                        (-6.27)         (-5.61)        (-2.34)         (-0.63)         (-0.37)
MIDDLE SCHOOL                          -30.99**          -14.81         -18.14          -4.41         (omitted)
                                        (-2.19)         (-0.87)        ( -0.99)        (-0.23)
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL                     -57.45***       -45.55***          -28.9        -42.56**             10.4
                                        (-5.49)         (-4.12)        (-1.49)         (-2.36)           (0.37)
AGE                                      11.64*            7.36         11.50*       19.76***            13.76
                                         (1.94)          (1.27)         (1.88)         (2.89)            (1.30)
REPEAT                                -38.60***       -33.51***      -36.64***        -29.45**         -36.04**
                                        (-7.79)         (-6.19)        (-4.58)         (-2.42)          (-2.46)
ESCS                                       4.6           4.12**           2.59           0.67             -3.63
                                         (2.68)          (2.38)         (1.36)         (0.24)           (-0.83)
IMMIGRANT                                 -8.97          -10.42           -6.1          -9.26          -27.81**
                                     (-1.24)            (-1.35)        (-0.67)         (-0.91)           (-2.2)
LANG_Foreign                              -7.98          -9.63*         -10.8*           1.16            -17.39
                                     (-1.64)            (-1.94)        (-1.69)         (0.13)           (-1.15)
PRIVATE SCHOOL                          -27.3**        -30.84**        -27.41*         -13.27             -1.56
                                     (-2.51)            (-2.43)        (-1.67)         (-1.27)          (-0.12)
CITY                                      1.66            -0.25            1.2           4.84           17.76**
                                         (0.37)         (-0.05)         (0.25)         (0.84)            (2.04)
LARGE CITY                                -3.68           -1.74           1.53          13.65            -14.13
                                     (-0.37)            (-0.18)         (0.14)         (0.88)           (-0.96)
PROP_Girl                                -16.5*        -19.42**          -8.22         -17.52             4.33
                                     (-1.75)            (-2.17)        (-0.74)         (-1.16)           (0.17)
TEACH_Math                             1.85***          1.48***         0.88**          1.4**               0.8
                                         (4.45)          (4.18)         (2.03)         (2.35)            (1.26)
HOUSEWIFE                              -16.4***       -13.99***      -14.05***       -20.12***          -25.1**
                                        (-3.88)         (-2.74)        (-2.89)         (-2.87)          (-2.29)
Region dummies                           YES             YES            YES             YES              YES
Adjusted R2                              0.30            0.22           0.13            0.10             0.09
N                                        4185            3488           2325            1162             465
Number of Females                        2133            1727           1072             475             141
Number of Males                          2052            1761           1253             687             324
NOTE: The table reports our basic specification at different quantile of Math Literacy.   The Math Literacy score is
derived from PISA 2012.      REPEAT is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade.       ESCS
is an index of student`s economic, social and cultural status; LANG_Foreign indicates if the language spoken at
home is not the Italian language; PROP_Girls indicates the Proportion of girls enrolled in the school; TEACH_Math
is the percentage of Math Teachers in school; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother is
a housewife.    The T - statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 6: Historical Determinants of Local Environment controlling for Math
Literacy Scores.


Dependent Variable                          (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)                   (5)
Financial Literacy Score
FEMALE                                  -27.80***         -4.75       38.30***       -32.81***             -83.39***
                                          (-3.26)       (-1.31 )        (2.45)         (-3.04)               (-2.91)
MATH_Score                               0.48***        0.48***        0.48***        0.48***               0.48***
                                         (18.72)        (18.54)        (18.65)        (18.653)              (18.68)
COMM_Route                               2.46***
                                          (5.98)
COMM_Route*FEMALE                        0.47***
                                          (2.79)
NFS                                                     -0.43***
                                                         (-4.52)
NFS*FEMALE                                                 0.02
                                                         (0.47)
Stereotype Index                                                      -5.38***
                                                                       (-5.79)
Stereotype Index*FEMALE                                               -1.31***
                                                                       (-2.79)
GEI                                                                                   3.78***
                                                                                       (5.84)
GEI*FEMALE                                                                            0.83***
                                                                                       (2.70)
IGGI                                                                                                        9.33***
                                                                                                             (5.97)
IGGI*FEMALE                                                                                                1.73***
                                                                                                             (2.75)
Region dummies                             YES            YES            YES            YES                   YES
School dummies                             YES            YES            YES            YES                   YES
Basic student dummies                      YES            YES            YES            YES                   YES
Adjusted R2                                0.08           0.08           0.08           0.08                  0.08
N                                          4651           4651           4651           4651                  4651
NOTE: The table shows the relevance of the historical determinants of the regional culture and their interaction with FE-
MALE on students` financial literacy score, when controlling also for math literacy. The Math Literacy score is derived
from PISA 2012. COMM_Route is the % of provinces which were on a medieval commercial route; NFS indicates the pres-
ence of a Nuclear Family Structure; Stereotype Index is an index of the peoples` belief in stereotypes; GEI is the Gender
Equality Index; IGGI is the Italian Gender Gap Index based on four dimensions of which we take two: Political and Eco-
nomic participation. The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                    Table 7: Endogenous Treatment Effect.

Dependent Variable                        Financial Literacy Score                   Financial Literacy Score                  Scientific Lyceum
                                                       Baseline                                  2nd stage                            1st stage
FEMALE                                                  -19.01***                                 -17.30**                                -0.14
                                                          (-5.64)                                  (-2.43)                              (-1.56)
AGE                                                      -12.45**                                 -16.68**                               0.037
                                                          (2.17)                                   (2.53)                                (0.32)
REPEAT                                                  -40.78***                                 -58.23**                             -0.91***
                                                          (-8.46)                                  (-2.25)                               (-4,2)
ESCS                                                      3.86**                                    12.63                               0.26***
                                                          (2.28)                                   (1.15)                                (6.08)
IMMIGRANT                                                -15.69**                                 -18.80**                                -0.16
                                                          (2.17)                                   (-2.33)                              (-0.89)
LANG_Foreign                                              -9.86*                                   -16.31                              -0.35***
                                                          (-1.69)                                   (-1.5)                              (-3.77)
PRIVATE SCHOOL                                            -16.65                                  -23.16**                                 0.04
                                                          (-1.61)                                  (-2.36)                                (0.2)
CITY                                                        1.76                                     5.81                                  0.10
                                                          (0.37)                                   (0.93)                                (0.62)
LARGE CITY                                                 -0.97                                     3.83                                 -0.20
                                                          (-0.10)                                  (0.27)                               (-0.83)
PROP_Girls                                                -14.17                                     7.72                                 -0.04
                                                          (-1.64)                                  (0.75)                               (-0.17)
HOUSEWIFE                                               -18.65***                                 19.97***                                -0.11
                                                          (-4.41)                                  (-3.73)                              (-1.11)
TECHNICAL SCHOOL                                        -48.83***
                                                          (-8.53)
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL                                     -93.84***
                                                         (-11.74)
MIDDLE SCHOOL                                           -65.23***
                                                          (-2.86)
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL                                      -102.94***
                                                          (-9.69)
HUMANISTIC LYCEUM                                       -27.22***
                                                          (-5.61)
SCIENTIFIC LYCEUM                                                                                    5.65
                                                                                                    (0.04)
% SCIENTIFIC LYCEUM                                                                                                                      3.04**
                                                                                                                                         (2.06)
Region dummies                                             YES                                       YES                                  YES
N                                                          4651                                      4651                                 4651
athrho                                                                                               0.36
                                                                                                    (0.28)
lnsigma                                                                                            4.28***
                                                                                                   (33.25)
NOTE: The table reports the results of the first and second stages of the Heckman estimation. Column (1) is our basic specification that we report for
comparison. Column (2) shows our second stage specification with financial literacy score as dependent variable. Column (3) reports the probability of stu-
dents choosing to enroll in a scientific lyceum. REPEAT is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade. ESCS is an index of student`s
economic, social and cultural status; LANG_Foreign indicates if the language spoken at home is not the Italian language; PROP_Girls indicates the Propor-
tion of girls enrolled in the school; TEACH_Math is the percentage of Math Teachers in school; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother
is a housewife; % SCIENTIFIC LYCEUM A is the percentage of scientific lyceums by region. The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in
parenthesis below the coefficients.                                                                                                                    ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                Table 8: Teaching Practice.


Dependent Variable                         (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)
Financial Literacy Score
FEMALE             -17.73*** -25.08*** -29.22***                                      -15.86***
                      (-4.38)   (-5.86)   (-4.09)                                       (-3.93)
TEACH_think                       -5.89
                                (-1.25)
TEACH_think*FEMALE            16.22***
                                 (2.77)
TEACH_quest                                 -1.66
                                          (-0.29)
TEACH_quest*FEMALE                       16.68**
                                           (2.30)
COGNITIVE                                                                                2.60
                                                                                        (1.00)
COGNITIVE*FEMALE                                                                        8.32**
                                                                                        (2.20)
Region dummies                            YES            YES           YES               YES
School dummies                            YES            YES           YES               YES
Basic student dummies                     YES            YES           YES               YES
Adjusted_R2                               0.35           0.36          0.36              0.36
N                                         3018           3018          3018              3018
NOTE: The table reports the effect of teaching practices. Column (1) includes our basic controls. Col-
umn (2) includes TEACH_think, which is a dummy variable equal to 1 if teacher asks to present rea-
soning during every lesson or most of the lessons.     Column (3) includes TEACH_quest, which is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if teacher ask if students understood during every lesson or most of the
lessons.   Column (4) includes COGNITIVE, which is an index for cognitive activation during math
lessons. The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                    Table 9: Discussion about Money with the Family.


Dependent Variable                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                       (4)
Financial Literacy Score
FEMALE                                     -17.22***           -15.78***           female = 1                female = 0
                                             (-3.66)             (-2.35)
DISCUSS_Family                                                  15.88***             15.68***                  15.82***
                                                                 (2.75)               (2.84)                    (2.87)
DISCUSS_Family*FEMALE                                             -1.33
                                                                 (-0.16)
Region dummies                                NO                  NO                   NO                        NO
School dummies                                YES                 YES                  YES                       YES
Basic student dummies                         YES                 YES                  YES                       YES
Adjusted R2                                   0.35                0.36                 0.36                      0.36
N                                             2109                2019                 1056                      1053
NOTE: The table considers the effect of discussing Money Matters with the family. Column (1) is our basic specification esti-
mated on the sub-sample of respondents only. Column (2) includes the variable Discuss_Family, which equal to 1 if students
talk often about money with their family. In columns (3) and (4) the same specification is estimated for the sub-samples of
females and males respectively. The T-statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                    Table 10: Stereotype Index IV Estimates

Dependent Variable                       (1)        (2)               (3)              (4)
Financial Literacy Score                            first stage                    first stage
FEMALE                                  25.11                       26.08
                                       (0.53)                       (0.83)
Stereotype Index                      -4.44***                     -1.73**
                                       (-4.04)                     (-1.95)
Stereotype Index*FEMALE                 -1.39                        0.91
                                       (-1.09)                      (0.91)
MATH_Score                                                         0.49***
                                                                   (18.46)
Plough-pos environment                                0.12**                         0.12**
                                                      (23.12)                        (23.12)
Plough-neg environment                               -0.72***                       -0.72***
                                                     (-35.26)                       (-35.26)
School Dummies                           YES           YES         YES          YES
Basic Student Dummies                    YES           YES         YES          YES
F-Stat (escl.ins.)                                      407                                   418
Model p-value                           0.000          0.000              0                     0
N                                       4651           4651            4651                  4651
NOTE: The table presents IV regression of a specification where we instrument the Stereotype
index with Plough-pos and Plough-neg agricultural areas.     The two instruments are then con-
structed by computing the ratio of the amount of land suitable for the production of Plough pos-
itive or Plough negative cereals with the total arable land, for each Italian region.    The T-
statistics computed with robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                       Table 11: Saving and Financial Literacy

                                      (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
Dependent Variable               PSAVE_A          PSAVE_A         PSAVE_B          PSAVE_B
FEMALE                              -0.25*        female = 1              0.073    female = 1
                                   (-1.15)                               (0.74)
Financial Literacy Score         0.0002           0.002**              0.001**         0.002**
                                    (0.26)           (1.98)              (2.49)          (2.08)
AGE                                  -0.07            -0.18               -0.01           -0.02
                                   (-0.31)          (-0.66)             (-0.04)         (-0.10)
REPEAT                            -0.59***            -0.27               0.044            0.27
                                   (-3.60)          (-0.98)              (0.27)          (1.09)
ESCS                                 -0.04            -0.05              -0.002            0.09
                                   (-0.65)           (0.63)             (-0.03)          (1.19)
IMMIGRANT                            -0.12            -0.13                0.18            0.18
                                   (-0.52)          (-0.48)              (0.85)          (0.56)
CITY                               -0.43**         -0.46***                0.03        0.45***
                                   (-2.29)          (-2.62)              (0.30)          (2.59)
LARGE_CITY                           -0.38           -0.71*               0.48*        1.04***
                                   (-0.65)          (-1.93)              (1.90)          (2.69)
HOUSEWIFE                            -0.15            -2.29               -0.10           -0.13
                                   (-1.21)          (-1.60)             (-0.81)         (-0.84)
Region dummies                       YES              YES                 YES              YES
N                                    1803             963                 2029             1016
NOTE: The table reports our basic specification for the probit model, with Probability to Save as de-
pendent variable.   PSAVE_A is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the students saves money; PSAVE_B
is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student saves money to buy an item; REPEAT is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the student has repeated a grade.     ESCS is an index of student`s economic,
social and cultural status; HOUSEWIFE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother is a house-
wife. The T - statistics computed with robust standard errors are in parenthesis below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
