                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     QUALITY-ADJUSTED POPULATION DENSITY

                                    J. Vernon Henderson
                                      Adam Storeygard
                                        David N. Weil

                                     Working Paper 28070
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28070


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We are grateful to Anna Croley, Joao Garcia, Bo Yeon Jang, and Balazs Zelity for excellent
research assistance; to Jesus Fernandez Villaverde, Matthew Delventhal, Gajendran
Raveendranathan, and Ömer Özak for sharing data; to seminar audiences at Clark University,
Louisiana State University, Southern Methodist University, the University of Southern Denmark,
The Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, the Second Workshop on Geodata in
Economics (Hamburg, 2019), the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, University of Haifa,
Hebrew University, and IDC Herzliya for helpful comments; and to Andrew Foster and Joshua
Wilde for helpful advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quality-adjusted Population Density
J. Vernon Henderson, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 28070
November 2020
JEL No. O13,O18,Q56,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

Quality-adjusted population density (QAPD) is population divided by land area that has been
adjusted for geographic characteristics. We derive weights on these geographic characteristics
from a global regression of population density at the quarter-degree level with country fixed
effects. We show, first, that while income per capita is uncorrelated with conventionally
measured population density across countries, there is a strong negative correlation between
income per capita and QAPD; second, that the magnitude of this relationship exceeds the
plausible structural effect of density on income, suggesting a negative correlation between QAPD
and productivity or factor accumulation; and third, that higher QAPD in poor countries is
primarily due to population growth since 1820. We argue that these facts are best understood as
results of the differential timings of economic takeoff and demographic transition across
countries, and particularly the rapid transfer of health technologies from early to late developers.

J. Vernon Henderson                              David N. Weil
Centre for Economic Performance                  Department of Economics
London School of Economics                       Box B
Houghton Street                                  Brown University
London UK WC2A2AE                                Providence, RI 02912
J.V.Henderson@lse.ac.uk                          and NBER
                                                 david_weil@brown.edu
Adam Storeygard
Department of Economics
Tufts University
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02115
and NBER
Adam.storeygard@tufts.edu
Introduction

Population density has long played a central role in the thinking of economists regarding
economic growth, population size, agglomeration effects, and the role of natural resources in
affecting economic outcomes. Comparing countries, for example, we naturally adjust population
size by area in order to make our comparisons more meaningful. It is not particularly surprising
that Kenya has 10.7 times the population of the Republic of Ireland (52.6 vs. 4.9 million), given
that it has 8.3 times the area (580,362 vs 70,273 km2). By contrast, it is somewhat more
interesting that the population in Bangladesh is 77 times more dense than that in Argentina
(1,016 vs. 14.4 people per km2).

Economists have also long understood that a simple calculation of population density might
miss important information. It is difficult for people to live in rugged mountains or deep deserts.
Similarly, fertile soil, a moderate climate, and access to the coast are conducive to settlement
and economic activity. Geographic characteristics would be expected to affect population
density, and we might want to judge a region as particularly densely or sparsely populated
based on how its population compares to its area adjusted in some manner for geophysical
characteristics.

There have been a number of attempts to assess the role of geography in influencing population
density, and similarly to adjust the conventional density measure for geographic characteristics.
For example, Mellinger, Sachs, and Gallup (2000) show that population density on land that is
within 100 km of an ocean or sea-navigable waterway is on average 4.7 times as high as on
land that is not. Measures of climate or land characteristics are sometimes included as controls
in cross-country regressions where population density, income, or income growth is the
dependent variable (e.g. Masters and McMillan, 2001; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015) .
Some existing work has constructed density measures adjusted for the quality of agricultural
land. For example Binswanger and Pingali (1988) construct a measure that they call
"agroclimatic population density," which is population per million calories of production potential
at an intermediate input technology level, using FAO estimates. Galor and Ozak (2016)
similarly construct country-level measures of potential crop yield (millions of kilocalories per
hectare, using a specified set of available crops and conditioning on specific levels of inputs and
water supply), that can be used to construct quality-adjusted population densities.

In this paper we introduce a new method for adjusting population density for land
characteristics. Specifically, we estimate weights on land characteristics from a Poisson
regression of population in quarter-degree grid squares on a vector of geographic
characteristics and country fixed effects, and then use fitted values (suppressing the fixed
effects) to form a measure of land quality for each grid square. The use of country fixed effects
avoids the problem that the estimated coefficients on geographic characteristics will be biased
due to the correlation of country-level institutions with country-level average geographic
characteristics, as stressed for example by Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001).



                                                                                                      1
With our measure of land quality in hand, we can construct a set of interesting variables at the
country level: average land quality, total quality-adjusted land area, and quality-adjusted
population density. The last is simply total population divided by the sum of grid-cell level
quality-adjusted land quantity.2

Quality-adjusted population density (QAPD) is positively correlated with conventionally
measured population density, but there are a number of cases in which the change in measure
makes a substantial difference to a country's relative density. To give an example, Rwanda and
the Netherlands have fairly similar values of conventionally measured population density, but
when we use our quality-adjusted measure, Rwanda remains one of the most densely
populated countries in the world, while density in the Netherlands is close to the world median.
Further, we show that switching to our quality-adjusted measure brings to light important
empirical regularities. Most significantly, while the correlation across countries between income
per capita and conventional population density is close to zero, income per capita is strongly
negatively correlated with quality-adjusted population density. This result is robust to alterations
in the specification and population dataset used, as well as to the sample of countries used in
estimating the weights on geographic characteristics.

The finding that poorer countries have higher quality-adjusted population density than rich
countries is a surprise, and much of the remainder of the paper is devoted to exploring it. In
many models of urbanization and agglomeration, higher population density is associated with
higher productivity, and so one would expect density and income to be positively correlated
(Ciccone and Hall,1996; Combes and Gobillon, 2015). Similarly, in models in which there are
exogenous productivity differences among countries, typically, density is higher in more
productive countries, due to either migration or endogenous population growth. As long as
population did not completely swamp the benefits of density, these more dense countries would
also be richer.

A natural mechanism that would explain the negative correlation between income per capita and
quality-adjusted population density is pressure on natural resources, à la Malthus. This view
was a staple of thinking among development economists through the 1980s, but has mostly
fallen out of fashion since then.3 While we do not attempt to directly estimate the effect of


2
  Nordhaus (2006) takes an approach similar to that in the current paper, regressing the logs of total
output, output per capita, and population at the level of one degree grid cells on country fixed effects and
a set of geographic covariates. Our paper differs from his in its specification (log-linear vs. Poisson, as
discussed below), population data used, the set of geographic covariates, and most importantly in
interpretation, in focusing on re-scaling population density as a function of geographic characteristics.
3
  The idea still has some following among economists. For example, Acemoglu, Fergusson, and Johnson
(2019) interpret their finding that rapid population growth induces increased civil unrest as being driven by
population pressure on fixed natural resources. In the quantitative analysis of Ashraf, Weil, and Wilde
(2013) the Malthusian channel (labor force relative to resources) accounts for about one quarter of the
increase in income per capita resulting from reduced fertility at a horizon of 90 years. By contrast,
analyses such as Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla (2003) focus on the effects of fertility reduction on
population age structure and dependency ratios, without much attention to population size.


                                                                                                           2
quality-adjusted population density on income through this channel, we conduct a development
accounting exercise to show that even if one allows for a generous role of natural resources in
the production function, such a population channel plays a limited role in explaining the negative
correlation between QAPD and income. That negative correlation is better explained by the
negative correlation between QAPD and productivity.

We then turn to historical data. We show that the negative correlation between income and
quality-adjusted population density today is primarily due to differential population growth across
countries since 1820, rather than persistence in quality-adjusted population density over time. If
persistence were important, we would see a strong correlation between income today and
quality-adjusted density 200 years ago, but we do not. We also show that quality-adjusted
population density today is systematically lower in countries, primarily in the New World, where
the native population was displaced over the last 500 years, than in countries where such
displacement did not occur.

The final part of the paper suggests a historical explanation for the negative correlations
between quality-adjusted population density and both income per capita and productivity. We
show that QAPD is strongly, positively correlated with a country having gone through the
demographic transition and having taken off economically at a later point in time. We argue that
while late-developers received transfers of both productive and health technology from the world
leaders, health technology transferred much more quickly, leading to rapid population growth. It
is this differential timing of health and productivity improvements that produced the patterns that
we observe in the data today.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we discuss the data we use as well
as a simple model for estimating geographic impacts. Section 2 presents our basic results in
terms of geographic predictors, fitted values for land quality, and estimates of quality-adjusted
population density at the country level. Section 3 reports three key facts about the cross-country
correlation between quality-adjusted population density and income per capita: it is negative,
development accounting suggests it is unlikely to be driven primarily by population pressure on
natural resources, and it arose in the past 200 years. Section 4 shows how simple models
cannot explain the facts we have uncovered, and lays out our proposed explanation, focusing
on the differential timing of the transfer of productive and health technologies from rich to poor
countries. Section 5 concludes.

1.     Data and specification

In this section we first discuss which population data set we use and why. We then present a
simple model of how population allocates itself within a country as a function of geographic
characteristics, which we use to motivate our empirical specification.

1.1    Population dataset



                                                                                                 3
Our primary population dataset is the European Union's Global Human Settlements population
layer (GHS-POP), which provides an estimate of population within each 30-arc-second
(approximately 1 square km) grid cell. These data are produced in two steps. First, an initial
estimate is taken directly from the Gridded Population of the World version 4 (GPWv4). GPWv4
in turn takes population estimates for administrative regions (polygons), typically from censuses
circa 2010, and allocates them to cells assuming a uniform distribution. Its effective spatial
resolution thus depends on what information individual countries provide, with richer countries
typically providing data for finer regions, down to enumeration units, or even block level data. Of
12.9 million input polygons worldwide, 10.5 million are in the United States. There is substantial
variation within countries as well, with higher resolution in more densely populated regions.4

In the second step, GHS-POP reallocates GPWv4 estimates within administrative polygons
based on a companion dataset, GHS-BUILT, that defines built surface based on Landsat
30-meter resolution satellite data circa 2015. In the rare cases where no built areas are visible in
a region, it reverts to the GPWv4 estimates.5

GHS-POP's use of building cover to redistribute people within census units is very likely to
provide more accuracy than GPWv4's assumption of uniform density within large administrative
units. We however avoid more heavily modelled population datasets such as LandScan (Rose
and Bright, 2014), primarily due to endogeneity concerns. In the Appendix, we compare these
three datasets in greater detail, including the key relationship between GDP per capita and
quality-adjusted density as measured using each of them.

To calculate population density, we follow GHS-POP and divide population by land area from
GPWv4, but we first aggregate both to quarter-degree grid squares (approximately 773 square
km at the equator) to match the spatial resolution of our geographic characteristics. We limit the
analysis to latitudes between 55 South and 75 North due to data availability. GHS-POP registers
40% of our sample grid squares as having no people. Non-zero values begin at an implausible
measure of 3 x 10-9 people per square kilometer. These issues of having many zeroes and very
low recorded population densities guide our choice of estimation strategy in the following
section.

1.2     Estimating land quality

We outline a simple model of population allocation within a country that leads directly to our
econometric specification. In the equations to follow c indexes countries, i indexes regions
(grid cells) within a country, and Nc is the number of regions in country c. Production in a region
is given by

4
  A grid cell crossing a polygon boundary is assigned a population density that is the areally-weighted
average of its constituent polygons.
5
  More information about the GHS data can be found in Florczyk et al. (2019). GHS-POP is described in
Schiavina et al. (2019) and Freire et al. (2016). GHS-BUILT is described in Corbane et al., (2018 and
2019). GPWv4 is described in CIESIN (2017).


                                                                                                          4
(1)     Y i,c = (Ai,c Z i,c B c )1- Li,c

where Ai, c is a measure of land productivity in a region, Z i, c is the land area of the region, and
B c is a country-level measure of productivity due to non-land factors (institutions, technology,
etc.).6 Differences in physical and human capital per worker could also be incorporated into B C .
Similarly, allowing for agglomeration economies would not affect the key results of the model for
our purposes.7 Although the regions that we use are all quarter-degree squares of latitude and
longitude, they differ in their land areas both because lines of longitude converge away from the
equator and because parts of some grid squares are covered with water.

Total labor in the country is

                 Nc
(2)     Lc =  Li,c .
                 i=1

We assume that workers in a region are paid their average products


                         (                      )
                              Ai,c Z i, c B c    1-
(3)           y i,c =              Li,c


and that labor mobility within a country equalizes income among regions


(4)      y i,c = y c .

We can thus solve for the equilibrium distribution of workers using (2)-(4):

                          Ai,c Z i, c
(5)          Li,c =      Nc               Lc .
                          Ai,c Z i, c
                        i=1




6
  The exponent on the term with land quality and productivity is simply a normalization. Land quality is
not observed directly, but rather inferred from a regression. Using a different normalization would lead to
different regression coefficients, but would not change the fitted values that we focus on below.
7
  If we think that agglomeration economies come from density as in the classic Ciccone and Hall (1996)
paper or more modern papers such as Combes et al. (2017) and Henderson, Kriticos and Nigmatulina
(2020), then there should be a multiplicative argument on the right hand side of (1) equal to (Li,c/Zi,c). In
this case, equation (7b) is the same except the Xi,c term is multiplied by (1-)/(1--). Using 1-=0.25 or
0.33 from below and =0.04, which is typical in the literature (see Rosenthal and Strange, 2004, or
Combes and Gobillon, 2015), this factor is 1.19 or 1.14. While this affects the interpretation of the
estimated coefficients in (7b), it does not affect the fitted values from this equation that we focus on below.


                                                                                                             5
While we cannot observe        Ai,c   directly, we do observe a set of land characteristics
X = [X 1 , X 2 , ...] that we assume affect productivity8:


(6) Ai,c = exp(X i,c ) .

Previous work (Nordhaus, 2006; Henderson, et al., 2018) estimated the parameters in equation
(6) by taking logs and plugging into equation (5) with a log-additive error term:


(7a) ln(Li,c /Z i, c ) = C c + X i,c  + i,c .

where C c is a country fixed effect and i,c is a stochastic error term. There are a number of
problems with this log-linear specification, however.

First, as noted above, 40% share of grid squares in our data have zero reported population. A
common approach to this problem is to replace these with a small non-zero value.9
Unfortunately, parameter estimates can be sensitive to the value used for imputation, and are
also sensitive to simply dropping zeros. Moreover, as seen in Figures A1.A and A1.B, about
50% of grid squares have density values less than 0.135 people per square kilometer and about
75% less than 12 people per square kilometer. Thus, beyond the problem of zero reported
population densities, the specification in equation (7a) puts a lot of weight on regions with
extremely low population densities. Given the data construction process described above, it is
highly unlikely that the differences between e.g. 3 x 10-9 and 0.135 people per square kilometer
are well-measured. Even if they were well-measured, conceptually they are of less interest than
what drives regions to have a density of 12 versus 1000 people per square kilometer. From
Figure A1.B, over 95% of the world's population lives at above 12 people per square kilometer.

For these reasons we estimate a Poisson model. The specific functional form is


            (
(7b) E Li,c /Z i, c C c , X i,c       )         (
                                          = exp C c + X i,c  .   )
The Poisson specification is well-suited for outcome measures with many zeros and tiny values.
In addition, Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) show that OLS estimates of (7a) are inconsistent

8
  It is straightforward to allow these characteristics to also affect the amenity value of a location in addition
to productivity. Specifically, we can modify (4) so that mobility within a country equalizes the product of
income and amenities, rather than just income.
9
  For example, Henderson, et al. (2018), which examined lights data, assigned to every reported zero
observation the minimum non-zero value in the dataset. In Nordhaus (2006), where output per square
kilometer is the dependent variable, 3,170 of 17,409 grid squares in the regression sample have zero
values for the dependent variable. Norhaus imputes values for 618 of these cells based on neighbors,
and then assigns the remainder a value of one before taking logs.


                                                                                                               6
(and NLS inefficient) in the presence of heteroskedasticity, which is likely in our context. Poisson
estimation solves these problems. Also, predicted values of density discussed later from a
Poisson specification are remarkably robust to using the two alternative population datasets
noted above, while log-linear predicted values are much more sensitive, as shown in the
Appendix Figure A.2. Similarly our basic results on the relationship between predicted country
population and GDP per capita discussed later are again remarkably similar across the three
data sets under the Poisson specification with or without censoring zeros and tiny values, while
estimates of the log-linear specification are wildly different for the three different data sets as
shown In Appendix Table A.2.

The stochastic component of the Poisson model is crucial for addressing the contingent nature
of human settlement. There is a vast literature on multiple equilibria and accidents of history
with agglomeration (e.g. Krugman, 1991; Arthur, 1989; Davis and Weinstein, 2002). More
recent work has focused on dynamic development subject to stochastic processes that yield
particular, unique equilibria as a way of encapsulating these accidents (Michaels, Rauch,
Redding, 2012, and Desmet and Rappaport, 2017). For example, in a model similar to ours but
with a more complex production process, Desmet and Rappaport envision regions as being
subject to initial large productivity/resource shocks and then to a series of accumulating
independent draws over time. These accidents are important to understand why, for example,
the centre of Kolkata is not 50 kilometers further up or down the Hugli River or on a completely
different river in historical Bengal. In that particular case, an initial arbitrary choice of a British
East India Company employee, Job Charnock, and then a history of other choices and
accumulations over 300 years, anchored that location and induced high density. Our reduced
form specification summarizes the cumulative impact of such a succession of shocks under free
mobility. Since we are assuming a Poisson specification overall, we effectively assume that
these shocks are a series of Poisson draws.

We estimate the parameter vector  in (7b). The country fixed effects control for factors like
technology and national population relative to national land area. Identification of effects of land
quality comes from within-country variation. Under this specification, the estimated country fixed
effect is algebraically


                 æ  Zic  Lic
                                ö
(8)      ^
        C c = ln ç    ic
                                ÷    .
                 ç  exp(X i,c ) ÷
                             

                 è ic           ø


Given our expression for   Ai,c     in (6), our estimate of grid square i's land quality is naturally the
fitted value from (7b), suppressing country fixed effects:




                                                                                                            7
                                       
(9)      Quality i,c = exp(X i,c  ) .

1.3 Geographic data

To measure land quality we use the 24 geographic characteristics that Henderson et al. (2018)
show explain a large share of the variation in light intensity globally and within countries. These
are temperature, precipitation, length of growing period, land suitability for agriculture, elevation,
latitude, ruggedness, an index of the stability of malaria transmission, distance to the coast, a
set of 11 indicators defining 12 biomes, and a set of 4 dummies indicating the presence of a
coast, a navigable river, a major lake, and a natural harbor within 25 km of a cell centroid.10
They are all available for 164 countries. While other exogenous natural features are likely useful
for human settlement, they are either hard to define, like defendability, or measured based on
highly endogenous search, like mineral deposits.

2.      Results

2.1     Estimation results for grid squares

We begin by looking at the explanatory power of equation (7b). Poisson regression has no
perfect analog to the coefficient of determination ( R2 ) in OLS. We follow Cameron and
                                2
Windmeijer (1996) in reporting RDEV , which is based on the concept of deviance, the difference
between the model log-likelihood and the highest possible likelihood for a given dependent
variable. It is defined as:


                         [y i ln(i /y )-(i -y i )]
                                         

(10)        R2
             DEV     =   i
                                                     ,
                                y i ln(yi /y)
                               i



where y i is the value of the dependent variable for observation i, i is the predicted value for
observation i, and y is the average of y i .11

                       2
In Table 1, we report RDEV for the basic specification and a set of alternatives for a Poisson
regression using the GHS-POP data.12 The first row of the table shows that geography and

10
   The actual data are slightly updated from Henderson et al. (2018).
11
   This measure applied to Poisson models shares five desirable properties with R2 applied to OLS: it is
bounded within [0,1]; never decreases with additional regressors; can be equivalently expressed based
on sum of residual squares or sum of explained squares; relates to joint significance tests of all the slope
parameters; and has an interpretation in terms of information content. Other typical pseudo-R2 measures
for Poisson models do not satisfy all these properties.
12
   As noted above, in Appendix Table A.1 we report the explanatory power of geographic variables and
country fixed effects for the Poisson and log-linear specifications for GHS-POP, GPWv4 and LandScan,


                                                                                                           8
country fixed effects alone each explain similar amounts of variation, but the marginal effect of
each is also very high. In the other rows, we examine the robustness of this result with respect
to three potential concerns. First, we experiment with dropping the six countries with the largest
land area, which contain 54.1% of grid squares and a large share of within-country variation.13
Second, Henderson, et al. (2018) stress that the determinants of agglomeration differed
systematically between early- and late-agglomerating countries. They show that geographic
characteristics related to agriculture had a proportionally larger impact on urbanization in the
former group, while those characteristics related to trade had a proportionally larger impact in
the latter, reflecting declining transportation prices over time. To test whether these
considerations affect our analysis, we re-run the population equation using two complementary
sub-samples (early and late agglomerators, based on urbanization in 1950) to estimate the
weights on geographic factors. Finally, we also consider the robustness of our results to the
inclusion of a richer specification of geography in the grid-cell regression. Specifically, we
estimate a version of (7b) including a second order expansion of a general functional
relationship with X ic , with a full set of squared terms and interactions among all of our
geographic covariates.

Table 1 shows that results are similar across these specifications. While row 2, which drops the
                                          2
six largest countries, has lower overall RDEV in each of the columns, considerable explanatory
power remains. Rows 3 and 4 indicate the geography has a somewhat stronger role for early
agglomerators, which is not surprising because in Henderson et al. (2018), much of the
explanatory power of geography in general comes from agriculture-related variables. But
patterns for early and late are similar. Finally in row 5, adding covariates of course increases the
 2
RDEV  , but not by a lot. We maintain the simpler specification where one can more easily
interpret the impacts of geography.

Table 2 shows the coefficient estimates from our basic specification (column 2), and also
coefficients from a specification excluding country fixed effects (column 1), for comparison.14 As
a basic interpretation, in column 2, the coefficient of 0.73 for being on the coast raises expected
population density for a grid cell by a factor of exp(0.73) = 2.1 . Similarly, being in a
Mediterranean relative to a temperate conifer forest biome raises predicted population density
by a factor of exp(1.76 - 0.71) = 2.8 , ceteris paribus. Because many of the geographic
characteristics we use are correlated, we focus our interpretation on fitted values from this
equation. Specifically, fitted values are produced from the estimates on the geographic variables


as well as versions of GPWv4 and GHS-POP that are censored to match the minimum non-zero value in
LandScan.
13
   The countries are Russia, Canada, USA, China, Brazil, and Australia. We choose six as our cutoff
because there is a natural break in the distribution of country sizes between the sixth largest (Australia,
7,692,024 km2) and the seventh largest (India, 3,287,263 km2).
14
   Reported standard errors relax the "equidispersion" assumption of classical Poisson estimation that the
variance of the dependent variable is equal to its mean, which is rejected in our data. The quasipoisson
model we implement assumes instead that variance is proportional to the mean and estimates the
constant of proportionality.


                                                                                                          9
in column 2, suppressing the country fixed effects. These fitted values are what we defined in
equation (9) as Quality. If the world were a single country, with the same technology and
institutions (B in equation 1) and with perfect mobility of population, then population density in
each grid cell would be proportional to Quality.

Figure 1A shows world population density and Figure 1B shows a world map of Quality, both at
the level of grid cells. Visually, there are clear similarities between Quality and actual population
density, with high values for Quality in Europe, Japan, northern China, the River Plate basin,
and the Ganges delta, among other places Not surprisingly, Quality does a worse job of
capturing agglomeration. In Figure 1A, one can pick out areas such as Mexico City, Los
Angeles, Madrid, and Paris, which do not have particularly high values of Quality in comparison
to their surrounding areas.


2.2    Land quality at the country level.

Multiplying land quality from (9) by grid cell area produces what we call Quality Adjusted Area (
QAAi ). We can similarly construct quality-adjusted area at the country level, QAAc :


                 é      Z i,c        ù
(11)      QAAc = ê    iW             ú  exp(X i,c )Z i,c
                 ê  exp(X i,c        ú
                               )Z i,c ic
                 ë iW                û
where we normalize so that QAAc sums across countries to the same value as actual area of
the world (W). In essence, QAAc is a country's allocation of world land based on its quality of
land relative to the world average quality of land.

Figure 2 presents a cartogram in which each country's area is proportional to its quality-adjusted
area as in equation (11). The corresponding numbers are listed in Appendix Table B.1. For
comparison, we also present countries' actual areas. In comparing QAA with conventional area,
there are a number of interesting rescalings and rank-reversals, many of which accord with
common sense. For example, in our sample (south of 75 degrees North latitude) Canada has
97% of the conventional area of the United States, but only 23% of the quality-adjusted area.
Overall, the figure is notable for showing that Europe expands greatly in size, while Africa
contracts. The five countries with the highest quality-adjusted area are the United States,
Australia, China, Brazil, and Argentina.

For a corresponding perspective, we can ask what each country's population would be if the
world's population were reallocated such that country populations were proportional to
quality-adjusted areas. This involves replacing the term in square brackets in equation (11), the
world land area, with total world population. In Figure 3 we show actual (in blue) and
reallocated (in red) populations for the 80 countries with the largest quality adjusted areas. The



                                                                                                     10
distance between the red and blue dots corresponds to the extent to which a country would gain
or lose population from this reallocation. The five biggest gains in absolute population size
would be in Australia (adding 631 million), The United States (478 million), Argentina (338
million), Brazil (207 million), and Russia (153 million). By contrast, the countries with the
biggest absolute declines following such a reallocation would be India (losing 1.06 billion), China
(834 million), Pakistan (167 million), Nigeria (160 million), and Bangladesh (135 million).

Next we can calculate average land quality of a country using normalized QAAc :

                    QAAc
(12)     ALQc =      Zc

            Nc
where Z c =  Z i,c . Average land quality values are in column 1 of Appendix Table B.1. Similar
            i=1
to the above, if the world had uniform institutions/technology and there was complete population
mobility, then the population density of countries would be proportional to their average land
quality. The five countries with the highest average land qualities are Denmark, Ireland, the
Netherlands, Croatia, and the United Kingdom, all of which have populations less than would be
predicted by land quality in Figure 3.

Finally we calculate Quality Adjusted Population Density ( QAP Dc ), which is simply country
population divided by normalized QAAc , and can equivalently be expressed as conventional
population density divided by ALQc . That is, QAP Dc is a country's population divided by its
allocation of total world land based on its share of world quality-adjusted land.

                         Lc             Lc
(13)      QAP Dc =      QAAc   =   Z c ALQc


Note that (13) is similar to the expression inside the parenthesis in equation (8) for country fixed
effects, apart from the normalization in (11). The difference is that (8) divides the items in the
numerator by grid square land area Z i before summing, while in (13) those Z i terms are in the
denominator sum. As noted above, these areas vary both due to the convergence of longitude
lines away from the equator and the exclusion of surface water area. If all grid cells in a country
had the same area, the country fixed effect that we estimate would just be the log of
quality-adjusted population density, ignoring the normalization. In practice, the correlation of the
fixed effect and the log of quality-adjusted population density across countries is 0.98, so that
the two measures are almost interchangeable.




                                                                                                  11
Column 5 of Appendix Table B.1 shows values of log QAPD, which is measured in units of
population per quality-adjusted square kilometer. For the world as a whole, QAPD is 56.6
people per square kilometer, which by our earlier normalization is the same as conventional
population density for the world as a whole. The five countries with the highest levels of
quality-adjusted population density (excluding the city-states of Hong Kong, Singapore, and
Bahrain, as well as countries with populations of less than one million) are Rwanda (2,419),
Burundi (1,654), Uganda (711), Nigeria (507), and Pakistan (496). The five countries with the
lowest QAPD are Australia (2.06) New Zealand (3.23), Ireland (5.38), Uruguay (5.50), and
Latvia (7.42). Among the other interesting findings in this table are that China, with QAPD 2.5
times the world average, has significantly lower QAPD than India, which is 5.3 times the world
average. The United Kingdom (28.7) and Germany (48.5) have higher QAPD than the United
States (22.6), but the latter country, despite being in the New World, has higher quality adjusted
density than France (18.5) and Spain (14.4). Japan, which is often thought of as a crowded
country, has QAPD of 81.2, which is only 50% above the world average.

Figure 4 compares conventional population density to QAPD in logs. The sample is the same
one we use in all of our cross-country analysis that follows. Specifically, starting from the 164
countries we study in Tables 1 and 2, we exclude those with land area under 1,500 km2, missing
values for the GDP data used in our analysis, or missing data for the measure of the native
share of the population, from Putterman and Weil (2010), which is discussed below. The
remaining sample is 148. As the figure shows, the two measures of density are highly
correlated, but there are also notable deviations. For example, while Russia is one of the lowest
density countries in the world and Italy is one of the highest, the two countries have nearly
identical levels of QAPD.



3.     The relationship between density and income per capita

3.1 Reduced form

Figures 5A and 5B graph the bivariate relationships between GDP per capita and (respectively)
conventional population density and our measure of quality-adjusted population density. There
seems to be little association between GDP per capita and conventional population density in
Figure 5A, while in Figure 5B GDP per capita and quality-adjusted density are distinctly
negatively correlated. We focus on this association for much of the rest of the paper.

Table 3A explores these same data in a bivariate regression context, and also presents results
for several other methods for adjusting population density. The column 1 elasticity, -0.52, is
large in absolute value. In column 2, results are similar when we use the fixed effect measure in
equation (8) as a variant of QAPD. In column 3 we reconstruct QAPD based on a version of
equation (7b) without country fixed effects. Identification is no longer based solely on
within-country variation, so institutions and other fixed factors may drive results. The elasticity
shrinks in magnitude but remains significantly negative. However no significant association


                                                                                                 12
exists between GDP per capita and conventional density (column 4), Galor and Ozak's (2016)
measure of population per million calories of agricultural potential
(post1500MaximumCalories0mean; column 5), or population per unit land suitable for
agriculture from Ramankutty et al. 2002 (column 6).

Table 3B explores the impact of adding, as a control, a dummy variable for countries in which
less than 80 percent of the population is descended from people who lived in the country 500
years ago ("Native" for short), based on data from Putterman and Weil (2010).15 In the
regression dataset, 35% of countries (with 18% of total population) fall into this category. The
coefficient on the non-native indicator is of interest itself, showing that countries in which the
native population has largely been replaced over the last 500 years tend to have lower QAPD
than those where such replacement has not taken place. Our supposition is that these mostly
New World countries had not yet reached a new equilibrium with replacement populations by
the time the demographic transition was complete, an issue we return to Section 4. Note that
adding the control has little impact on the pattern of coefficients for GDP per capita across
columns. Baseline coefficients in column 1 differ by less than 5%.

Table 4 probes the robustness of our result that quality-adjusted population density is negatively
correlated with income per capita. In all columns we include the "Native" dummy as a standard
control. Column 1 of Table 4 shows our baseline result, where the elasticity of QAPD with
respect to GDP per capita is -0.498. Focusing on this elasticity of QAPD with respect to GDP
per capita, in columns 2-6 we show other specifications. Columns 2-5 correspond to rows 2-5 in
Table 1. In column 2, we drop the 6 largest countries in the grid square regression (equation
7b), but still predict QAPD for them using its estimated coefficients. In column 3 we estimate
grid square populations for early agglomerators only and predict QAPD for all countries from
those coefficients. Column 4 repeats this exercise for late agglomerators, but here because the
tundra biome does not appear at all in the late agglomerator subsample, we cannot form fitted
values for the six countries with tundra. Column 5 predicts country population with the fully
interacted grid square regression. Finally in column 6, country observations are weighted by
land area (using `aweights' in Stata). The idea here is that the larger number of cells makes
larger countries' measures of QAPD better measured and more informative.

In all these specifications, we retain a highly significant elasticity. Relative to column 1, the
elasticity rises in magnitude by 10-48%, except for column 5 using the fully interacted version of
(7b), where it falls to -0.29 . Measuring quality-adjusted population density for all countries using
early agglomerator coefficients, implying that grid square populations are more sensitive to
agricultural conditions, yields the largest absolute value elasticity, and dropping the 6 largest


15
  The cutoff of 80 percent native was chosen to maximize the R2 of our basic regression in column 1 of
Table 3B. In practice, the results are insensitive to using alternative cutoffs or a continuous measure
rather than a dummy. In a larger sample of 164 observations, including countries for which the Native
variable is not available, the elasticity coefficient (standard error) is 0.455 (0.071) versus 0.521 In Table
3A.


                                                                                                                13
countries the second largest. The key point however is that the large and significant negative
elasticity between GDP per capita and QAPD is a robust result.16

3.2 Productivity and congestion

Having established that there is a robust negative correlation between quality-adjusted
population density and income per capita, it is natural to think about what causal channels might
underlie it and what other important facts may emerge. One natural channel to consider is
congestion of natural resources. The idea that having too many people relative to land will
reduce income goes back at least to Malthus. In a modern context, research that argues for an
operative Malthusian channel, particularly in poor countries, includes Young (2005), Acemoglu
and Johnson (2007), Kohler (2012), and Acemoglu, Fergusson and Johnson (2019). As noted
by Das Gupta, Bongaarts, and Cleland (2011), discussion of "sustainable development" at the
country level is to a large extent a reformulation of the Malthusian concern with the ratio of
population to resources. At the same time, there is a significant body of work, going back to
Boserup (1965) and Simon (1976), and crystallized in the report of the National Research
Council (1986), arguing that population size does not represent an important barrier to
economic development.17

Providing a definitive answer to the question of how much population size affects income per
capita would be a significant accomplishment. We do not propose an answer to that
controversy. Instead, we pursue a more limited objective: we ask to what extent a negative
causal effect of population on income per capita could account for the pattern that we see in the
data. Put differently, we consider the possibility that the negative relationship between income
and QAPD is driven solely by the channel of crowding with respect to fixed resources. If under
reasonable modelling assumptions the elasticity implied by crowding is much smaller than what
we find, there must be other causal channels at work.

The simplest approach is to apply the model of Section 1.2. Equation (3) gives the level of
income per capita in a grid square as a function of population, geographic attributes, and the
country-level productivity term, B c . Under the assumption that people migrate within countries

16
   In Appendix Table A.2, we further explore the robustness of the specification in column 1 of Table 3B.
Specifically, we present estimates using the different underlying population datasets (GHS-POP, GPWv4,
and LandScan) and specifications (Poisson and log-linear), and also censor all three datasets at the
LandScan minimum value, which at 0.0013 people per sq km is higher than those of the other data sets.
The take-away from this exercise is that the significant relationship with an elasticity of about -0.5 is
maintained for any data set as long as we use a Poisson estimator. The log-linear formulation results are
highly variable, though less so if data sets are censored at a common arbitrary threshold. With a
log-linear formulation, if we censor GHS-POP at the LandScan minimum, the elasticity is -0.41 in column
(9), close to the baseline -0.5. Referring back to the end of Section 1.1, the consistency of Poisson
estimates across data sets that differ enormously in their treatment of the huge number of low density grid
squares is a key reason we use the Poisson.
17
   See Kohler (2012) for a more extensive review. The literature discussed here focuses on population
size. Related literature looks at two other dimensions of population: its growth rate and its age structure.
Ashraf, Weil, and Wilde (2013) discuss the magnitudes and interactions of these various channels.


                                                                                                         14
to equalize income across grid cells as shown in equation (4), equation (5) then gives the
number of people per grid cell. Combining equations (3)-(5), we can thus solve for log income
per capita at the country level:



                               æ              æ            öö
(14)        ln (y c ) = (1 - ) çln (B c ) - lnç       Lc   ÷÷
                               ç              ç    i,c i,c ÷ ÷
                                                    A Z
                               è              è   i
                                                           øø
Ignoring the normalization factor in eqn. (13) which is the same for all countries, what we have
defined as quality-adjusted population density is the same as the second term in the large
brackets on the right hand side in (14). We then decompose the variance of log output per
worker across countries in (14) into a piece that is due to resource congestion, a piece that is
due to productivity, and a piece that is due to the covariance of these two things. This yields

(15)
v ar(ln(y c )) = (1 - )2 var(ln(B c )) + (1 - )2 var(ln(QAP Dc )) - 2(1 - )2 cov (ln(B c ), ln(QAP Dc ))

Table 5 shows a variance decomposition based on this equation, calculating productivity as a
residual from (14). We present results for our quality-adjusted density measure, and also for
conventional density to see the contrast, using values of ¼ and  for (1 - ) .18 Appendix Table
B.2 shows the same decomposition restricting to the Native>0.8 sample. Results are very
similar to those in Table 5.

The variance decomposition using conventional population density (panel A) may appear
puzzling at a first glance. First, it shows that the variance of the log of productivity term is
actually larger than the variance in income per capita.19 This implies that, overall, variation in
population density must be working to reduce income inequality among countries. However, the
decomposition further shows that density by itself raises the variance of income by 9.5% or
17%, depending on the value of the land share assumed. The resolution to this apparent puzzle
18
   Kremer (1993) uses one third as an upper-end estimate of land's share for the economy as a whole,
while Hansen and Prescott (2002) assume a value of the fixed factor share of 30% for preindustrial
economies. Caselli and Coleman (2001) derive a value of 0.19 as land's share in agriculture in the United
States in the twentieth century. All of these papers assume an elasticity of substitution between fixed
factors and other inputs (either for the economy as a whole, or within agriculture) of one. Ashraf, Lester,
and Weil (2009), using data from Caselli and Feyrer (2007), calculate resources shares in national
income that are as high as 25% in many poor countries, and exceed 30% in a few. These data also show
that the resource share is strongly negatively correlated with income per capita, suggesting that the
elasticity of substitution between fixed factors, on the one hand, and an aggregate of physical capital,
human capital, and technology, on the other, is greater than one. Weil and Wilde (2009) estimate this
elasticity of substitution to be in the neighborhood of two.
19
   Recall that productivity as we have measured it effectively includes variation in physical and human
capital per worker. Breaking these out separately would not affect the fraction of variance due to
population density and its covariance with other factors.


                                                                                                        15
is that there is a large positive covariance between conventional population density and
productivity, as in the final column.

We find the results in panel B of Table 5, which uses our quality-adjusted population density
measure, to be more enlightening. These results show that, while the largest part of variation in
income per capita is due to variation in productivity, B c , unlike Panel A, they do not imply that
variation in the productivity term is larger than variation in income. The Malthusian channel of
resource congestion explains between 10.3% and 18.3% of the variation in income per capita,
depending on the value of land's share assumed in the calculation. However now most
interestingly, not only is the covariance of quality-adjusted density and productivity negative, but
that covariance explains a fraction of the variation in income that is about the same or even
larger than the direct Malthusian effect. While the Malthusian channel has been well explored by
economists, the negative covariation at the country level between quality-adjusted population
density and productivity is something entirely new.20 In Section 4, we discuss why this finding is
unexpected.

3.3 Timing: QAPD before and after the start of modern economic growth

To understand the negative QAPD-income relationship, it is natural to ask whether it is a recent
phenomenon, reflecting modern economic and population growth, or whether it holds for
historical QAPD as well. More concretely, we can ask whether currently poor countries
historically had higher quality-adjusted population densities, or whether the currently observed
pattern of QAPD's results from population growth that we observe in the data.21

To pursue this question, we consider a simple decomposition of current QAPD into past QAPD
and population growth:


(16) ln(QAP Dcurrent ) = ln(QAP Dhistorical ) + ln               (   population current
                                                                     populationhistorical   )
We use Angus Maddison's population data for 76 countries in 1820 as reported on the
Gapminder website.22
20
   As noted earlier, spatial work at the city level finds a positive, potentially causal correlation between
productivity and local density, where local land quality might not vary much. While such a relationship
exists for local commercial and industrial concentrations, we are looking at a different relationship at a
macro level.
21
   In principle it would also be interesting to explore how changes in income over time have affected the
current relationship. However, as historical income data are of significantly lower quality than historical
population data, we do not pursue this path.
22
   https://www.gapminder.org/tag/maddison/ . Gapminder also supplies data for another 63 countries in
1820, and McEvedy and Jones (1978) report incomes for 76 countries in 1850, drawing partially on
Maddison. We focus on Maddison alone (plus Gapminder's estimate for Sweden from the Human
Mortality Database) because the additional Gapminder data appear to be spatial-temporal interpolations
that push credibility to a greater degree than the Maddison data, and because the earlier year relative to
McEvedy and Jones limits the impact of modern economic growth and the demographic transition. For


                                                                                                           16
Table 6 Panel A shows the results from regressing the log of current QAPD (columns 1 and 4),
1820 QAPD (columns 2 and 5), and the historical increase in population (columns 3 and 6) on
the log of GDP per capita in 2010. By construction, regression coefficients in column 1 are equal
to the sum of the corresponding coefficients in columns 2 and 3; the same property holds for the
second set of columns 4-6. For the first three columns, we include the under-80% Native share
dummy. The second three columns drop countries where Native is less than 80%.

The relationship between 2010 QAPD and 2010 GDP per capita in column 1 is explained in
almost equal parts by the 1820 QAPD (column 2) and population growth 1820-2010 (column 3)
relationships with income, although the former is not significant, suggesting a weak historical
QADP relationship with current GDP per capita. Moreover, in columns 4 to 6 when we look at
just the sample of countries without major population displacement, the elasticity between 1820
QAPD and current income (column 5) is much smaller, as well as insignificant. As a result,
especially in this sample, most of the negative relationship between 2010 QAPD and current
income comes from the population growth component of the decomposition. That is, poor
countries have high QAPD mostly because of population growth over the period for which we
have data, rather than because they historically had high levels of quality-adjusted density.

Another notable finding is that the Native < 80% dummy has a strong, negative relationship with
population density historically, and a strong positive relationship with the subsequent extent of
population growth. This is consistent with a story in which countries that were underpopulated
relative to their resources as of 500 years ago were most likely to see their native populations
displaced. Many of these countries are geographically well-suited to agriculture (using the
modern portfolio of available crops), and historically were occupied to some degree by
hunter-gatherers. The coefficient in column (2) shows that as of 1820, these countries were less
densely populated than would be expected based solely on geography. The coefficient in
column (3) shows that population growth in such countries was subsequently particularly high.
However, we know from the negative coefficient on Native < 80% in Table 3B that these
countries remain less populated today than would be expected based on their geographic
characteristics. This differential population history of countries where the native population was
not largely displaced is the main reason that we find the results in columns 4-6 as or more
interesting than those in columns 1-3.

Before leaving this topic, we pursue one further extension. In addition to having high QAPD,
poor countries today on average also have higher rates of population growth than do rich
countries. Population forecasts are obviously not exact, but because of demographic



completeness, we ran these specifications for the entire Gapminder 1820 and McEvedy and Jones 1850
datasets, obtaining similar results. For the full Gapminder data there is a stronger relationship between
1820 QAPD and 2010 income than in Table 7, but still much weaker than between 2010 QAPD and 2010
income. For the McEvedy and Jones 1850 data, the relationship between 1850 QAPD and 2010 income
is even weaker than in Table 6.


                                                                                                       17
momentum and limits on the observed rates at which fertility and mortality change, such
forecasts are probably of reasonable quality up to a horizon of a few decades.

In Table 6 Panel B, we repeat the exercise from Panel A, replacing 2010 population estimates
with population projections for 2050, when the demographic transition is likely to be further
along in today's poor countries. The negative relationship between 2010 income and 2050
QAPD, which was already strong using the 2010 measure of QAPD, becomes even stronger, as
measured by the magnitude of the coefficient, the t-statistic, or the R-squared. Thus population
growth differentials, rather than historical QAPD, are driving the future negative relationship
between QAPD and income.

4.     Explaining the relationships among QAPD, income, and productivity

We view the negative correlations between quality-adjusted population density, on the one
hand, and both income per capita and productivity, on the other, as a mystery. To see why, we
start with a simple Malthusian model of an economic-demographic equilibrium, following Lucas
(2000). Countries produce output with land and labor as in our equation (1), and population
growth is a positive function of income per capita as well as a preference parameter  :

           
(17)      L
          L   = f (Y /L, )

In the absence of technological change, the economy will reach a steady state in terms of
                                             L
population and income per capita, where      L   = 0.

First consider a world composed of countries described by this model in which preferences and
productivity are the same in all countries, and only land quality differs. In a steady state,
conventional density would vary positively with land quality, but neither quality-adjusted
population density nor income per capita would vary across countries, and so there would be no
correlation between the two. Second, if only preferences differed across countries, that would
indeed induce a negative correlation between income per capita and quality-adjusted density
such as is seen in the data; but, under the current assumptions, the model would not generate
the negative correlation between QAPD and productivity that we find in the data.23 Third,
suppose that countries differed only in their levels of productivity for some exogenous reason,
such as technology or institutions, broadly defined. In the simple model described above,
income per capita would again not vary, so there could be no correlation between QAPD and
income per capita, but there would be a positive correlation between QAPD and productivity --
the opposite of what we see in the data.



23
  The same would be true if some countries were temporarily away from their steady states due to
shocks to population such as the Black Death.



                                                                                                   18
Finally, consider a model which starts out with all countries in Malthusian steady states, but then
some take off into modern economic growth, as in Galor and Weil (2000) or Hansen and
Prescott (2002). In these models, the Malthusian dynamics embodied in equations (1) and (17)
are modified so that, in the presence of sufficiently rapid productivity growth, income per capita
can rise even as population size grows. As a result, countries that take off first will have higher
income, productivity, and population density than those that take off later or are still in the
Malthusian equilibrium. Again, this would produce a positive correlation between QAPD, on the
one hand, and both income and productivity, on the other. This is the opposite of the
correlations that we see in the data. One could similarly pursue a model in which there were
benefits of agglomeration, so that locations with higher land quality endogenously had higher
productivity. Again this would induce a positive correlation between income per capita and
quality-adjusted population density.

These models do not suffice to explain the negative correlation between quality-adjusted
population density and both income and productivity. An explanation requires looking in more
detail at the process of development around the world. We already know that the negative
correlation between current income and QAPD is due to differential population growth across
countries since 1820, not QAPD then. Thus it seems important to pursue this differential
population growth aspect. Pursuing this approach, we bring to bear four sets of stylized facts
that are relatively well-established in the literatures on long run growth, demography, and
increased health over time.

First, there is a strong correlation between income per capita today and the year in which a
country started to experience income and productivity growth. Living standards throughout the
world were relatively equal prior to the onset of modern economic growth around the end of the
18th century, and differences in levels of income in the world today are overwhelmingly due to
differences in growth since then. The richest countries in the world are those that started to
develop earliest. This regularity is noted by e.g. Lucas (2000). Galor and Weil (2000) stress the
consistency of relatively equal living standards prior to the takeoff with a Malthusian model of
population.

Second, economic growth in the last 250 years has been paralleled by a process of
demographic transition, from a regime in which fertility and mortality were both high and were
roughly equal, toward one in which both of these vital rates are significantly reduced and again
roughly equal. The demographic transition is enormously complex and not fully understood, has
varied across time and among locations, and is not yet complete in all parts of the world.
Nonetheless, several important features stand out. First, the decline in mortality temporally
precedes the decline in fertility, and the gap between the two series is responsible for the
increase in population over the demographic transition. This idea is summarized in the idea of
the "population multiplier," defined by Chesnais (1990) as "the number by which the population
is multiplied during the transition between the pre-transitional phase (high mortality, high fertility)




                                                                                                    19
and the post-transitional phase (low mortality, low fertility)."24 Further, while the decline in
mortality is the result of both improvements in income per capita and improvements in health
technology, the latter is the dominant driver (Deaton, 2014). Finally, while some of the decline in
fertility is driven by falling mortality of children, a very significant component of fertility decline is
due to a fall in desired family size, in turn resulting from changes in the structure of the
economy, including the return to skill, urbanization, and the gender wage differential.25

Third, in countries that started to develop later, the rate of progress in both income and health
has been faster than it was in those that developed early; further, the later that this development
started, the faster this progress has been. Such a description is consistent with a process in
which technologies (broadly defined) that produce improvements in income and health have
been transferred from leading countries to following countries. In the case of income-producing
technologies this is often referred to as the "advantage of backwardness" (Nelson and Phelps,
1966; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1997). In the summary of Lucas (2000), leading countries have
seen income per capita growing steadily at a rate of 2% pear year since 1800, while late starting
countries have been able to grow much faster. In the case of health technologies the most
prominent example of technology transfer is the international epidemiological transition following
World War II, which produced enormous gains in life expectancy in poor countries. Oeppen and
Vaupel (2002) show that in leading countries, life expectancy has increased linearly at a rate of
three months per year since 1840; by contrast, many late-starting countries have seen life
expectancy grow at much higher speeds.

Fourth, the transfer of health technologies has been faster than the transfer of the other
elements that led to higher income per capita. For example, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007)
show that convergence of life expectancy among countries is much faster than convergence of
income per capita. "Health miracles" in developing countries have been far more common than
"growth miracles" (Deaton, 2014).

The interaction of these four component pieces produced the relationship between
quality-adjusted density and income that we observe today. Prior to the takeoff in growth, most
of the world was well described by a Malthusian model in which there were relatively small
differences among countries in income per capita, and population size was roughly proportional
to agricultural potential of a region.26 In the countries that started growing first, beginning around
1800, technological change drove a slow but steady growth in income. Growth in income, along
with improvements in health technology that flowed out of the same scientific progress that
allowed for higher productivity, in turn led to increased life expectancy, triggering the first part of


24
   Above we looked at data starting in 1820, which was after the beginning of the demographic transition
in a few European countries. More significantly, a good number of countries have not completed their
transitions as of today. Thus the change in log population that we measure understates the true
population multipliers.
25
   Galor and Weil (2000), Dyson (2011), Galor and Weil (1996).
26
   In terms of the Lucas (2000) discussed above, this means that variation in the fertility preference
parameter was relatively small.


                                                                                                       20
the demographic transition. Over the next century or more, the processes of income growth,
declining mortality, and, with a lag, declining desired fertility played out, to the point where
further increases in life expectancy did not affect population growth (because almost all women
lived through their child bearing years) and desired fertility had fallen to near the replacement
level. In the countries that started growing first, this produced population multipliers on the order
of five or six.

In countries that started growing later, this process was partially reproduced, but with important
differences. As discussed above, transfer of broadly-construed technology from leaders to
followers allowed for more rapid growth of both income and health, but particularly health. This
produced a demographic transition in which mortality fell both more quickly, and at at far lower
income levels, than had been the case in early developing countries. The gap between fertility
and mortality that opened up was larger in the late starters than it had been in the first countries
to develop. As a consequence, late-developing countries experienced larger population
multipliers (or will have experienced larger multipliers once their demographic transitions are
complete) than did early developers.

4.1     Illustrative data

In the rest of this section, we examine several pieces of evidence that are consistent with the
story just laid out. In Table 6 we already showed that countries with higher levels of modern
QAPD have experienced faster population growth over the past two centuries. This was
particularly clear in looking at countries where the native population was not displaced. Here we
establish several related facts.

To examine the relationship between the beginning of economic growth and our variables of
interest, we use data from Costa, Kehoe, and Raveendranathan (2016). In their classification
scheme, a country moves from stage 0 (Malthusian) to stage 1 (first time sustained growth)
when it has experienced a 25 year period of income per capita growth averaging 1% per year.
Countries can revert from stage 1 to stage 0 if they have 25 years of slow growth, and can then
take off again. We look at the first episode of takeoff.

Figure 6 shows the relationship between takeoff date and current GDP per capita. Figure 7, in
turn, shows the relationship between takeoff date and QAPD. In Table 7, we show the same
data in regression form. We experiment with controlling for the Native<80% dummy, and with
excluding countries where the local population was replaced. The table shows that an earlier
takeoff is associated with higher income and lower quality-adjusted density today. Specifically,
for column 3, taking off one century earlier leads to being 7.1 times richer, and having 69%
lower density.27 Taking the ratio of the coefficients on takeoff year in columns (6) and (3), implies
that a 1% increase in GDP per capita would be associated with a decrease of 0.59% in QAPD.


27
  Galor (2011) similarly shows that there is a strong positive relationship across countries between time
elapsed since the demographic transition and current income.


                                                                                                        21
This is fairly similar to the direct GDP per capita-QAPD elasticities of -0.52 and -0.50 in column
(1) of Tables 3A and 3B.

We next turn to the population dynamics underlying these relationships. Table 8 shows
regressions of the change in log population since 1820 on the year of takeoff.28 As in the
previous table, we experiment with including a control for Native<.8 or dropping observations in
which the native population was replaced. The coefficient on Native<.8 is large and significant,
showing that population growth has been faster in countries where the native population was
largely displaced. Further, the fit of the regression is much better in the subsample of countries
where the native population was not displaced, which is not surprising, given that these
countries have more similar population histories. For this sample in column 3, the coefficient on
takeoff year implies that delaying a country's takeoff by one century raises its expected
population increase by a factor of 2.1.

To probe more deeply into the source of the increase in population, we calculate a rate of
natural increase (RNI) for a global panel of countries as the difference between crude birth
(CBR) and death rates (CDR) estimated by Delventhal, Guner, and Fernández-Villaverde
(2019).29 Our motivation for examining the RNI rather than the growth rate of population per se
is that the former is not affected by migration. Figure 8 shows the relationship between the peak
value of the RNI and the takeoff date of income per capita, while Table 9 shows the same thing
in the form of a regression. A one century delay in the date of takeoff is associated with a
maximum rate of natural increase that is 1.4% per year higher.

Finally, we examine the speed of the health transition and its relationship to population growth.
Figure 9 looks at the length of time it took countries to go from life expectancy at birth of 35
years to 50 years. Countries that reached life expectancy of 35 in the 19th century generally
took more than 100 years to reach life expectancy of 50; those that reached 35 in the middle of
the 20th century took less than half as long.30 We then look at the relationship between the time
that a country took to get from life expectancy of 35 to 50 and its population growth. Results are
presented in Table 10. Using the estimate in column 3 for the Native population countries, a one



28
    Similar patterns hold if we use all Gapminder countries in 1820 rather than just those coming from
Madisson or the 1850 McEvedy and Jones data.
29
   Delventhal, Guner, and Fernández-Villaverde (2019) start by assembling panel data on crude birth
(CBR) and death rates (CDR) for 188 countries going back as far as 250 years. For each country and
each vital rate they fit a three state model that allows for constant pre- and post-transition levels, and a
linear transition between them; the fit of the model is maximized by searching over potential starting and
ending dates for the transition.
30
   In fact, the data as shown actually understate this effect, since a number of countries had already
passed life expectancy of 35 years by 1800, which is when our data begin. A related fact is that increases
in life expectancy have been achieved at lower and lower levels of income over time. This is generally
discussed under the rubric of the Preston Curve. See Preston (1975) and Deaton (2014). Weil (2014),
figure 3.7, shows that over the course of the 20th century, life expectancy at a fixed level of income per
capita rose by approximately 20 years.


                                                                                                         22
century speed-up in the time it took to get from life expectancy of 35 to life expectancy of 50
leads to a population increase that was larger by a factor of approximately 2.8.31

Of course the brief narrative presented here leaves out many considerations that would have to
be addressed in a full fledged model of take-off and transition to the modern world. Why did
some countries start growing earlier than others? Was there an important effect of geography
on entry into modern growth? Why did health technology transfer more effectively than income
producing technology? We see these are important issues for future research.



5.      Conclusion

The idea that population density will be responsive to geographic characteristics is hardly
radical, nor is it novel. Giovanni Battista Riccioli, an Italian Jesuit who published the first
serious and systematic attempt to estimate the world's population in 1661, employed as one of
his techniques extrapolation of density based on geographic characteristics. For example,
although he knew Africa was more than twice as large as Europe, he estimated its population to
be smaller because "its interior is full of enormous wastelands" (Korenjak, 2018).

The observation that population density is frequently responsive to geographic characteristics
suggests in turn that it can be useful to assess population density in a particular place in light of
these same characteristics. A given number of people living in a given area might be
considered to have lower effective density if that area is flat, fertile, and near a coast than if it is
rugged, barren, and landlocked. Given how ubiquitous is the use of the idea of population
density in economics as well as related fields, it is desirable to improve its measurement by
taking these considerations into account.

Pursuing this goal, we estimated a set of coefficients from a global Poisson regression of
population density on geographic and climatic characteristics, controlling for country fixed
effects. Fitted values from this exercise allow us to create measures of land quality at the
grid-cell level, and similarly to calculate average land quality, total quality-adjusted area, and
quality-adjusted population density at the country level.

We certainly don't expect that our measure of quality-adjusted density will displace
conventionally-measured population density; rather, we see it as giving a complementary
perspective. For example, if one is interested in Marshallian externalities or agglomeration
effects, then a conventional measure of (local) density is appropriate since that tells us how far
apart people live from each other and how easy it is for them to interact. The same would be

31
   These findings match results from Chesnais (1990), who showed the relation of the population
multiplier to the speed of transition and the gap between birth and death rates. He notes that countries
and regions that went through the transition later in time tended to reach higher maximal rates of
population growth, and also (in his limited data) showed that on average countries that started the
transition later had larger multipliers.


                                                                                                           23
true if one were concerned about disease transmission. By contrast, if one is interested in the
ecological services provided by the geo-physical environment, then an adjusted measure like
ours is more useful. Among other issues, our measure could be relevant for studying the effects
of population pressure on outcomes like political conflict or migration both within and between
countries.

In the second part of the paper, we pursued a novel finding that our new measure facilitated:
that across countries there is a strong negative correlation between GDP per capita and
quality-adjusted population density. This is surprising, because there is no such correlation
between GDP per capita and population density as conventionally measured. We showed that
this finding was robust to alterations in the dataset and specification used to estimate the
underlying weights on geographic characteristics. This relationship is primarily a modern
phenomena resulting from population growth over the last two centuries, particularly in countries
where the local population was not displaced over the last 500 years. Finally, although we do
not have the ability to estimate the effect of population and income, by bounding the magnitude
of this effect we showed that the negative correlation between income per capita and
quality-adjusted population density is not simply the result of resource congestion.

In the last part of the paper, we argued that the negative correlation between income and
quality-adjusted density is best understood by looking back at variation among countries in the
processes of economic takeoff and demographic transition, and the transfer of the productive
and health technologies that underlay these processes. The fact that health technology diffused
more quickly than productive technology from early- to late-takeoff countries led the latter to
experience larger population multipliers in the process of demographic transition than did the
early takeoff countries, which remain wealthier on average today.




                                                                                              24
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Leopoldo Fergusson, and Simon Johnson, "Population and Conflict," The
   Review of Economic Studies, 2019 , rdz042, https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdz042

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. "Disease and development: the effect of life expectancy
   on economic growth." Journal of Political Economy 115.6 (2007): 925-985.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. "The colonial origins of
   comparative development: An empirical investigation." American Economic Review 91.5
   (2001): 1369-1401.

Arthur, W. Brian Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by historical events/
    The economic journal, 1989, 99(394): 116­131.

Ashraf, Quamrul, Ashley Lester, and David N. Weil (2009) "When Does Improving Health Raise
   GDP?" in Acemoglu, Rogoff, and Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008,
   Volume 23.

Ashraf, Quamrul H., David N. Weil, and Joshua Wilde. "The effect of fertility reduction on
   economic growth." Population and development review 39.1 (2013): 97-130.

Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. "Technological diffusion, convergence, and growth."
   Journal of Economic Growth 2.1 (1997): 1-26.

Binswanger, Hans P., and Prabhu Pingali. 1988. "Technological Priorities for Farming in
   sub-Saharan Africa." World Bank Research Observer 3(1):81­98.

Bloom, David, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. The demographic dividend: A new
   perspective on the economic consequences of population change. Rand Corporation, 2003.

Boserup, Esther. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
   Change under Population Pressure. Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing.

Burke, M., Hsiang, S. & Miguel, E. Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic
   production. Nature 527, 235­239 (2015)

Cameron, A. Colin and Frank A. G. Windmeijer (1996) R-Squared Measures for Count Data
  Regression Models with Applications to Health-Care Utilization Journal of Business &
  Economic Statistics Vol. 14, No. 2 (Apr., 1996), pp. 209-220.

Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer (2007), "The Marginal Product of Capital," The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, Volume 122, Issue 2, Pages 535­568.


                                                                                                 25
Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur John Coleman II. "The US structural transformation and regional
   convergence: A reinterpretation." Journal of Political Economy 109.3 (2001): 584-616.

Center For International Earth Science Information Network-CIESIN-Columbia University (2017)
   "Gridded Population of the World, Version 4 (GPWv4): Population Count, Revision 10,"
   Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), DOI:
   10.7927/H4PG1PPM.

Chesnais, Jean-Claude. "Demographic transition patterns and their impact on the age
   structure." Population and Development Review (1990): 327-336.

Ciccone, Antonio and Hall, Robert, (1996), Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,
   American Economic Review, 86, issue 1, p. 54-70

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux, 2010,
  "Estimating Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker Effects," in Edward
  L. Glaeser, editor, Agglomeration Economics University of Chicago Press, p. 15 - 66.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Laurent Gobillon, 2015. The empirics of agglomeration
  economies. Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics vol. 5, G. Duranton, V. Henderson
  and W. Strange (eds.), Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam, 247­348 (2015).

Corbane, Christina, Aneta Florczyk, Martino Pesaresi, Panagiotis Politis, and Vasileios Syrris
   (2018) "GHS built-up grid, derived from Landsat, multitemporal (1975-1990- 2000-2014),
   R2018A," European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), DOI:
   doi:10.2905/jrc-ghsl-10007.

Corbane, Christina, Martino Pesaresi, Thomas Kemper, Panagiotis Politis, Aneta J. Florczyk,
   Vasileios Syrris, Michele Melchiorri, Filip Sabo, and Pierre Soille (2019) "Automated global
   delineation of human settlements from 40 years of Landsat satellite data archives," Big
   Earth Data, Vol. 3, pp. 140­169, DOI: 10.1080/20964471.2019.1625528.

Costa, Daniela, Timothy J. Kehoe and Gajendran Raveendranathan. 2016. "The Stages of
   Economic Growth Revisited, Part I: General Framework and Taking Off into Growth."
   Economic Policy Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
   https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2016/the-stages-of-economic-growth-revisited

Das Gupta, Monica, John Bongaarts, and John Cleland, 2011. "Population, poverty, and
   sustainable development : a review of the evidence," Policy Research Working Paper Series
   5719, The World Bank.

Davis, Donald, R., and David E. Weinstein. 2002. "Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
   Geography of Economic Activity ." American Economic Review, 92 (5): 1269-1289.


                                                                                                 26
Deaton, Angus. 2014. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality,
   Princeton University Press.

Delventhal, Matthew, Nezih Guner, and Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, "Demographic Transitions
   Across Time and Space," Working Paper, March 2019.

Desmet, Klaus and Jordan Rappaport (2017) "The Settlement of the United States, 1800-2000:
   The Long Transition to Gibrat's Law," Journal of Urban Economics, 98, 50-68 .

Desmet, Kalus, David Nagy, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2018). "The Geography of
   Development" Journal of Political Economy, 126(3), 903-983.

Dyson, Tim. Population and development: the demographic transition. Zed Books Ltd., 2013.

Florczyk, Aneta, Christina Corbane, Daniele Ehrlich, Sergio Freire, Thomas Kemper, Luca
    Maffenini, Michele Melchiorri, Martino Pesaresi, Panagiotis Politis, Marcelo Schiavina, Filip
    Sabo, and Luigi Zanchetta (2019) "GHSL Data Package 2019,"Technical Report EUR 29788
    EN, Publications Office of the European Union, DOI: 10.2760/062975.

Freire, Sergio, Kytt MacManus, Martino Pesaresi, Erin Doxsey-Whitfield, and Jane Mills (2016)
    "Development of new open and free multi-temporal global population grids at 250 m
    resolution," in Geospatial Data in a Changing World, Association of Geographic Information
    Laboratories in Europe (AGILE).

Galor Oded, 2011, Unified Growth Theory, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Galor, Oded, and Ömer Özak. 2016. "The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference." American
   Economic Review, 106 (10): 3064-3103.

Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 2000. "Population, technology, and growth: From Malthusian
   stagnation to the demographic transition and beyond," American Economic Review 90 (4),
   806-828.

Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. "Malthus to solow." American Economic Review 92.4
   (2002): 1205-1217.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Dzhamilya Nigmatulina, and Sebastian Kriticos, 2020. Measuring urban
   economic density, Journal of Urban Economics.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Tim Squires, Adam Storeygard and David N. Weil, 2018. "The Global
   Distribution of Economic Activity: Nature, History, and the Role of Trade," The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 133(1), pages 357-406.


                                                                                               27
Kohler, Hans-Peter. 2012. "Copenhagen Consensus 2012: Challenge Paper on `Population
   Growth.'" PSC Working Paper Series, PSC 12-03.

Korenjak, Martin. "Humanist Demography: Giovanni Battista Riccioli on the World Population."
   Journal of Early Modern Studies, vol. 7, no. 2, 2018, pp. 73­104.,
   doi.org/10.5840/jems20187214.

Kremer, Michael. 1993. "Population growth and technological change: One million BC to 1990."
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108.3, 681-716.

Krugman, Paul, (1991), Increasing Returns and Economic Geography, Journal of Political
   Economy, 99, issue 3, p. 483-99.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Some Macroeconomics for the 21st Century," The Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 1 (Winter, 2000), pp. 159-168.

Masters, William A., and Margaret S. McMillan. "Climate and Scale in Economic Growth."
  Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 6, no. 3, 2001, pp. 167­186.

McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones, 1978. The atlas of world population history, Penguin.

Mellinger, Andrew, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and John Luke Gallup. "Climate, Coastal Proximity, and
   Development," in Clark, Gordon L., Maryann P. Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler, eds., The
   Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, pp. 169-194, 2000.

Michaels, Guy, Ferdinand Rauch, and Steven Redding (2012). "Urbanization and Structural
   Transformation." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 535-586.

National Research Council. 1986. Population Growth and Economic Development: Policy
   Questions. Working Group on Population Growth and Economic Development, Committee
   on Population, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,
   DC: National Academy Press.

Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund S. Phelps. "Investment in humans, technological diffusion, and
   economic growth." The American Economic Review 56.1/2 (1966): 69-75.

Nordhaus, William D., "Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new findings,"
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Mar 2006, 103 (10) 3510-3517.

Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney, "The Global
  Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate
  Change," Global Ecology and Biogeography, 11 (2002), 377­392.


                                                                                              28
Rose, Amy and Eddie Bright. 2014. The LandScan Global Population Distribution Project:
   Current State of the Art and Prospective Innovation. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
   of the Population Association of America.

Rosenthal, Stuart and Strange, William, (2004), Evidence on the nature and sources of
   agglomeration economies, ch. 49, p. 2119-2171 in Henderson, J. V. and Thisse, J. F. eds.,
   Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, Elsevier

Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Tenreyro, Silvana (2006), "The Log of Gravity," The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, 88(4), pp. 641-658.

Schiavina, Marcello, Sergio Freire, and Kytt MacManus (2019) "GHS population grid
   multitemporal (1975-1990- 2000-2015), R2019A," European Commission, Joint Research
   Centre (JRC), DOI: doi:10.2905/0C6B9751- A71F-4062-830B-43C9F432370F.

Simon, Julian L. 1976. "Population growth may be good for LDCs in the long run: A richer
   simulation model," Economic Development and Cultural Change 24(2): 309­337.

Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu. (2019) "Trade, Migration, and Productivity: A Quantitative
   Analysis of China." American Economic Review, 109 (5), 1843-72.

Weil, David N., and Joshua Wilde. "How relevant is Malthus for economic development today?."
   American Economic Review 99.2 (2009): 255-60.

Weil, David N. "Health and economic growth." Handbook of economic growth. Vol. 2. Elsevier,
   2014. 623-682.

Young, Alwyn. "The gift of the dying: The tragedy of AIDS and the welfare of future African
   generations." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120.2 (2005): 423-466.




                                                                                              29
Table 1. Goodness of Fit Under Alternative Samples


                                   Country Only      Geography Only      Both                N
           Full Sample                 0.344               0.377         0.536            237, 051
   Exclude Six Large Countries         0.317               0.284         0.453            108, 881
    Early Agglomerators Only           0.328               0.417         0.516            134, 230
    Late Agglomerators Only            0.264               0.361         0.495            102, 628
         Fully Interacted              0.344               0.517         0.625            237, 051
                                                                                                      2
     Note: All regressions use the GHS dataset and Poisson specification. Goodness of fit measure is RDEV .




                                                       1
  Table 2. Grid square results on the geographic determinants of population

                                                                              No country fixed effects    Baseline

Ruggedness                                                                         -1.23e-06             -2.9e-06
                                                                                    (1.42e-07)            (1.19e-07)
Malaria Ecology                                                                     -0.018                -0.039
                                                                                    (2.76e-03)            (2.87e-03)
Temperature                                                                          0.115                 0.087
                                                                                    (4.61e-03)            (4.71e-03)
Precipitation                                                                       -0.086                -0.102
                                                                                    (8.97e-03)            (7.58e-03)
Growing Days                                                                       6.44e-04              4.45e-03
                                                                                    (1.96e-04)            (1.88e-04)
Land Suitability                                                                     1.523                 0.741
                                                                                      (0.041)               (0.037)
Latitude                                                                             0.032                 0.045
                                                                                    (2.28e-03)            (3.12e-03)
Elevation                                                                          1.21e-04              1.37e-04
                                                                                     (3.8e-05)            (3.25e-05)
Coastal dummy                                                                        0.751                 0.726
                                                                                      (0.034)               (0.026)
Distance to Coast                                                                  -4.65e-07             -8.39e-07
                                                                                    (3.64e-08)            (3.44e-08)
Harbor dummy                                                                         0.694                 0.791
                                                                                      (0.036)               (0.027)
Navigable River dummy                                                                0.909                  0.69
                                                                                      (0.042)               (0.032)
Large Lake dummy                                                                      0.548                0.916
                                                                                      (0.224)               (0.166)
Tropical and Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests                                     0.631                 0.652
                                                                                      (0.102)               (0.077)
Tropical and Subtropical Dry Broadleaf and Coniferous Forests                         0.181                0.313
                                                                                      (0.109)               (0.084)
Temperate Broadleaf and Mixed Forests                                                0.707                  1.14
                                                                                      (0.113)               (0.087)
Temperate Coniferous Forests                                                           0.119               0.713
                                                                                      (0.137)               (0.106)
Boreal Forests/Taiga                                                                 -1.26                -0.874
                                                                                      (0.177)               (0.137)
Tropical, Subtropical, and Flooded Grasslands, Savannas, and Shrublands             -0.565                 0.262
                                                                                       (0.11)               (0.085)
Temperate Grasslands, Savannas, and Shrublands                                      -0.332                 0.999
                                                                                       (0.12)               (0.096)
Montane Grasslands and Shrublands                                                    0.643                 0.925
                                                                                      (0.138)               (0.109)
Tundra                                                                              -2.924                -2.682
                                                                                      (0.418)               (0.307)
Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands, and Scrub                                           0.288                1.756
                                                                                      (0.115)               (0.101)
Deserts and Xeric Shrublands                                                        -0.558                  -0.092
                                                                                      (0.114)               (0.087)
 2
Rdev                                                                                   0.377                0.536
Observations                                                                          237051               237051
 Note: The omitted biome is Mangroves.  p<0.1;     
                                                      p<0.05;   
                                                                   p<0.01



                                                         2
Table 3. Income vs. Density for Alternative Measures

A.

                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)            (4)               (5)                  (6)
                                                                                                         log            log suitability
                                                                 log QAPD,
 Dependent                                       country                              log            population            adjusted
                             log QAPD                              no fixed
 Variable:                                    fixed effects                         Density          per million          population
                                                                    effects
                                                                                                      calories              density
 log GDP per Capita           -0.521           -0.504              -0.181           0.00783             0.117                0.200
 2010                         (0.0817)          (0.0854)          (0.0724)          (0.0825)          (0.0832)              (0.112)

 Constant                     8.747             4.937             5.514             4.014             -5.921                3.668
                               (0.735)           (0.760)           (0.669)           (0.740)           (0.741)               (0.966)
 Observations                    148               148               148               148               146                   148
 R-squared                      0.249             0.241            0.0451          0.0000605           0.0141                0.0308
 Notes: Column (3) uses the analogue of our QAPD measure, but constructed from a grid-cell regression that does not include county
 fixed effects. Column (5) calculates population density per million calories of agricultural production potential at intermediate input
 technology, from Galor and Ozak (2016). Column (6) calculates population density per unit of land suitability, from Ramankutty
 et al. (2002). Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.



B.

                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)            (4)               (5)                  (6)
                                                                                                         log            log suitability
                                                                 log QAPD,
 Dependent                                       country                              log            population            adjusted
                             log QAPD                              no fixed
 Variable:                                    fixed effects                         Density          per million          population
                                                                    effects
                                                                                                      calories              density
 log GDP per Capita           -0.498           -0.484              -0.148            0.0347             0.142               0.227
 2010                          (0.0799)         (0.0834)          (0.0690)          (0.0800)          (0.0798)              (0.111)

 Native<80%                   -0.553             -0.456           -0.767            -0.640            -0.737                -0.658
                               (0.191)           (0.189)           (0.167)           (0.217)           (0.216)               (0.251)

 Constant                     8.731             4.924             5.492             3.996             -5.891                3.650
                               (0.731)           (0.759)           (0.651)           (0.723)           (0.726)               (0.987)
 Observations                    148               148               148               148               146                   148
 R-squared                      0.291             0.271             0.167            0.0608             0.100                0.0808
 Notes: Column (3) uses the analogue of our QAPD measure, but constructed from a grid-cell regression that does not include county
 fixed effects. Column (5) calculates population density per million calories of agricultural production potential at intermediate input
 technology, from Galor and Ozak (2016). Column (6) calculates population density per unit of land suitability, from Ramankutty
 et al. (2002). Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                                    3
Table 4. Income and Quality Adjusted Population Density across Countries

                                                              Dependent Variable: log QAPD
                                 (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)          (5)                             (6)
                                               Drop 6          Early Ag-    Late Agglom- Fully Interact
 Grid cell regression         Baseline                                                                                      Baseline
                                              Largest         glomerators       erators      Geog.
 log GDP per Capita          -0.498          -0.613            -0.739         -0.548       -0.290                          -0.567
 2010                         (0.0799)        (0.0909)           (0.108)       (0.0908)     (0.0832)                        (0.112)

 Native<80%                   -0.553            -0.362            -0.424             -0.525              -0.713             -0.814
                               (0.191)         (0.225)           (0.252)             (0.206)              (0.189)            (0.295)

 Constant                     8.731           10.09             11.25                9.271               6.924              9.252
                              (0.731)          (0.815)           (1.023)              (0.818)             (0.758)            (1.023)
 Observations                   148              148               148                  142                 148                148
 R-squared                     0.291            0.290             0.312                0.292               0.192              0.481
 Note: We restrict the sample in these regressions to exclude countries with areas below 1,500 km2 . In column (4), late agglomerators
 are missing the tundra biome, so we cannot estimate a grid square population coefficient from late agglomerators for tundra and
 thus cannot predict population for the 6 countries with tundra. Column (6) weights country observations by land area. Standard
 errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001




                                                                   4
Table 5. Variance Decomposition

A. Using Conventional Population Density

 (1 - )    var(ln(y ))   (1 - )2 var(ln(Bc ))   (1 - )2 var(ln(densityc ))   -2(1 - )2 cov (ln(Bc ), ln(densityc ))
   1/4       1.511             1.612                      0.096                             -0.197
   1/3       1.511             1.689                      0.170                             -0.348


B. Using Quality Adjusted Population Density

 (1 - )    var(ln(y ))   (1 - )2 var(ln(Bc ))   (1 - )2 var(ln(QAP Dc ))     -2(1 - )2 cov (ln(Bc ), ln(densityc ))
   1/4       1.511             1.220                      0.103                             0.188
   1/3       1.511             1.169                      0.183                             0.159




                                                        5
Table 6. Current QAPD, Historical QAPD, and Population Growth

A. Using 1820 population

                                   log                   log            log            log           log          log
     Dependent Variable          QAPD                 QAPD           population      QAPD          QAPD       population
                                 (2010)               (1820)         1820-2010       (2010)        (1820)     1820-2010
                                   (1)                   (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
     Sample                                                all                               exclude native< 80%
     log GDP per Capita         -0.539                 -0.300           -0.240      -0.480         -0.111      -0.369
     2010                        (0.127)              (0.156)           (0.0704)     (0.145)      (0.158)       (0.0659)

     Native<80%                   -0.472          -2.070                1.598
                                 (0.240)           (0.303)               (0.162)

     Constant                   9.087                 4.845             4.242       8.529         3.064       5.465
                                 (1.226)              (1.497)            (0.662)     (1.405)     (1.524)       (0.627)
     Observations                   76                   76                 76         48           48           48
     R-squared                    0.261                0.437              0.603       0.223      0.0128         0.301
     Note: Observations include only values that have not been modified from original source by Gapminder.
     Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001



B. Using 1820 and 2050 populations

                                   log                   log            log            log           log          log
     Dependent Variable          QAPD                 QAPD           population      QAPD          QAPD       population
                                 (2050)               (1820)         1820-2050       (2050)        (1820)     1820-2050
                                   (1)                   (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
     Sample                                                all                               exclude native< 80%
     log GDP per Capita         -0.687                 -0.300        -0.387         -0.649         -0.111      -0.539
     2010                        (0.123)              (0.156)         (0.0835)       (0.145)      (0.158)       (0.0763)

     Native<80%                   -0.400          -2.070                1.670
                                 (0.240)           (0.303)               (0.183)

     Constant                   10.70                 4.845             5.851       10.34         3.064       7.276
                                 (1.198)              (1.497)            (0.783)     (1.403)     (1.524)       (0.716)
     Observations                   76                   76                 76         48           48           48
     R-squared                    0.335                0.437              0.576       0.324      0.0128         0.381
     Note: Observations include only values that have not been modified from original source by Gapminder.
     Standard errors in parentheses.      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001




                                                                     6
Table 7. The Effect of Takeoff Year on Income and Density

                                 (1)           (2)           (3)                 (4)             (5)            (6)
    Dependent Variable              log GDP per capita 2010                                 log QAPD
    Takeoff year             -0.0167      -0.0169       -0.0196              0.0117          0.0120         0.0116
                              (0.00144)    (0.00145)     (0.00161)           (0.00214)       (0.00205)      (0.00244)

    Native< 80%                               0.452                                          -0.622
                                              (0.179)                                         (0.210)

    Constant                  41.34          41.54             46.78         -18.55          -18.82         -18.05
                               (2.738)        (2.776)           (3.070)       (4.128)         (3.937)        (4.671)
    Observations                 120            120                78           120             120            78
    R-squared                   0.449          0.480             0.591         0.211           0.265          0.228
    Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,       p < 0.001. Columns (3) and (6) restrict the
    sample to countries where Native is greater than or equal to 80%.




                                                           7
Table 8. The Effect of Takeoff Year on Population Growth

                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)
                       Dependent Variable                  log population 1820-2010
                       Takeoff year                  0.00491    0.00423         0.00718
                                                    (0.00252)   (0.00152)        (0.00173)

                       Native< 80%                                   1.628
                                                                      (0.161)

                       Constant                       -6.824          -6.138             -11.78
                                                     (4.853)          (2.920)             (3.322)
                       Observations                     73               73                  46
                       R-squared                     0.0495            0.604               0.218
                       Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01, 
                       p < 0.001. Column(3) restricts the sample to countries where Native is greater
                       than or equal to 80%.




                                                             8
Table 9. The Effect of Takeoff Year on Peak Rate of Natural Increase

                                 (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)                  (5)             (6)
    Dependent Variable                                 Peak Rate of Natural Increase
    Takeoff year             0.000118       0.000116 0.000136
                             (0.0000114)    (0.0000103) (0.0000119)

    log QAPD                                                                0.00282        0.00337         0.00370
                                                                            (0.000510)     (0.000498)      (0.000625)

    Native< 80%                             0.00410                                        0.00577
                                             (0.00105)                                      (0.00127)

    Constant                  -0.201         -0.200         -0.238          0.0142         0.00993         0.00854
                               (0.0222)       (0.0202)       (0.0234)       (0.00240)       (0.00251)      (0.00309)
    Observations                  119           119             77             146             146             94
    R-squared                   0.507          0.564          0.639           0.174           0.268          0.255
    Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,      p < 0.001. Columns (3) and (6) restrict the
    sample to countries where Native is greater than or equal to 80%.




                                                           9
Table 10. Speed of Life Expectancy Improvement and Population Growth

                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)
                      Dependent Variable                 log population 1820-2010
                      Life-expectancy             -0.0108     -0.00743       -0.0104
                      improvement time             (0.00254)   (0.00147)      (0.00154)

                      Native< 80%                                  1.434
                                                                    (0.162)

                      Constant                     3.147           2.439           2.619
                                                    (0.161)         (0.144)         (0.152)
                      Observations                    76               76             48
                      R-squared                      0.226           0.652           0.418
                      Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01, 
                      p < 0.001. Column (3) restricts the sample to countries where Native is
                      greater than or equal to 80%.




                                                        10
Figure 1. Population Density and Land Quality




                                            11
Figure 2. Country Level Quality Adjusted Area

A. Countries by Land Area




B. Countries by Quality Adjusted Area




                                            12
Figure 3. Top 80 Countries by Fitted Population




                                             13
Figure 4. Conventional and Quality Adjusted Population Density Across Countries




                                             14
Figure 5. Density and GDP per Capita

A. Conventional Population Density and GDP per Capita




B. Quality Adjusted Population Density and GDP per Capita




                                           15
Figure 6. Takeoff Date and Current GDP per Capita




                                           16
Figure 7. Takeoff Date and QADP




                                  17
Figure 8. Takeoff Year vs. Maximum Rate of Natural Increase




                                            18
Figure 9. Time to Get from Life Expectancy of 35 to 50




                                             19
Appendix A: Comparison of population datasets and cell-level specifications

In this appendix we first compare the distribution of population density in our main population
data source, GHS-POP, to two alternatives (GPWv4 and LandScan). We then compare
regression results using our baseline Poisson specification and a log-linear alternative, using all
three datasets -- a total of six variants. Specifically, we compare goodness of fit and fitted
values in a regression of population on geographic characteristics. We also show the
robustness of our key result, the negative correlation between Quality Adjusted Population
Density and income per capita, to the choice of dataset and specification.

We consider three global datasets all reporting population counts for 30-arc-second by 30
arc-second pixels in Plate Carrée (latitude/longitude) projection. The area of a pixel is 0.86
square km at the equator, decreasing with the cosine of latitude.

The Gridded Population of the World version 4 (GPWv4; CIESIN 2017) is the simplest of the
three. The underlying data are population estimates for administrative regions (polygons) from
censuses circa 2010. When there is no census in exactly 2010, values are extrapolated or
interpolated from multiple censuses. Population is assumed to be distributed evenly within an
administrative region. GPWv4's effective spatial resolution thus depends on what information
individual countries provide, with richer countries typically providing data for finer regions, down
to enumeration units, or even block level data . There is substantial variation within countries as
well, with higher resolution in more densely populated regions. Of 12.9 million input polygons
worldwide, only 2.4 million are from outside the United States. A grid cell crossing a polygon
boundary is assigned a population density that is the areally-weighted average of its constituent
polygons.

The European Union's Global Human Settlements population layer (GHS-POP; Schiavina et al.
2019; Freire et al. 2016) reallocates GPWv4 estimates within administrative polygons based on
a companion dataset, GHS-BUILT (Corbane et al., 2018, 2019) that defines built-up pixels as
seen in Landsat 30-meter resolution satellite data circa 2015. In the rare cases where there is
no built-up area visible in a region, it reverts to the GPWv4 estimates. Its land area measures
are taken directly from GPWv4. More information about the GHS data can be found in Florczyk
et al. (2019).

LandScan uses a proprietary algorithm to provide population estimates based on a much wider
set of inputs that include census population data and satellite imagery at higher resolution than
Landsat. While the algorithm is not publicly documented and changes from year to year, in the
recent past input data have also included information on elevation, slope, and land cover, as
well as locations of road and rail networks, hydrologic features and drainage systems, utility
networks, airports, and populated urban places. LandScan reports estimates of ambient
population averaged throughout the day, whereas the other two datasets report nighttime
(residential) population estimates. A recent explanation of LandScan for an academic audience
can be found in Rose and Bright (2014).


                                                                                                  30
We rely on GHS-POP as our primary source, and consider GPWv4 and LandScan for
robustness here. GHS-POP's use of building cover to redistribute people within census units is
very likely to provide more accuracy than GPWv4's assumption of uniform density within large
administrative units.

LandScan aims to achieve the same goal of redistributing population based on built cover.
However, as noted, it uses other information in making assessments, including higher resolution
satellite imagery. LandScan may thus do a better job of finding the built environment in rural
locations and it may have greater accuracy in dense but low income cities with coarse
population data.

However LandScan has four main drawbacks. First, it has historically used coarse census data
as a benchmark outside of the United States.32 While better satellite imagery can better define
the built environment, to convert that to population one still needs fine grained census
population data. Second and more importantly, LandScan's algorithm uses physical features like
elevation directly to predict population density. This raises the possibility that our regressions
will end up simply predicting LandScan's algorithm rather than true population density. Third,
LandScan's algorithm changes from year to year and is not documented. Finally LandScan
measures the ambient population over the 24 hours of a day, making inferences about where
people work and for how many hours of the day, without, as we understand it, much if any
spatial economic census data which are unavailable for many developing countries anyway.
This seems likely to add error without benefit for our purposes.

Figure A.1 Panel A reports the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of log population density
according to the three datasets, with zeros in each dataset replaced with that dataset's
minimum nonzero value before logging. In this and all other subnational empirical work, our unit
of analysis is a quarter-degree grid square, a 30-by-30 array of 30-arc-second pixels.
The Figure shows that the three data sets treat grid squares with tiny densities very differently
For example GHS-POP registers about 40% of cells as having no people, with nonzero
densities starting at 0.0000000033/km2, while LandScan registers only about 24% of grid
squares at 0, with non-zero densities starting at about 0.0013/km2. By about 50/km2 (exp(3.9)),
the three lines converge, at which point about 85% of pixels have been accounted for. Panel B
of Figure A.1 analogously reports cumulative population by density. It shows that less than 10%
of world population lives at a density under 50/km2. However, since our unit of analysis is the
grid square, these tiny densities potentially play an important role.



32
  LandScan has not released details about its current census data, but as of its 2009 version "Globally,
LandScan uses 8,285,172 census inputs, whereas GPW v.3 uses 399,747 units.... Outside the USA
LandScan used 79,590 administrative units for ambient modeling. By contrast, GPWv3 uses 338,863
units outside of the US." Source:
https://sedac.uservoice.com/knowledgebase/articles/41665-what-are-the-differences-between-gpw-grump
-and-la


                                                                                                     31
We now further flesh out the log-linear specification, in order to compare it to our main Poisson
specification. Given the log-linear specification from (7a) ,
ln(Li,c /Z i, c ) = C c + X i,c  + i,c         , the corresponding OLS estimate of the country
constant is

(A.1) C^c =      1
                 Nc   (ic
                           ln   ( ) - ( X
                                    Li,c
                                    Z i,c
                                                  ic
                                                             
                                                        i,c   OLS        ))   .
Our OLS estimate of cell i's log population density when setting all the country fixed effects to
                                                                               = X 
zero to equalize all factors that vary at the country level is             ln  ( )Li,c
                                                                                  Z i,c       i,c
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                        OLS   . The
                                                                  
                                                                         = exp (X   + )
                                                                  Li,c                              2
                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                    s 2 is
                                                                                                    
analogous estimate of population density level is Z                                  i,c   OLS      2         where 
                                                    i,c

the variance of the error term in the estimated equation (which we assume to be homoskedastic
across countries). Fitted national population is then:

                          (                        )Z
                                              2
                                               s
(A.2) Lc =  exp X i,c   OLS +
                                              

                                               2        i,c   .
                ic
Finally, we can calculate the ratio of actual to expected population, where the latter is based on
the fitted value suppressing country fixed effects. This is what we have been calling
quality-adjusted population density.
                                      Li,c
(A.3) QAP Dc =                        i


                                (             2
                                                  )
                           exp X i,c   OLS + s2 Z i,c
                          ic



An obvious problem with this approach is that, as discussed above, there are a significant
number of grid cells with zero measured population in our data. In implementing the log-linear
specification, we assigned to such cells the population density of the least dense non-zero cell
in the dataset before logging. We also experimented with creating versions of the logged
GPWv4 and GHS-POP datasets in which cells with zero density are assigned the minimum
nonzero density value in LandScan. As shown in Figure A.1, LandScan's minimum value is
much larger than the minimum non-zero density in the other two datasets.

Figure A.2 compares cell-level predicted values across the three datasets. Using the Poisson
specification (Equation 7b), Panel A shows that all three data sets give very similar predicted
values. This is because the Poisson specification makes little distinction between cells that have
moderately low density and those that have extremely low density. By contrast, in Panel B, there
are large differences across datasets when using the log-linear specification (Equation 7a),
driven by the differing treatments of low density regions.

Table A.1 reports goodness of fit measures for geographic variables, country fixed effects, and
both, analogously to Table 1, Row 1, for the six variants. In the first 3 rows zeros are assigned



                                                                                                                       32
their dataset-specific minimum non-zero value. In rows 4 and 5 zeros in GHS-POP and GPWv4
are assigned the LandScan minimum value. Results across all data sets and specifications are
generally similar.

Table A.2 reports ten variants of Table 2, Panel B, column 1, each corresponding to a variant
reported in Table A.1. Log-linear results in columns 1, 3 and 5 vary enormously across datasets,
while Poisson results in columns 2, 4 and 6 do not. Columns 7-10 censor at the Landscan
minimum. Poisson results (columns 8 and 10) are also insensitive to this, while log-linear results
(columns 7 and 9) are much more sensitive.

Appendix B: Other results

Table B.1 reports log Average Land Quality (ALQ), log conventional area, log Quality-adjusted
Area (QAA), log conventional population density, and log Quality-adjusted population density
(QAPD), for each country in the grid-cell-level estimation (Tables 1 and 2). It also reports
whether they appear in the country-level sample (Tables 3-5) and the 1820 sample (Table 6),
and their value of 1(Native<0.8).

Table B.2 shows an alternative version of the equation (15) decomposition reported in Table 5,
restricted to the sample of Native>0.8 countries. Results are generally quite similar to those in
Table 5.




                                                                                                33
Table A.1. Goodness of Fit for Grid Cell Level Regressions


                            Log-linear Specification                               Poisson Specification
                   Country Only     Geography Only          Both          Country Only   Geography Only     Both
    GHS                0.359              0.470          0.567                0.344              0.377      0.536
    GPW                0.551              0.430          0.736                0.390              0.419      0.590
  LandScan             0.482              0.564          0.712                0.364              0.398      0.562
GHS Censored           0.411              0.509          0.628                0.344              0.377      0.536
GPW Censored           0.557              0.519          0.775                0.390              0.419      0.590
 Note: The table reports R2 values for the log-linear regressions and RDEV
                                                                       2
                                                                           for the Poisson specification.




                                                        1
    Table B.1. Cross-country regressions of QAPD on GDP per capita: Robustness to Alternative Grid Cell Datasets and Specifications

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)          (10)
                                                                         log-linear       Poisson                             log-linear    Poisson    log-linear    Poisson
                                        log-linear        Poisson                                    log-linear   Poisson
       Grid cell regression                                                 Land            Land                                GPW          GPW         GHS           GHS
                                          GPW              GPW                                         GHS         GHS
                                                                            Scan            Scan                              Censored     Censored    Censored     Censored
       log GDP per Capita 2010           0.0133          -0.467            -0.107        -0.501      -0.942       -0.498        -0.153     -0.467      -0.410       -0.498
                                         (0.100)         (0.0760)         (0.0996)        (0.0756)    (0.230)      (0.0799)    (0.0840)     (0.0760)    (0.116)      (0.0799)




2
       Native<80%                       -1.134           -0.522           -0.740          -0.568       -0.237     -0.553      -0.774       -0.522       -0.687      -0.553
                                         (0.270)          (0.187)          (0.243)         (0.187)    (0.564)      (0.191)     (0.208)      (0.187)     (0.272)      (0.191)

       Constant                         4.892            8.322            5.514           8.682      16.95        8.731       5.749        8.322       8.714        8.731
                                         (0.891)          (0.701)          (0.908)         (0.699)    (1.988)      (0.731)     (0.761)      (0.701)     (1.025)      (0.731)
       Observations                        148              148              148             148        148          148         148          148         148          148
       R-squared                          0.115            0.276           0.0721           0.304      0.124        0.291       0.121        0.276       0.147        0.291
       Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Table B.1. Country-Level Measures

                                                                      log Population           Country-
                                    log        log Area       log                       log               Pop.   Native
Country Name                                                              Density                level
                                   ALQ      (conventional)   QAA                       QAPD               1820   < 0.8
                                                                      (conventional)            Sample
Afghanistan                        -1.610      13.372        11.762        3.935       5.545       1       1       0
Albania                             1.911      10.223        12.135        4.637       2.725       1       1       0
Algeria                            -0.289      14.656        14.366        2.841       3.130       1       1       0
Angola                             -0.953      14.046        13.094        3.007       3.960       1       0       0
Argentina                           0.898      14.826        15.724        2.761       1.863       1       1       1
Armenia                            -0.038      10.309        10.272        4.650       4.687       1       0       0
Australia                           0.414      15.850        16.264        1.136       0.722       1       1       1
Austria                             0.376      11.295        11.671        4.624       4.248       1       1       0
Azerbaijan                         -0.021      11.308        11.287        4.710       4.731       1       0       0
Bangladesh                          1.167      11.833        13.000        7.059       5.893       1       1       0
Belarus                             0.960      12.234        13.194        3.837       2.877       1       0       0
Belgium                             1.717      10.365        12.082        5.891       4.174       1       1       0
Belize                              0.987      10.047        11.034        2.661       1.674       1       0       1
Benin                              -0.960      11.672        10.712        4.569       5.528       1       0       0
Bhutan                             -1.564      10.530        8.967         3.425       4.988       1       0       0
Bolivia                            -0.389      13.873        13.485        2.308       2.697       1       1       1
Bosnia and Herzegovina              1.206      10.844        12.050        4.283       3.078       1       0       0
Botswana                           -1.355      13.260        11.906        1.380       2.734       1       0       1
Brazil                             -0.141      15.948        15.807        3.202       3.343       1       1       1
Brunei                              0.567       8.761         9.328        4.227       3.660       0       0
Bulgaria                            1.075      11.607        12.683        4.154       3.078       1       1       0
Burkina Faso                       -1.674      12.521        10.848        4.204       5.878       1       0       0
Burundi                            -1.343      10.137         8.793        6.068       7.411       1       0       0
Cambodia                            0.296      12.091        12.387        4.464       4.168       1       1       0
Cameroon                           -0.846      13.032        12.186        3.909       4.755       1       0       0
Canada                             -1.189      15.985        14.797        1.341       2.530       1       1       1
Central African Republic           -1.789      13.347        11.558        2.115       3.904       1       0       1
Chad                               -1.806      14.058        12.252        2.425       4.231       1       0       0
Chile                               0.599      13.469        14.068        3.230       2.631       1       1       1
China                               0.038      16.034        16.072        5.008       4.969       1       1       0
Colombia                           -0.178      13.938        13.760        3.742       3.920       1       1       1
Costa Rica                          0.166      10.839        11.005        4.548       4.382       1       1       1
Croatia                             2.403      10.946        13.349        4.357       1.953       1       0       1
Cuba                                1.440      11.589        13.029        4.649       3.209       0       0       1
Czech Republic                      0.906      11.291        12.197        4.901       3.995       1       0       0
Democratic Republic of the Congo   -1.514      14.648        13.135        3.506       5.020       1       0       0
Denmark                             2.666      10.641        13.307        4.935       2.268       1       1       0
Djibouti                           -1.609      10.009         8.400        3.752       5.361       0       0
Dominican Republic                  1.390      10.778        12.168        5.396       4.006       1       1       1
Ecuador                            -0.189      12.419        12.230        4.174       4.363       1       1       1
Egypt                              -0.856      13.794        12.938        4.533       5.389       1       1       0
El Salvador                         0.340       9.981        10.321        5.647       5.307       1       1       1
Equatorial Guinea                  -0.490      10.129         9.638        3.245       3.736       1       0       1
Eritrea                            -1.072      11.694        10.622        3.737       4.809       1       0       0
Estonia                             1.398      10.624        12.022        3.473       2.076       1       0       1
Ethiopia                           -0.943      13.935        12.993        4.475       5.417       1       0       0
Finland                            -0.621      12.620        11.999        2.885       3.505       1       1       0
France                              1.858      13.200        15.057        4.775       2.917       1       1       0
French Guiana                      -0.025      11.332        11.307        1.166       1.190       0       0
Gabon                              -0.688      12.493        11.804        1.928       2.617       1       0       1
Gambia                             -0.358       9.206         8.848        5.189       5.547       1       0       0
Georgia                             0.697      11.145        11.842        4.058       3.361       1       0       0
Germany                             1.551      12.780        14.331        5.433       3.882       1       1       0
Ghana                              -0.748      12.351        11.603        4.825       5.573       1       0       0
Greece                              2.214      11.628        13.842        4.483       2.269       1       1       0
Guatemala                           0.490      11.561        12.051        5.050       4.560       1       1       1
Guinea                             -0.857      12.431        11.574        3.924       4.781       1       0       1
Guinea-Bissau                      -0.477      10.359         9.882        4.065       4.542       1       0       0
Guyana                              0.426      12.242        12.668        1.271       0.846       1       0       1
Haiti                               0.839      10.152        10.991        5.993       5.154       1       1       1
Honduras                            0.256      11.610        11.866        4.275       4.019       1       1       1
Hong Kong                           1.953       6.637         8.590        9.002       7.048       0       0       1
Hungary                             1.229      11.400        12.629        4.673       3.444       1       1       0
Iceland                            -1.036      11.315        10.279        1.271       2.307       0       0
India                               0.345      14.951        15.295        6.043       5.698       1       1       0
Indonesia                           0.042      14.329        14.371        4.925       4.884       1       1       0



                                                                3
Iran                -0.708   14.294   13.586   3.882   4.591   1   1   0
Iraq                -0.121   12.998   12.877   4.416   4.537   1   1   0
Ireland              2.544   11.136   13.680   4.227   1.683   1   0   0
Israel              1.393     9.967   11.361   5.998   4.605   1   0   1
Italy                2.195   12.503   14.698   5.310   3.115   1   1   0
Ivory Coast         -0.722   12.683   11.961   4.257   4.979   1   0   1
Japan                1.450   12.788   14.238   5.847   4.397   1   1   0
Jordan              -0.294   11.366   11.072   4.470   4.764   1   1   1
Kazakhstan          -1.216   14.780   13.564   1.897   3.114   1   0   1
Kenya               -1.379   13.262   11.883   4.372   5.750   1   0   1
Kuwait               0.035    9.789    9.824   5.386   5.350   1   0   1
Kyrgyzstan          -2.535   12.149   9.614    3.531   6.065   1   0   0
Laos                -0.208   12.347   12.139   3.447   3.655   1   1   0
Latvia               1.443   11.055   12.498   3.447   2.004   1   0   1
Lebanon              1.909    9.286   11.195   6.324   4.414   1   1   1
Lesotho             -0.805   10.318    9.513   4.105   4.910   1   0   0
Liberia             -0.577   11.472   10.895   3.860   4.436   1   0   0
Libya               -0.661   14.298   13.637   1.351   2.012   1   1   0
Liechtenstein       -1.464    6.267    4.803   5.042   6.505   0   0
Lithuania            1.382   11.043   12.424   3.832   2.451   1   0   0
Luxembourg           1.173    7.822    8.995   5.094   3.921   1   0   0
Macedonia            0.495   10.056   10.551   4.464   3.969   1   0   0
Madagascar           0.104   13.287   13.390   3.712   3.609   1   1   0
Malawi              -0.507   11.437   10.930   5.156   5.663   1   0   0
Malaysia             0.238   12.697   12.935   4.527   4.289   1   1   1
Mali                -1.479   14.043   12.564   2.636   4.116   1   0   0
Mauritania          -0.768   13.858   13.090   1.418   2.186   1   0   0
Mexico               0.029   14.480   14.509   4.169   4.140   1   1   1
Moldova              0.999   10.490   11.488   4.740   3.742   1   0   1
Mongolia            -1.892   14.254   12.362   0.629   2.521   1   1   0
Montenegro           1.432    9.499   10.931   3.848   2.416   0   0
Morocco              0.607   13.437   14.044   3.932   3.325   1   1   0
Mozambique          -0.215   13.565   13.351   3.580   3.795   1   1   0
Myanmar              0.398   13.401   13.799   4.391   3.993   1   1   0
Namibia             -1.117   13.617   12.500   0.989   2.106   1   0   1
Nepal               -0.867   11.842   10.974   5.337   6.205   1   1   0
Netherlands          2.479   10.413   12.892   6.197   3.718   1   1   0
New Zealand          1.675   12.478   14.153   2.846   1.171   1   1   1
Nicaragua            0.227   11.677   11.904   3.919   3.691   1   1   1
Niger               -1.626   13.989   12.364   2.857   4.483   1   0   1
Nigeria             -0.927   13.710   12.783   5.301   6.228   1   0   0
North Korea          0.808   11.725   12.534   5.283   4.474   0   0   0
Norway              -0.740   12.622   11.882   2.812   3.552   1   1   0
Oman                -0.819   12.646   11.826   2.690   3.510   1   1   1
Pakistan            -0.815   13.660   12.845   5.392   6.207   1   1   0
Palestine            1.172    8.655    9.827   6.555   5.383   0   0
Panama               0.514   11.221   11.735   3.949   3.436   1   0   1
Papua New Guinea    -0.155   12.897   12.742   2.780   2.934   1   0   0
Paraguay             0.361   12.890   13.252   2.829   2.467   1   1   1
Peru                -0.404   14.063   13.659   3.196   3.600   1   1   1
Philippines          0.929   12.446   13.374   5.900   4.971   1   1   0
Poland               1.500   12.628   14.128   4.832   3.332   1   1   0
Portugal             2.217   11.383   13.599   4.709   2.492   1   1   0
Qatar                0.096    9.404    9.500   5.211   5.115   1   0   1
Republic of Congo   -0.942   12.742   11.800   2.466   3.408   1   0   0
Romania              1.067   12.377   13.444   4.431   3.364   1   1   0
Russia              -1.123   16.591   15.468   2.187   3.310   1   0   0
Rwanda              -1.617   10.082    8.465   6.174   7.791   1   0   0
Saudi Arabia        -0.875   14.469   13.594   2.794   3.669   1   1   0
Senegal             -0.768   12.170   11.402   4.343   5.110   1   0   0
Serbia               0.929   11.415   12.344   4.593   3.664   0   0
Sierra Leone        -0.841   11.186   10.345   4.418   5.259   1   0   1
Singapore            1.883    6.358    8.241   9.103   7.220   0   0   1
Slovakia             0.585   10.827   11.412   4.693   4.108   1   0   0
Slovenia             0.971    9.893   10.865   4.642   3.670   1   0   0
Somalia             -1.240   13.368   12.128   2.853   4.093   0   0   0
South Africa        -0.132   14.017   13.885   3.805   3.936   1   1   1
South Korea          1.312   11.456   12.768   6.261   4.950   1   1   0
Spain                1.795   13.109   14.903   4.464   2.670   1   1   0
Sri Lanka            0.582   11.077   11.659   5.758   5.177   1   1   0
Sudan               -1.476   14.735   13.259   3.046   4.522   1   0   0
Suriname             0.294   11.888   12.183   1.385   1.091   0   0


                                         4
Swaziland              -0.151    9.757    9.606   4.315   4.466   1   0   1
Sweden                  0.659   12.927   13.586   3.151   2.493   1   1   0
Switzerland            0.091    10.554   10.645   5.263   5.172   1   1   0
Syria                   0.934   12.134   13.068   4.591   3.657   0   0   0
Taiwan                  0.799   10.489   11.288   6.470   5.671   0   0
Tajikistan             -1.844   11.809    9.965   4.104   5.948   1   0   0
Tanzania               -0.720   13.684   12.964   4.059   4.779   1   0   0
Thailand                0.133   13.140   13.274   4.894   4.761   1   1   0
Timor-Leste            -0.149    9.643    9.494   4.432   4.581   1   0   0
Togo                   -0.824   10.996   10.171   4.566   5.390   1   0   1
Trinidad and Tobago     1.091    8.488    9.578   5.583   4.493   1   1   1
Tunisia                1.177    11.957   13.134   4.262   3.085   1   1   0
Turkey                 1.094    13.551   14.645   4.608   3.514   1   1   0
Turkmenistan           -1.383   13.041   11.658   2.471   3.854   1   0   0
Uganda                 -1.331   12.207   10.875   5.235   6.566   1   0   0
Ukraine                 1.078   13.277   14.355   4.336   3.257   1   0   0
United Arab Emirates   -0.524   11.182   10.658   4.831   5.356   1   0   0
United Kingdom          2.270   12.362   14.633   5.621   3.350   1   0   0
United States           0.448   16.013   16.461   3.568   3.120   1   1   1
Uruguay                 1.300   12.073   13.373   3.004   1.704   1   1   1
Uzbekistan             -1.483   12.947   11.464   4.248   5.731   1   0   0
Venezuela               0.121   13.712   13.833   3.530   3.409   1   1   1
Vietnam                 0.337   12.692   13.029   5.657   5.319   1   1   0
Yemen                  -1.512   13.021   11.509   4.083   5.595   1   1   0
Zambia                 -1.222   13.518   12.296   3.139   4.361   1   0   1
Zimbabwe               -0.989   12.869   11.880   3.688   4.677   1   0   0




                                            5
Table B.2. Variance Decomposition, excluding countries with Native<80.

A. Using Conventional Population Density

    (1 - ) var(ln(y )) (1 - )2 var(ln(Bc )) (1 - )2 var(ln(densityc )) -2(1 - )2 cov (ln(Bc ), ln(densityc ))
      1/4    1.614           1.751                    0.080                           -0.217
      1/3    1.614           1.833                    0.142                           -0.361


B. Using Quality Adjusted Population Density

    (1 - ) var(ln(y )) (1 - )2 var(ln(Bc )) (1 - )2 var(ln(QAP Dc )) -2(1 - )2 cov (ln(Bc ), ln(densityc ))
      1/4    1.614           1.269                    0.094                         0.251
      1/3    1.614           1.196                    0.168                         0.250




                                                       6
Figure A.1. Population Distributions by Grid Square Worldwide




                                             7
Figure A.2. Predicted Values

A. Poisson Fit Across Datasets




                                 8
B. Log-linear Fit Across Datasets




                                    9
