                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DID U.S. POLITICIANS EXPECT THE CHINA SHOCK?

                                      Matilde Bombardini
                                          Bingjing Li
                                       Francesco Trebbi

                                      Working Paper 28073
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28073


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We would like to thank seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Johns Hopkins, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics Summer Trade Workshop, the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors and the U.S. Census Bureau. Leopoldo Gutierre provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matilde Bombardini, Bingjing Li, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did U.S. Politicians Expect the China Shock?
Matilde Bombardini, Bingjing Li, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 28073
November 2020
JEL No. F13,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

In the two decades straddling China's WTO accession, the China Shock, i.e. the rapid trade
integration of China in the early 2000's, has had a profound economic impact across U.S. regions.
It is now both an internationally litigated issue and the casus belli for a global trade war. Were its
consequences unexpected?Did U.S. politicians have imperfect information about the extent of
China Shock's repercussions in their district at the time when they voted on China's Normal Trade
Relations status? Or did they have accurate expectations, yet placed a relatively low weight on
the subconstituencies that ended up being adversely affected? Information sets, expectations, and
preferences of politicians are fundamental, but unobserved determinants of their policy choices.
We apply a moment inequality approach designed to deliver unbiased estimates under weak
informational assumptions on the information sets of members of Congress. This methodology
offers a robust way to test hypotheses about the expectations of politicians at the time of their
vote. Employing repeated roll call votes in the U.S. House of Representatives on China's Normal
Trade Relations status, we formally test what information politicians had at the time of their
decision and consistently estimate the weights that constituent interests, ideology, and other
factors had in congressional votes. We show how assuming perfect foresight of the shocks biases
the role of constituent interests and how standard proxies to modeling politician's expectations
bias the estimation. We cannot reject that politicians could predict the initial China Shock in the
early 1990's, but not around 2000, when China started entering new sectors, and find a moderate
role of constituent interests, compared to ideology. Overall, U.S. legislators appear to have had
accurate information on the China Shock, but did not place substantial weight on its adverse
consequences.

Matilde Bombardini                                     Francesco Trebbi
Business & Public Policy Group                         Haas School of Business
Haas School of Business                                University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                     2220 Piedmont Ave
2220 Piedmont Ave                                      Berkeley, CA 94720
Berkeley, CA 94720                                     and CIFAR
and CIFAR and RCEA                                     and also NBER
and also NBER                                          ftrebbi@berkeley.edu
mbombardini@haas.berkeley.edu

Bingjing Li
National University of Singapore
Department of Economics
Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
AS2 #04-41, 1 Arts Link, Singapore 117570
Singapore
bingjing.crystal@gmail.com
1         Introduction
The China Shock, the large surge in imports from China that started in the 1990's and that has
turned China into one of the U.S. main trading partners, has received broad attention in academia
and policy making. Although early research by Autor et al. (2013, 2016) and Pierce and Schott
(2016) focused mainly of its employment effects, a large literature has expanded the analysis to
health, social, and political outcomes of the shock.1 While in hindsight China's entry in the
U.S. market may seem like a preordained outcome, in a series of roll call votes during the 1990's
members of Congress were faced with the choice of allowing China to maintain its Normal Trade
Relations (NTR) and ultimately assigning China Permanent NTR status.
        In this paper we ask to what degree U.S. politicians were informed about the consequences of
the China Shock for their voters and how much the expected impact on their constituents affected
their support in favor or against China's NTR status.2 These two questions are intrinsically related
and point to the difficulty of modeling forward-looking expectations and decisions by policy makers
in a context where these choices depend on consequences that are not known at the time of the
vote. We present a model and an estimation strategy of the decisions and expectations of law
makers. In this, we depart from the empirical political economy literature on legislative voting
(Poole and Rosenthal, 1997; Heckman and Snyder, 1997; Clinton et al., 2004; Canen et al., 2020)
and extend it in a distinct direction, as a formal analysis of law makers' information sets and
expectations does not typically figure in standard empirical models of voting.
        To consolidate our intuition, consider the following. A naive approach to estimating the im-
portance of constituent interests may be the replacement of the politician's expectations of the
China Shock with their realized values. However, assuming that politicians are perfectly informed
about future shocks when they are not, necessarily implies a downward bias in the coefficient
that measures the preference weight placed on constituent interests within a discrete choice vot-
ing model. This is due to an intuitive error-in-variables argument (i.e. the mechanical negative
covariance between the expectational error and the realized future value of the shock). Without
correction, a small coefficient may be interpreted as low responsiveness of politicians to subcon-
stituents' fortunes, possibly indicating a political accountability problem (Kalt and Zupan, 1984,
1990). In reality, a small coefficient may be as well the result of assuming that politicians are
better informed than they truly are. Yet, this rather points to a limited expertise or insufficient
    1
     Among the others, see Greenland and Lopresti (2016), Feler and Senses (2017), Autor et al. (2019), Greenland
et al. (2019), Autor et al. (2019) and Autor et al. (2020a).
   2
     The role of electoral constituencies and subconstituencies in driving the behavior of members of Congress has
played a central role in the analysis of policy support in Washington at least since Fenno (1978); Peltzman (1984).
See also Mian et al. (2010, 2014) for more recent applications.


                                                        1
information acquisition of legislators (Krehbiel, 1992). Because these interpretations have distinct
policy implications and they call for different remedies, it seems relevant to be able to distinguish
between them.
       To address the estimation challenge, we link the political economy literature to a separate
strand of the international trade literature. The novel moment inequality methodology of Dickstein
and Morales (2018), developed in the context of the decision of firms to export to foreign markets,
allows us to consistently operate within an expectational environment where what belongs to the
information set of the decision maker is only partially observed. That is, this moment inequality
approach only requires the econometrician to know a subset of the information available to the
politician at the time of his or her vote for consistent estimation of parameters ­ a much less
demanding restriction. This approach turns out to be particularly informative in our context. It
allows us to estimate a voting model under general assumptions about the politician's information
set and expectations, and therefore to answer the question of how much politicians cared about
the China Shock in the first place.
       Naturally, economic consequences on their voters were not the only considerations affecting
individual law makers' support for NTR and our model accommodates these features.3 It is
generally believed that several members of Congress voted to withhold NTR status in order to
affect China's position on human rights, as the series of yearly roll call votes on China's NTR
status between 1990 and 2001 started after the Tiananmen Square events of 1989. We therefore
also allow the voting behavior to depend on the ideological position of the legislator and the
expected electoral cost of supporting China's NTR status, taking into consideration the district-
specific impact of China's continued and growing exports to the U.S.. Further, in the utility
function, ideology also captures the position of the legislator towards free trade policy, that is the
value the politician places on the collective gains from maintaining low import tariffs.
       We establish two main results. The first result is a moderate role of constituent interests.
An interquartile difference in the value of the the shock decreases the probability of voting in
favor of NTR for China by roughly 4 percentage points, while an analogous difference in ideology
creates a 15-20 percentage point increase in the probability of supporting NTR for China. In
our heterogeneity analysis, we show that constituent interests are more important for Democrats
than for Republicans and for politicians that were elected with small vote margins (a margin of
responsiveness supported by other studies, see discussion in Mian et al. 2010; Ladewig 2010).
       The second main result of our analysis is that politicians possessed a significant amount of
   3
    There is a vast literature discussing pure economic models of voting where electoral constituents (Peltzman,
1984) or subconstitutents matter for roll call voting in Congress versus ideology of members of Congress (Kalt and
Zupan, 1984, 1990; Levitt, 1996). For a recent review see (Mian et al., 2014).


                                                        2
knowledge about the future China Shock. In some years we cannot reject that they perfectly
forecasted the shock that would hit their district in the next five years. More precisely, for all
years from 1990 to 2001 we cannot reject that politicians had, at least, enough information to
forecast 55 percent of the variation in the China Shock. Perhaps surprisingly, our findings imply
that knowledge decreases over the 1990's, a result that is plausible given that China's comparative
advantage shifted substantially during the late 1990's and early 2000's. Comparing legislators
across parties, we find that Democrats were systematically more informed than Republicans, with
the exception of the early 1990's, a period when they are both equally informed. We also present
several robustness exercises for our approach, including a comparison of the NTR voting for
China to the NTR voting for the case of Vietnam, showing how the moment inequality approach
highlights similar patterns in information sets and preferences.
      Finally, we employ the estimated model to perform counterfactual exercises in which we give
politicians perfect information about the upcoming shocks and calculate the change in voting
behavior that would have resulted from the additional information. We find that overall support for
China's NTR status would not have changed substantially in the presence of perfect information.
      In essence, to the question in the title "Did U.S. politicians expect the China Shock?", our
answer is "Yes, but they did not give it substantial weight." Counterfactual simulations in section
6.2, where such weight is increased for all lawmakers in our sample for given baseline information,
show that pro-China legislation would have been overturned.
      One important premise to the question we are posing is the assumption that the electorate
is generally attuned to trade policy positions of their representatives. It would otherwise be
unclear why politicians would care about the reaction of voters. While it is implausible to assume
that voters have a complete command of specific trade policy measures, a number of papers
have documented the impact of the China shock and the recent trade war on electoral outcomes.
Autor et al. (2020b) find that districts more affected by the China shock saw an increase in
Fox News viewership and elected more conservative Republicans and, to a lesser extent, more
liberal Democrats, thus inducing more polarization.4 Another recent contribution by Che et al.
(2020) finds that the 2010's reaction to the China shock is due to the anti-trade turn taken
by the Republican party after the appearance of the Tea Party. The same paper finds that,
during the 2000's, the areas affected by the China shock voted more in favor of Democrats.
Blanchard et al. (2019) also document a significant electoral impact of the trade war on the vote
share of Republicans in 2018. Interestingly, the negative effect on GOP vote share coming from
retaliatory tariffs imposed by U.S. trading partners is not mirrored by a positive effect due to
  4
      Colantone and Stanig (2018) document a similar result for Western European countries.



                                                        3
the protection offered by import tariffs. In sum, these recent papers offer a clear justification for
making constituent interests a major component of the decision to vote on an important trade
policy measure, like maintaining and expanding China's Normal Trade Relations status.5
       This paper contributes directly to the literature on Congressional voting, in particular on trade
policy. An example is Baldwin and Magee (2000), which estimates the importance of constituent
interests and campaign contributions from business and labor groups in three trade bill votes in the
1990's. Relative to Baldwin and Magee (2000), we sharpen the estimation of the role of constituent
interests by employing a more precise measure of how constituents were impacted by the policy, but
mostly by applying a new econometric methodology to expectations of politicians. A more recent
paper by Feigenbaum and Hall (2015) studies the impact of the China Shock on congressional
voting on trade bills in general and finds that congressmen in districts more negatively affected
are less likely to vote in favor of trade promoting bills, as classified by the Cato Institute, a think-
tank in Washington DC. Differently from Feigenbaum and Hall (2015) retrospective view, we take a
prospective angle in modeling voting behavior, where law makers are deciding to vote based on the
future electoral consequences of their decision. In the broader literature on the political economy
of trade policy, Rodrik (1995) offers a more conceptual framework and depicts trade policy as
emerging from demand (interest groups, grassroots, etc) and supply (government) factors. This
paper's contribution sheds light on the individual behavior of legislators that constitutes a crucial
element of the policy "supply side".
       Beyond the trade policy literature, this paper speaks to the established empirical literature
focused on modeling voting in legislatures. The elements of this vast scholarship that are closer
to our paper span political economy and political science (Poole and Rosenthal, 1984; Levitt,
1996; Heckman and Snyder, 1997; Poole and Rosenthal, 1997; Jenkins, 2000; Clinton et al., 2004;
McCarty et al., 2006; Canen et al., 2020). Modeling prospective behavior of legislators does
figure in this strand of research, as it is often postulated that a representative politician acts
by "determining her roll-call vote choice based on which legislative options will maximize her
future utility" (Ladewig, 2010). Stimson et al. (1995) argue that in congressional voting "elected
politicians. . . sense the mood of the moment, assess its trends, and anticipate its consequences for
future elections". However, expectations and information sets of lawmakers are rarely explicitly
modeled as part of the empirical approach. The more complex exercise of assessing whether a
politician may not be responding to prospective constituent conditions in her or his vote because
of limited information or because of policy preferences appears unexplored. We contribute to this
   5
     A recent paper by Fajgelbaum et al. (2020) points to the importance of constituent interests in the structure
of tariffs in the Trade War the US started in 2018. U.S. import tariffs are such that marginal counties (those with
a Republican vote share of around 50 percent) receive the highest level of protection.


                                                        4
by showing how this moment inequality approach provides a useful stepping stone in estimating
prospective behavior of law makers.
        Less directly, our application offers an alternative and complementary view to the empirical
literature focused on modeling the expectations of policy makers. This analysis has traditionally
found important applications in Macroeconomics (Primiceri, 2006; Sargent et al., 2006), and in
this sense, the paper connects to a broader set of questions than congressional voting alone. Our
estimates also speak to the modeling of government preferences, a key area of political economy.6
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 builds a baseline model of probabilistic
voting useful for rationalizing the data. Section 3 lays out the estimation methodology including
appropriate model specification tests, while 4 describes the data on roll call votes and the China
Shock. Section 5 reports estimation results and the following section presents counterfactual
analysis based on our baseline estimates. Section 7 concludes.




2         Empirical model
This section presents a simple model of probabilistic voting for members of Congress. Indicate a
congressional cycle with t = 1, 2, ...., T . Each period a single bill focused on a main policy issue
is introduced ­ in this application the normalization of trade relations with China. As previously
discussed, such bills were typically presented to the U.S. legislative branch and voted upon once
per congressional cycle, so that t may equivalently indicate time and bill number.
        Let us indicate with xt  R a policy position favorable to trade normalization, so that a
Yes vote will indicate a vote for xt . Consequently, one interprets a No vote as a vote against
normal trade relations, qt  R. This notation allows for the two positions to be affected by some
nuance over time and neither position is assumed to be exactly constant in time. In the empirical
analysis we will simply make sure that a Yes vote will be consistently labeled to the support for
the alternative xt .
        Indicate by i = 1, ..., N individual legislators, where N is large.7 We will assume that individ-
ual i's preferences are described by a random utility framework. We also posit a spatial voting
environment for the members of Congress. Spatial voting is a successful and informative modeling
approach to the description of congressional behavior and it has found substantial support in the
literature (Poole and Rosenthal 1997; Heckman and Snyder 1997; Clinton et al. 2004; McCarty
    6
    For early applications, see Alesina (1988); Alesina and Tabellini (1990); Drazen and Masson (1994).
    7
    What follows can be applied to each chamber independently at the cost of omitting interactions between the
two chambers, such as resolutions and conferences. N =435 for the House and N = 100 for the Senate.


                                                      5
et al. 2006; Bateman et al. 2017).
       For simplicity of exposition (relaxed in the empirical application later), the deterministic com-
ponent of the politician's utility is assumed to depend on: (i) the distance of the bill from his/her
ideological position i ; (ii) an electoral motive, summarized by his/her expected future electoral
support Vi,t+1 (for example, due to the employment consequences of i's voting behavior from the
perspective of his/her constituents).
       Concerning (i), political ideology i  R is a unidimensional and fixed characteristic of i. The
assumption of unidimensionality is appropriate in the time period under analysis (see McCarty
et al. 2006). The assumption of constant policy preferences has been validated repeatedly in the
literature on Congress (Moskowitz et al. 2017 for a discussion). We use the ideological positions
i from DW-Nominate first dimension scores (Poole and Rosenthal, 1997).8 This follows a com-
mon approach in modeling congressional voting when the explicit estimation of such preference
parameters is peripheral to the main empirical analysis like in this case (e.g., Mian et al. 2010,
2014).9
       Concerning (ii), let us indicate by Si,t a proxy for the degree of exposure of the local labor
market in the district represented by i at time t to increasing imports from China (the China
Shock as presented in Autor et al. 2016). Assume the potential electoral impact of the China
Shock in the district represented by politician i at time t + 1 is defined by:

                                            Vi,t+1 = ht (dt , Si,t+1 ) + ei,t+1 ,

where dt is the voting decision made by the politician, and

             E [ei,t+1 |dt , Si,t+1 , Ii,t ] = 0
                                            0   1
                        ht (dt , Si,t+1 ) = t + t Si,t+1 ×1 {dt = vote for xt }                                (1)
                                               2
                                              +t Si,t+1 × 1 {dt = vote for qt }
                                           0   2          1   2
                                         = t + t Si,t+1 + t - t Si,t+1 × 1 {dt = vote for xt }

where1 {.} is an indicator function and Ii,t is the information set of politician i at t. Note that the
function ht (.) introduces both a direct effect of the China Shock on electoral support independently
of i's vote and a component that depends on the interpretation by the voters of their representative
i's decision. These electoral effects are allowed to vary over time. Note further that we introduce
   8
    For further reference, see www.voteview.com
   9
    The reader interested in the estimation of i can find a detailed analysis in Canen et al. (2020) and references
therein. Due to lack of sample overlap the Canen et al. (2020) estimates cannot be used in our application.



                                                             6
the China Shock directly in the electoral outcome for politician i, but such effect can be interpreted
as the composite of two forces: the impact of the shock on employment outcomes and the impact
of employment outcomes on electoral results.10
       The expected utility for a politician i of taking decision dt given information set Ii,t is:

                         U (i,t , dt ; i , Ii,t )
                                              
                                              i,t,x       if dt = vote for xt
                       = u(dt ; i , Ii,t ) +
                                                        if dt = vote for qt
                                                  i,t,q
                                                                          
                                                                          i,t,x        if dt = vote for xt
                       = u ( dt - i             ~
                                            ) +  E [Vi,t+1 |dt , Ii,t ] +                                    ,
                                                                                       if dt = vote for qt
                                                                               i,t,q


where u ( . ) indicates an ideological loss that is function of the distance of the policy from the
ideal point of i. The term Vi,t+1 indicates the future electoral outcome for the district represented
                                                                                     2
by i. We assume a quadratic loss function u(.) and i.i.d. Gaussian term i,t,d  N (0,   ). This
                                                           2
implies the useful convolution i,t = i,t,q - i,t,x  N (0, 2  ). A standard identification requirement
in discrete choice problems with Gaussian shocks (e.g. in probit) further requires the normalization
 2
2  = 1, which we impose.
       We define the variable Yi,t as an indicator function that is equal to 1 when legislator i decides
to vote Yes on xt and 0 when the legislator votes in favor of qt :

         Yi,t = 1{U (i,t , xt ; i , Ii,t ) > U (i,t , qt ; i , Ii,t )}                                                     (2)
                     1                                         ~ (E [Vi,t+1 |xt , Ii,t ] - E [Vi,t+1 |qt , Ii,t ])  it .
              = 1 - (xt - i )2 - (qt - i )2 + 
                     2

We can write the probability of Yi,t = 1 as:

                                   P r(Yi,t = 1|Ii ,t )
                                                     1
                                                    -2 (xt - i )2 - (qt - i )2
                                   =                                                                ,                      (3)
                                             +~ (E [Vi,t+1 |xt , Ii,t ] - E [Vi,t+1 |qt , Ii,t ])

  10
     When considering the economic effects of trade with China, it may be natural to consider the role of exports,
and not only imports. Recent work by Feenstra et al. (2019) shows that the exports-led increase in the demand
for labor has almost matched the negative employment effects of the China Shock. An important observation in
this regard is that Feenstra et al. (2019) consider U.S. exports not only to China, but to all its trading partners.
When considering only China as a destination market, exports and export growth were markedly smaller and did
not have as large a positive effect on employment, as initially shown in Autor et al. (2013). Since NTR votes did
not have obvious implications for the U.S. worldwide export prospects, we exclude exports from our analysis of
voting decisions.


                                                                 7
where  is the standard normal cumulative density function and E [Vi,t+1 |xt , Ii,t ]-E [Vi,t+1 |qt , Ii,t ] is
the expected net loss (or net gain) of electoral support due to the China Shock in the constituency
represented by politician i in the future electoral cycle, given the information available to i at
t. This implies that the probability of voting Yes depends on the expectations of the electoral
consequences of voting Yes relative to voting No, which are unobserved by the econometrician.
The higher is the expected electoral gain of voting Yes, the higher the likelihood of voting Yes.
      It follows from (1) that:

                                                                         1   2
                     E [Vi,t+1 |xt , Ii,t ] - E [Vi,t+1 |qt , Ii,t ] =   t - t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] .

Setting t = ~ ( 1 -  2 ) and simplifying the relative loss function - 1 (xt - i )2 - (qt - i )2 as
               t    t                                                 2
                                        1 2
at i + bt , where at = xt - qt and bt = 2 (qt - x2
                                                 t ), we can further rewrite (2) and (3), respectively,
as:

                                         Yi,t = 1{at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]  i,t },                 (4)
                        P r(Yi,t = 1|Ii,t ) =  (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]) .                        (5)

A key parameter is t , which gauges the weight in the politician's vote choice of his/her expectations
about the future China Shock, E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. We discuss two distinct approaches to the estimation
of this and the other parameters in the next section.




3       Expectations and information set of politicians: Esti-
        mation
A key contribution of this paper is the analysis of the information set available to politicians to
forecast the labor market effects of the China Shock at the time of a roll call vote. There are two
fundamentally different approaches, which in turn hinge on the answer to the following question:
is the politician's information set Ii,t known to the econometrician? When the answer is in the
affirmative, then estimation can be performed by maximum likelihood or method of moments.
When the econometrician knows only a subset of the information available to politicians, then one
can adopt a moment inequality estimator. We discuss these two approaches in turn, but we first
start with describing the three benchmark information sets that we will consider throughout the
paper:


                                                             8
(i) Minimal Information: the politician knows his own ideological position i , but the only infor-
        mation a politician has about the economic impact of the China Shock is the current share
        of population employed in manufacturing in district i, ShareM f gi,t ;

(ii) Baseline Information: the politician has access to the minimal information set, plus the
        current period China Shock Si,t ;

(iii) Perfect Foresight: the politician has perfect foresight of the labor market consequences of
        the China Shock, so that E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] = Si,t+1 .



3.1      Politician's information set fully known to the econometrician:
         MLE
When the econometrician knows the content of the politician's information set, then the parameter
vector t = {xt , qt , t } can be estimated by maximum likelihood for each cycle. Based on expression
(5) the log-likelihood function takes the form:

                                ln L t | {Yi,t , i , Ii,t }N
                                                           i=1                                      (6)
                                 N
                            =         Yi,t ln [ (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])]
                                i=1
                                + (1 - Yi,t ) ln [1 -  (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])] .

Maximizing (6) requires specifying the information set Ii,t . In the case of perfect foresight, (6)
is maximized after replacing E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] with Si,t+1 . In the case of minimal information set, the
expectation of the China Shock is derived as the predicted value of the following OLS regression:
Si,t+1 =0 + 1 i + 2 ShareM f gi,t + i,t+1 .11 For the baseline information set, we can perform a
similar two-step procedure, albeit with an OLS regression that contains a larger set of regressors,
reflecting a richer knowledge by the politician.
      The key assumption of the maximum likelihood approach is that we, as econometricians, are
confident about what enters the politician's information set. When one misspecifies the politician's
information set, the parameter estimates t will be biased. The direction of the bias cannot be
characterized in general, so for our case we resort to Monte Carlo simulations to illustrate the
problem in Appendix C. One specific instance lends itself to an intuitive explanation. When
the econometrician incorrectly assumes that the politician has perfect foresight, the bias that
 11
      See Manski (1991) and Ahn and Manski (1993).


                                                           9
arises is similar to the case of error in variables in a linear regression setting. The intuition is that
E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] is measured with error when we replace it with Si,t+1 and that error is, by assumption
of rational expectations, uncorrelated with E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. Similarly to a linear regression setting,
this will lead to an attenuation bias in the estimated coefficient t . Assume that the true t is
negative and consider two representatives in districts A and B, who form their expectations based
only on a minimal information set, which includes the manufacturing share in the region. Assume
that district A and B have similar manufacturing shares, but different industrial composition.
Hence, the two representatives predict a similar import shock, but in reality district A is much
more severely affected than district B. We, the econometricians, assume that these representatives
are instead very well informed about the imminent import increases. Because A and B expect a
similar impact, they vote similarly on the bill. The econometrician, however, observing a similar
voting behavior between politicians A and B, concludes that  is smaller (in absolute value) and
that the politicians place little weight on the import shock. The bias can be large (around 40%)
under realistic data configurations, as shown in Appendix C.



3.2    Politician's information set partially known to the econometrician:
       Moment inequality approach
In the previous section we have shown that the maximum likelihood approach relies on an accurate
knowledge by the econometrician of the information set possessed by the politician. The alternative
estimation method proposed by Dickstein and Morales (2018), based on moment inequalities,
does not require full knowledge of Ii,t , but rather of a subset of variables Zi,t  Ii,t . That
is, the politician may know more than Zi,t in forming his/her forecast, but she knows at least
the covariates Zi,t . Assuming only partial knowledge of Ii,t comes at the cost of less precise
identification. We will not be able to point identify the elements of the parameter vector t ,
but only to set identify them. Whether these sets are sufficiently tight to be informative will be
carefully discussed in the results section.
   The second important goal of our analysis is to ascertain the extent of the information set
of legislators. This, in turn, involves a formal analysis of which subset of variables a politician
considers at the time of his/her vote through an application of specification selection tests proposed
by Bugni et al. (2015). Being able to reject that certain variables are used in the politician's forecast
allows us to learn about the process of decision making of legislators in this particular setting:
what they knew and considered relevant at the time of their vote. In this exercise the voting
model and data are kept constant, but the subset of variables assumed part of the information set

                                                   10
is varied.
       We will allow politicians to have time varying information sets and we will formally test whether
certain groups of legislators have identical information sets or not. For instance, we assess whether
members of higher levels of chamber seniority have broader information sets than lower seniority
members, or whether members of opposing parties share the same information set. Questions of
asymmetry of information sets across party lines are increasingly common in the political economy
literature focused on polarization12 and our application offers a formal approach to this problem
for members of Congress.
       A final question that the approach allows us to answer is whether, had politicians had a more
complete information set, their votes for trade normalization with China would have been different.
These counterfactuals are simulated within the same structure of expectations and information
we just described.
       Throughout, we maintain the assumption of rational expectations on the part of politicians,
that is the expectational error i,t+1 = Si,t+1 - E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] has mean zero, E [i,t+1 |Ii,t ] = 0
and is uncorrelated with E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. This means that politicians do not systematically skew
their prediction or ignore elements of their information set which would systematically help in
forecasting Si,t+1 . We follow Dickstein and Morales (2018) in generating two sets of moment
inequalities that identify the possible values that the parameters of interest can take: Odd-based
moment inequalities and Revealed Preference moment inequalities.13 In the following subsection
we go through the main steps of the derivation of the inequalities to illustrate the basic intuition.



3.2.1       Odds-based moment inequalities

We use the definition in (4) to obtain:

                                1{at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t  0} - Yi,t = 0.             (7)

This expression depends on the unobserved shock realization i,t and Ii,t . Therefore, we take
the expectation of (7) conditional on Ii,t and manipulate the expression to obtain the following
equality:
                                           (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])
                        E (1 - Yi,t )                                          - Yi,t Ii,t = 0      (8)
                                        1 -  (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])
  12
       See Alesina et al. (2020).
  13
       Specifically, see their Appendix C for additional details.




                                                            11
This equality still depends on the expectation E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ], which in turn depends on the true
information set Ii,t , an object that we do not observe. However, under the assumption that the
                                                                                                       
expectational error Si,t+1 - E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] has mean zero and from the property that               1-
                                                                                                            is convex,
one can replace E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] with Si,t+1 - i,t+1 and apply Jensen's inequality to derive the following
inequality:
                                             (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
                          E (1 - Yi,t )                                - Yi,t Ii,t  0                               (9)
                                          1 -  (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
Consider now a subset of the information set Zi,t  Ii,t . Because Zi,t is a subset of Ii,t , the
distribution of Zi,t conditional on Ii,t is degenerate. This is to say that once Ii,t is known, then
Zi,t conditional on Ii,t is deterministic.
       Starting from (8) and applying the Law of Iterated Expectations, we can derive the following
equality:14
                                         (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])
                      E (1 - Yi,t )                                          - Yi,t Zi,t = 0
                                      1 -  (at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])
which, by the same arguments employed to obtain (9), yields the inequality:

                       E mob
                          l Zi,t         0                                                                        (10)
                                                            (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
                                  mob
                                   l  = (1 - Yi,t )                                   - Yi,t
                                                         1 -  (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )

Notice that (10) is increasing in t , so this condition identifies a lower bound for this parameter.
We use the subscripts l, u to indicate the lower bound and upper bound inequalities.
       Following a similar logic, one can derive a moment condition that further bounds the parame-
ters of interest t :



                       E mob
                          u Zi,t          0                                                                       (11)
                                                 1 -  (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
                                  mob
                                   u  = Yi,t                                  - (1 - Yi,t )
                                                    (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )

Notice that mob
             u is decreasing in t and therefore moment inequality (11) identifies an upper bound
for this parameter.

  14
     Equation (8), which is of the form E [ X | I ] = 0, can be rewritten as Ez [ Ex [ X | Z ]| I ] =
 z
   Ex [ X | z ] fz ( z | I ) dz = 0. The last equality follows from the fact that, conditional on I , Z has a degenerate
distribution, i.e. fz ( z | I ) = 1.




                                                          12
3.2.2    Revealed preference moment inequalities

The second set of moment inequalities derives from the revealed preference argument that a
politician will vote Yes if and only if the benefit from doing so is positive, hence:

                                 Yi,t [at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t ]  0                            (12)

Because, again, i,t is unobserved, we take the expectation of (12), conditional on i and Ii,t and
obtain the following inequality:

                                 Yi,t [at i + bt + t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]] + i,t  0                             (13)

                                                   (a  +b + E[S       |I   ])
where i,t = -E [ Yi,t i,t | Ii,t ] = (1 - Yi,t ) 1-(tatii +tbt +tt E[i,t +1 i,t
                                                                     Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])
                                                                                     , and  is the standard normal
probability density function. Once again the expression in inequality (13) contains the unobserved
                                          
expectation E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. Because   1-
                                              is convex, we can apply Jensen's inequality to replace the
expectation with Si,t+1 , and then take the expectation conditional on Zi,t , a subset of Ii,t . The
resulting inequality will be weaker than (13) and is given by:

           E [ mrp
                l | Zi,t ]  0                                                                                (14)
                                                                              (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
                    mrp
                     l  = Yi,t [at i + bt + t Si,t+1 ] + (1 - Yi,t )
                                                                           1 -  (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )

Starting from another revealed preference inequality:

                              (1 - Yi,t ) [i,t - at i - bt - t E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]]  0,

we can obtain a second revealed-preference moment inequality in a similar manner:

            E [ mrp
                 u | Zi,t ]  0                                                                               (15)
                                                                                 (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )
                     mrp
                      u  = - (1 - Yi,t ) [at i + bt + t Si,t+1 ] + Yi,t                                  .
                                                                                 (at i + bt + t Si,t+1 )

The moment inequalities defined by (10), (11), (14) and (15) are conditional on values of the vectors
Zi,t , which we allow to contain different variables, characterizing different possible information
sets possessed by politicians. The following theorem indicates that the true parameter vector
t = {at , bt , t } is contained in the set of parameters that are in compliance with the odds-based
and revealed preference moment inequalities. Hence, the parameters of interest are partially



                                                        13
identified:15


Theorem 1. (Dickstein and Morales, 2018) At the true value of the parameter vector t =
{at , bt , t } the following four moment inequalities are satisfied:
                                            
                                             E mob u Zi,t      0
                                            
                                            E mob Zi,t
                                            
                                                               0
                                                   l
                                             E [ mrp
                                                  u | Zi,t ]   0
                                            
                                             E [ mrp
                                            
                                                  l | Zi,t ]   0
                                            


where Zi,t is the set of variables known by politician i at time t.



3.3       Estimation implementation
In this section we lay out the steps to construct confidence sets for the parameters of interest
{at , bt , t }. Conditional moments (10), (11), (14) and (15) cannot be directly employed for empir-
ical applications because conditioning on each possible value of Zi,t is computationally unfeasible.
The standard solution in the moment inequality literature, which we adopt, is to transform con-
ditional into unconditional moment inequalities, which can be directly employed in estimation.16
This is not innocuous in that information is lost in transitioning from conditional inequalities
to a relatively smaller set of unconditional inequalities. As a result, the parameters that satisfy
conditional moment inequalities may be a small subset of those that satisfy the unconditional
moments. Whether these larger confidence sets remain sufficiently informative is again an issue
to be reckoned with once we discuss our results.
       We collect the four moment inequalities (10), (11), (14) and (15) and we adopt the uncondi-
tional moment inequalities:                                      
                                          mob
                                           l        
                                                    
                                         mob
                                                                
                                           u
                                                                
                                       E mrp         × g (Zi,t )0                                          (16)
                                           l
                                                                
                                                    
                                          rp
                                          mu
                                                    

where the instrument function g (Zi,t ) is specified, e.g., for the baseline case of Zi,t = {i , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t },
  15
   See Appendix C in Dickstein and Morales (2018) for the proof of this result.
  16
   Starting from a moment inequality of the form E [m|Z ]  0, let us consider an instrument function g (Z ) > 0.
Multiplying the two yields g (Z ) E [m|Z ]  0 which implies E [g (Z ) m]  0 whenever g (Z ) is Z -measurable.


                                                      14
as follows:
              
                                   1 {i > med (i )} × (|i - med (i )|)a
              
                                   1 {i  med (i )} × (|i - med (i )|)a
              
               1 {ShareM f g > med (ShareM f g )} × (|ShareM f g - med (ShareM f g )|)a
              
                            it                  it                   it                it
  g (Zi,t ) =                                                                                a
               1 {ShareM f git  med (ShareM f git )} × (|ShareM f git - med (ShareM f git )|)
              
              
                                 1 {Sit > med (Sit )} × (|Sit - med (Sit )|)a
              
                                 1 {Sit  med (Sit )} × (|Sit - med (Sit )|)a
              


for a  {0, 1}. Take for example the case of a = 0. Intuitively, instead of conditioning on all the
possible values of Si,t this approach calculates the moment inequalities separately for values of Si,t
above and below the median. For the baseline information case, we have 6 × 2 × 4 = 48 moment
inequalities, which we use to construct confidence sets, as explained in section 5. The choice of the
instrument functions does not appear to drive our results and we probed it in several robustness
checks. For instance, our results are robust to only limiting the analysis to the subset of g (Zi,t )
under a = 0, cutting the number of moment inequalities that we use in half.17



3.4        Further robustness of the methodology
A relevant issue pertinent to our application is whether politicians are uncertain about the impact
of future import shock on future electoral support, and need to form expectations about it, as
well as the China Shock. This is an issue related to the uncertainty specific to the component
 1   2
(t - t ) in the model, to which we need to explore sensitivity in the construction of our estimator.
In Appendix B we clarify under which conditions we can allow this uncertainty and we reinterpret
the coefficients estimates in light of this modification.




4        Institutional background and data
The background for the series of roll call votes that we employ in this paper is the extension of
Normal Trade Relations to the People's Republic of China, after their suspension in 1951. NTR
status was restored in 1980 under Title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 and was dependent on the
presence of a bilateral trade agreement to be renewed every three years and on compliance with
  17
       For a complete discussion see Andrews and Shi (2013).



                                                        15
the Jackson-Vanik amendment on freedom of emigration, required for Non-Market Economies.18
China's NTR status would be renewed automatically every year upon the President recommen-
dation unless Congress disapproved by enacting a joint resolution. It is widely recognized that
these resolutions were spurred by humanitarian and foreign policy considerations following the
Tiananmen Square events of 1989 (Pregelj, 1998). Congress sought to provide incentives, through
withholding of NTR status, to the Chinese government to address issues of human rights. In this
effort, it clashed with the executive branch, a fact reflected in the several episodes in which the
resolutions to disapprove NTR passed in the House, but died in the Senate or were overturned by
a Presidential veto. In light of these considerations, it should be clear that we do not view the
threat to local economic interests as the only driver of the legislators' roll call votes, and ideological
considerations in the utility function of legislators account for this.



4.1       Roll call votes
The sample for our estimation includes individual legislator roll call votes for 12 House Joint
Resolutions that took place every year from 1990 to 2001, as listed in Table 1. Three of these
Joint Resolutions to disapprove NTR extension were passed by the House in the years 1990, 1991
and 1992, but not voted on or struck down in the Senate.19
       The website voteview.com provides the roll call votes, together with the ICPSR code for each
legislator, the congressional district, the Party, and the first two dimensions of the DW-Nominate
score, a multidimensional scaling application developed by Poole and Rosenthal (1997) and the
first dimension of which is our proxy for i .20 Instead of "Yea" and "Nay", we indicate all votes
as Pro and Against China (NTR) for ease of interpretation (a "Yea" vote in favor of disapproving
China's NTR is a vote against China).
       Figure 1 shows that support for NTR is not purely along party lines and changes over time.
Democrats are relatively more supportive of NTR in the middle of the sample period, while
Republicans become increasingly supportive of NTR over time. There is substantial switching
of positions within individual legislators as well. Figures 2 and 3 show, by party, how many
legislators switch position or maintain their vote relative to the previous year. On average, every
year 15 percent (17 percent) of Republican (Democratic) legislators change their position relative
  18
      See CRS Report for Congress Pregelj (2001) for further details.
  19
      Two House Resolutions, HR2212 and HR5318, in the 102nd Congress during the same period passed both in
the House and the Senate and were vetoed by President G.H.W. Bush.
   20
      voteview.com represents one of the most comprehensive and popular sources of measures of ideological positions
in American politics and is a standard reference in the political economy literature on Congress. See the Introduction
for references.


                                                         16
to the previous year. In sum, there is sufficient heterogeneity in positions across parties and within
legislators over time to justify that the changes in the electoral effects of the vote could play a role
beyond constant preferences and ideology of legislators.
       We also include in the data the voting outcomes of the bill HR 4444 in 2000 which would grant
China permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) conditional on China's accession to the WTO.
The results are stable regardless of the inclusion or exclusion of this bill.
       Note that the period 1990-1992 covers the final years of the George H.W. Bush administration.
The period 1993-1996 coincides with the first Bill Clinton administration and the the period 1997-
2001 covers the second Clinton administration and the first year of the George W. Bush presidency.
Given the important role played by the executive branch in the legislative evolution of China's
NTR status, this subdivision of the sample period is explored in our analysis, by allowing for
different parameters and expectations during each administration.



4.2       The China Shock
The exposure to the China Shock at the district level is generated from the import shocks in
different local labor markets nested within the district. We start with constructing the import
shocks at the level of commuting zones (CZs), which are clusters of adjoining counties characterized
by strong commuting ties and have been conceptualized as local labor markets in the literature
(Autor et al., 2013; Acemoglu et al., 2016). The shocks from different CZs are then aggregated to
congressional districts (CDs).



4.2.1      Exposure to import shock at the commuting zone level

Future supply shocks from China faced by the commuting zone j is constructed according to:

                                                              oth
                                                 Ljk,t     Mk,t  +1
                                  Sj,t+1 =                               .                               (17)
                                             k
                                                 Lj,t Yk,t + Mk,t - Xk,t

                     oth
In this expression, Mk,t +1 is the change in import of good k from China by eight other (non-U.S.)
high-income countries over 5 years in the future.21 It reflects the rising supply capacity of China
due to its economic reforms, and is arguably exogenous to the U.S. product-demand shocks from
the perspectives of the U.S. local economies (Autor et al., 2013; Acemoglu et al., 2016; Autor
  21
    The eight other high-income countries are Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain,
and Switzerland.


                                                     17
et al., 2020b). The future import growth is then normalized by the contemporaneous absorption
(U.S. industry output plus net imports, Yk,t + Mk,t - Xk,t ) at the industry level. Ljk,t /Lj,t denotes
the share of industry k in CZ j 's total employment in period t.
       The Bartik-style measure (17) summarizes the exposure of CZ j to China's future supply shocks
from the standpoint of t. Having a perfect foresight of (17) not only requires the information on
contemporaneous employment composition of the local labor market and domestic absorption of
different industries, but also knowledge on supply shocks from China 5 years in the future. In our
analysis, the future shocks correspond to the import supply growth over the period 1990-1995,
1991-1996, ..., 2001-2006, which overlaps with China's post-WTO-accession period when the U.S.
witnessed the most intense increase in import competition from China.
       While the congressional representatives may not have full knowledge of future import shocks
as in (17), they may use the information of the past shocks to form expectations. For the years
1993-2001, we construct import shock in the past 5 years analogously as follows:

                                                                        oth
                                                    Lik,t-5         Mk,t
                                Sj,t =                                              ,                        (18)
                                            k
                                                    Li,t-5 Yk,t-5 + Mk,t-5 - Xk,t-5

       oth
where Mk,t denotes the change in import of good k from China by eight other (non-U.S.)
high-income countries over the past 5 years.22
       The baseline measures (17) and (18) follow the specification in Acemoglu et al. (2016) and
Autor et al. (2020b), and can be derived from workhorse trade models with a gravity structure.
However, differently from the literature focusing the the impacts of contemporaneous trade shocks
on local economies, our study aims at evaluating the extent to which politicians foresaw the future
import shock from China in (17), and whether they acted on the relevant information when setting
China-specific trade policies.

  22
    Due to data constraints, for years 1990-1992, we use the 2-year-lagged variables to construct the past shocks.
To be specific, for t = 1990, 1991, 1992
                                                                        oth
                                                    Lik,t-2         Mk,t
                                   Si,t =                                           ,
                                                    Li,t-2 Yk,t-2 + Mk,t-2 - Xk,t-2
                                                k

            oth
where Mkt       denotes the change in import of good k from China by eight other (non-US) high-income countries
over the past 2 years. As is discussed below, we use the data from County Business Patterns (CBP) to construct
employment shares. For 1990-1992, calculating Lik,t-5 /Li,t-5 requires the 1985-1987 CBP data with industries
classified based on 1977 SIC codes. For the purpose of analysis, the data needs to be mapped to the 1987 SIC
codes. However, the crosswalk from 1977 SIC to 1987 SIC involves many splits of industries. As a result, the
concordance leads to a structural break in the employment measures for some localities over 1987-1988. For the
concern of systematic measurement errors, we don't use the CBP data prior to 1988 for the main analysis.



                                                              18
4.2.2    Trade, employment and output data

This subsection describes the data sources that we employ to construct the commuting-zone-level
measures (17) and (18).
    Data on bilateral trade flows over the period 1988-2006 for the 4-digit Standard International
Trade Classification (SITC) industries are obtained from UN Comtrade Database. We concord
these data to four-digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) industries.23 Following Autor
et al. (2013) and Acemoglu et al. (2016), we aggregate together a few four-digit industries to
ensure compatibility with the additional data on employment discussed below. Our final data
set contains 397 manufacturing industries. We complement the trade data by the output data
obtained from the NBER-CES data. All import, export and output amounts are inflated to 2007
US dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator.
    Information on industry employment structure by CZs over 1988-2001 is derived from the
County Business Patterns (CBP) data published by the US Census Bureau. The CBP tracks
employment, firm size distribution, and payroll by county and industry annually. To protect
confidentiality, employment for county-industry cells is sometimes reported as an interval instead
of exact count. We use the fixed-point imputation algorithm developed by Autor et al. (2013)
to derive employment for each county-industry cell. The county-level data is then aggregated to
commuting zones using the concordances provided by Autor et al. (2013).24



4.2.3    Exposure to import shocks at the congressional district level

Following Autor et al. (2020b), we map economic outcomes in CZs to CDs as follows. We start
with the geographic relationships between counties and congressional districts provided by the
Missouri Census Data Center (MCDC).25 Counties are sometimes split across different CDs, and
the MCDC concordance provides information on the distribution of the county population in each
CD. We then ascribe to each county-by-congressional district cell the CZ-level import shock that
  23
     The crosswalk that cross-matches the four-digit SITC (Rev.2) industries and the four-digit SIC (1987 version) is
constructed as follows. (1) We first map the four-digit SITC industries to the corresponding six-digit Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System (HS) products based on the concordance provided by UN WITS
(https://wits.worldbank.org/product concordance.html). (2) We then apply the crosswalk from Autor et al. (2013),
which assigns 6-digit HS products to 4-digit SIC industries. (3) Lastly, the four-digit SITC codes are cross-matched
with the four-digit SIC codes based on their relations with the six-digit HS codes.
  24
     Industry classifications in CBP changed periodically -- over 1988-1997, employment is classified using the
SIC (1987 version) codes, while employment thereafter is expressed according to the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS). Using the crosswalk in Autor et al. (2013), we correspond the post-1997 data to
the four-digit SIC industries.
  25
     http://mcdc.missouri.edu/applications/geocorr1990.html



                                                         19
corresponds to the county, and weight each cell by its share of population in the district. Lastly,
we aggregate the weighted shocks across cells to the CD level. By construction, if a district spans
multiple CZs, its exposure to China's rising import competition is the population-share-weighted
average of the import shocks in these CZs. Since congressional districts have more or less equal
population size, they have roughly the same weight in our analysis. In the empirical analysis, we
denote the future and past import shocks at the CD level by Si,t+1 and Si,t , respectively.
    During the sample period 1990-2001, the boundaries of county-by-congressional district cells
experienced a major change in 1993 but remained stable afterwards. Therefore, for 1990-1992, we
map the CZ-level import shocks to congressional districts as defined for the 102nd Congress. For
1993-2001, the mapping is based on the configuration of the 103rd Congress. This treatment does
not affect the consistency of our baseline analysis, because as is discussed below, we conduct the
estimation by periods based on presidential administrations, and none of the subsamples spans
over 1992-1993.
    Figure 4 shows the cross-district averages of past and future import shocks. The import
shocks are always positive throughout the sample period, but the future shocks move less in
tandem with the past shocks in the later years. For the moment inequality estimation discussed
below, we detrend the import shocks. The corresponding distributions reported in Table 2 reveal
a substantial heterogeneity in exposures across districts. For the periods 1997-2001, 1993-1996,
and 1990-1992, the interquartile ranges of future shock are 0.154, 0.078, and 0.143, respectively.




5     Results from congressional voting on trade relations with
      China

5.1    Estimation results
This section reports our main results. To benchmark our approach to more standard methods
using incorrect proxies for the information set of politicians, we start by reviewing estimates of a
voting model using a maximum likelihood approach.
    Table 3 shows that results substantially vary depending on the informational assumptions
made. An important parameter of interest is the weight placed by politicians on their affected
subconstituencies t . A reasonable prior for this parameter would be a negative utility weight, t <
0, placed on electoral groups adversely affected by the China Shock in the politician's congressional
district (ceteris paribus, the politician wishes to minimize these adverse effects). While occasionally


                                                  20
the parameter estimates for  are negative and sometimes of magnitude similar to those obtained
using the moment inequality approach, often the coefficients are economically insignificant and
not statistically different from zero. For example, for the period 1997-2001 the estimate for
 is 0.018, which is small in absolute value relative to consistent estimates obtained with the
moment inequality method. The risk of attenuation from misspecification of the information set
of politicians is therefore evident in the MLE case. To further consolidate the intuition we also
offer Monte Carlo evidence of the problem in Appendix C.
       We now proceed to the results of estimating of equation (5) using the three information sets
Zi,t : Minimal; Baseline; and Perfect Foresight. The 95% confidence sets that we report are built
through a grid search implementing the Generalized Moment Selection (GMS) method in Andrews
and Soares (2010) as detailed in Dickstein and Morales (2018). For each value of t we build a
modified method of moments (MMM) statistic, which tends to be large when, on average, the
moment inequalities are not satisfied at that value of the parameters. This is formally tested
by constructing the asymptotic distribution of the MMM statistic and rejecting t when the
MMM statistic is above the critical value corresponding to the 95th percentile of that distribution.
Incidentally, empty confidence sets instead have to be interpreted as highly significant rejection
(p-value < 0.05) of the corresponding information set. The steps to construct the 95% confidence
sets are detailed in Appendix D.
       Table 5 reports estimation results splitting the NTR votes by presidential administration and
for the full sample 1990-2001. The first period 1990-1992 covers the George H.W. Bush adminis-
tration, the second period 1993-1996 coincides with the first Clinton administration, and the third
period 1997-2001 covers the second Clinton administration.26 Focusing on sub-periods allows for
heterogeneity in information and flexibility of the parameters with respect to the behavior of exec-
utive branch/agenda setting ­ a more robust approach that we prefer. Table 5 presents estimates
for the parameters at , bt and t . We will mostly discuss results for the importance of constituency
interests  , but we will gauge its magnitude in relation to the role of ideology parameter a.
       Consider the 1997-2001 results first. Panel A reports estimation results under the assumption
that the politicians' information set includes at least the manufacturing share in their district and
their own ideology. Under this assumption we report a confidence set [-2.062, -0.137], so that all
values in the confidence set are negative, as we would expect if politicians are more likely to vote
against China's NTR status if they expect their constituency to be exposed to a larger shock. The
confidence set is quite similar under the assumption of baseline information, which includes also
  26
    As a robustness check, we drop the year 2001, which overlaps with George W. Bush's first year in office during
which the final vote took place but was remnants of the previous administration's efforts (Pregelj, 2001). The
results remain similar.


                                                       21
the current shock Si,t , [-1.670, -0.020]. Non-empty confidence sets include negative values for  ,
do not include zero, and are tight enough to be informative.
       The magnitude of the parameter  can be illustrated as follows. Considering two districts in
1997-2001, the probability of voting in favor of China's NTR status decreases by between 0.072
and 0.007 when the value of the expected China shock goes from its 25th percentile to its 75th
percentile.27 These numbers are 0.073 and 0.006 for 1993-1996, and 0.078 and 0.004 for 1990-
1992. This is a moderate effect, especially considering the role of ideology. If we perform the
analogous exercise, we find that an interquartile range shift in ideology calculated at the mean
expected China shock value produces an increase in the probability of voting in favor of China
of between 0.137 and 0.208 in 1997-2001 and between 0.190 and 0.359 in 1990-1992.28 In sum,
these comparisons allow us to conclude that the effect of ideology is much larger than the effect
of constituent interests. These results line up with common findings in the congressional voting
literature for most bills (as early as Kalt and Zupan (1984) and for a recent discussion see Poole
and Rosenthal (2017)).
    We will discuss differences in the parameters estimates between subsets of legislators after
introducing specification tests that allow us to gauge the information possessed by politicians.


5.2       Testing for different information sets
A fundamental first step in the analysis of politicians' decisions is to assess the exact extent of
their information sets at the moment of the vote. A valid statistical approach to this form of
specification test is presented in Bugni et al. (2015). The test proposed by Bugni et al. (2015)
allows us to reject the null hypothesis that there exists a value of t within the parameter space
that can rationalize the set of moment inequalities presented in section 3.3. Specifically, consider
                                  1        2
two alternative information sets Zi,t and Zi,t . Intuitively, suppose there is no value of the parameter
                                                            1
vector for which the set of moment inequalities hold given Zi,t , yet there are values of t within
                                                                               2
the parameter space that can rationalize the set of moment inequalities given Zi,t . Then one infers
      1                                2
that Zi,t      Ii,t and cannot reject Zi,t  Ii,t . The rejection of the null in this framework may
                                                                                          1
also indicate misspecification of the original model of decision, so simple rejection of Zi,t cannot
                                                                                                    2
exclude misspecification per se. What is crucial in this application is that the failure to reject Zi,t
eliminates this second interpretation of the test. Misspecification of the original model would affect
                         1        2
the analysis under both Zi,t and Zi,t , as the decision model is unchanged and only the information
  27
  In particular, we        calculate these percentage points as the minimum and maximum of
                 B 75th                       B 25th
 b +  E Si,t+1 |Ii,t       -  b +  E Si,t+1 |Ii,t    evaluated at the mean i = 0 and t  95%
                                                                                        t   ,
where 95%
        t   is the 95 percent confidence set of the underlying parameters.
 28
    For the period 1993-1996 we obtain a confidence set that contains zero.

                                                       22
set varies across tests, and model misspecification would imply rejection in both instances.
   Appendix D reports the full details for the construction of the BP, RC and RS specification
test statistics following Bugni et al. (2015) and the corresponding p-values. Generally speaking,
the test BP is less powerful than RC and RS, and rejection of the null hypothesis in any of these
tests indicates a rejection of the hypothesis that specific information belongs to the information
set of the members of Congress.
   We report results for all three tests in Table 5. Columns 4, 5, and 6 report the p-values for BP,
RC and RS respectively. For the full sample and for two of the three presidential administration
periods we reject that politicians have perfect foresight, with p-values of 0.01-0.015 depending on
the test. For all periods we cannot reject that the politicians had at least the baseline information
set. While it is not obvious whether the baseline information set represents an optimal amount
of knowledge, we believe Table 4 is informative. It shows that the manufacturing employment
share and past import shock have significant explanatory power in predicting future shocks. The
R-squared is generally around 55 percent and is lower in the later period, suggesting that the
variance of the expectational errors have increased over time and close to the end of the sample.
   Our results point to information used by politicians worsening over time and their capacity of
forecasting the China Shock in the following five years deteriorating. Why would legislators be
better informed in the earlier part of the period? We hypothesize that this is due to the more
predictable nature of the shocks in the early 1990's, when China was specialized in relatively less
complex and more labor intensive products. In Figure 5 we report the autocorrelation of the China
Shock at the industry level and it is clear that in the earlier years the shock was more predictable
from year to year as the autocorrelation was above 0.3. In the second half of the 1990's the
autocorrelation progressively drops to zero, a fact that could justify why politicians were less than
perfectly informed as the 2000's approached.



5.3     Heterogeneity across groups of politicians
5.3.1   Party

The estimates and tests presented so far were performed in the universe of the members of Congress
during the 1990-2001 period under an assumption of common information sets. It is plausible to
hypothesize that politicians from different parties, and with different electoral prospects, might
have had varying degrees of knowledge and different expectations.
   In this section we analyze three dimensions of heterogeneity: political party, tenure in office


                                                 23
(i.e., experience), and margin of victory in the most recent election. For all tests we report the
results for the baseline information set. To anticipate our findings, the picture that will emerge
from this heterogeneity analysis is that Democrats at the time of NTR votes were both more
informed and more sensitive to constituent interests than Republicans, and that legislators in
tighter electoral races placed a heavier weight on the China Shock.
   In Table 6 we find that Democrats are more informed than Republicans, as we cannot reject
that Democrats had at least the baseline information set in all time periods, but we can reject
at standard levels of significance that Republicans know the baseline information in all periods,
but 1990-1992. When we obtain non-empty parameter estimates, we find that Democrats display
higher (in absolute value) sensitivity to the China Shock. Republicans' confidence set for  strad-
dles zero, while the entire confidence set for the Democratic members of the House is comprised
of negative values. This is in line with Democratic legislators historical alignment with workers'
interests and placing more weight on the affected subconstituencies (Poole and Rosenthal, 1997).
    To further establish the relevance of this dimension of heterogeneity, we also considered be-
havior of politicians beyond voting, particularly congressional speech (number of speeches related
to the "China and trade" issue or the "China and labor" issue delivered). We can see that the
non-voting data aligns with preference and information patterns that we reported. We only focus
on two corroborating findings here and present a full analysis in Appendix A.2. First, as the China
Shock over 2001-2006 is realized, representatives from districts in the top tercile of the exposure
to import shock from China raise the related trade and labor issues more often in their speeches,
but such response is stronger for Democrats than Republicans. Second, consistently with their
higher information and preference weights, Democrats start taking actions earlier. Specifically, for
Democrats the congressional speech on China starts surging during the 106th Congress, 1999-2000,
while for Republicans, the effect picks up in the 108th , 2001-2002.

5.3.2   Vote margins and tenure

In Table 7 we also explore whether politicians with above-median victory margins in the previous
election display differences in the sensitivity to constituent interests. The literature has found
higher sensitivity for legislators in tighter races (Mian et al., 2010). We indeed find that, across
different periods, legislators in tighter races display confidence sets for  that are entirely composed
of negative values, whereas confidence sets for politicians in safe races often cover both positive
and negative values, consistent with lower preference weights. It does not appear to be the case,
however, that politicians in tight races were differentially informed relative to politicians elected
by larger margins. While it is not an objective of this section to identify whether the heightened
sensitivity to the China Shock was due to state dependent preferences of politicians, changing with

                                                  24
electoral conditions, or due to selection (although this should also reflect in different information
sets), the analysis does display a potential for our approach to pick up differential elements of the
behavior and knowledge of sub-groups of politicians.
       Finally, we explore the role of experience. In Table 8 we divide the sample in two according to
whether House members tenure is above or below the median. One may imagine that politicians
that are very experienced have better access to various sources of information. We do not find
support for this conjecture, as confidence sets for  of junior legislators appear not systematically
different from those of senior ones.



5.4       Validation: NTR votes for Vietnam
As validation of our model and methodology, we briefly compare the results for the analysis of
the NTR votes for China to a set of similar, but distinct NTR votes for the case of Vietnam. The
goal here is to establish comparability in the responses of politicians across sets of votes. We view
this as way of supporting external validity of our findings.
       The analysis covers the votes on Vietnam's Jackson-Vanik Waiver (i.e., whether to extend
Vietnam's NTR status) that existed over the period 1998 to 2002. This period is particular
interesting, during which there were rich dynamics between China and the U.S.. Based on a report
by the Congressional Research Services, disapproval resolutions were not introduced in 2003, 2004,
or 2005 (i.e. there is no voting data over 2003-05). In 2006, the House passed legislation to grant
Vietnam permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) status as part of a more comprehensive trade
bill. Vietnam accessed the WTO in 2007.29
       In Table 9 the coefficient  appears larger in magnitude than the China Shock case. Specifi-
cally, the baseline confidence set is [-74.075, -6.700]. However, this is because, as expected, the
magnitude of the import shock from Vietnam is several orders smaller than that from China. The
standard deviation of future import shock from Vietnam is 0.006, while that from China in the
same period is 0.129. Adjusted for this scaling, the economic significance of constituency interests
appears small for the Vietnam case as well, consistent with our findings of a low constituent weight
for China NTR.
       Concerning information sets, Table 9 confirms that members of Congress were informed about
the impact of Vietnamese imports to some extent, as they were for China.30 We cannot reject
  29
     See Appendix A for additional details on the data. Due to the congressional redistricting in 2002, for the
analysis in this section, we only include the bills over 1998-2001. The past and future import supply shocks from
Vietnam are constructed analogous to the China Shock in section 4.2.
  30
     The the manufacturing employment share and past import shock also have significant explanatory power in


                                                       25
at standard significance levels the baseline information set, however, we reject that politicians
have perfect foresight. Overall, across the sets of NTR votes for Vietnam and China, no salient
differences both in terms of economic magnitude of constituent weights and information sets appear
to emerge.



5.5     Role of special interests
Special interests' contributions31 are often listed within the set of potential drivers of congressional
voting, but not without substantial uncertainty about the economic magnitude of their effect.
There is evidence of a prominent role of special interest giving in certain votes (e.g. the EESA
of 2008, see Mian et al., 2010), but no consensus in the political economy literature on its role
for the bulk of all congressional activity (Stratmann, 2005). In the case of China's NTR, we find
no clear evidence that special interests, both in terms of campaign contributions from business
organizations (corporations and business associations) or from labor unions, played a crucial role
in driving congressional votes, beyond ideology and constituent interests in our main specification.
We base this assessment on three main sets of empirical evidence which we report below.
    First, as an extra dimension of heterogeneity, we separated politicians into two groups, de-
pending on whether the campaign contributions from business interests are above or below the
median in the sample. The degree of heterogeneity found in Table 10 is minimal, with marginally
tighter confidence sets on constituent weights for politicians with contributions above the median.
This may suggest that money in politics may target politicians with some type of characteristics,
but ultimately the confidence sets do not point to substantial differences.
    Second, we augmented our specification with campaign contributions. It has to be noted that
adding elements to the vector of parameters within the moment inequality approach is extremely
costly, due to the grid search process necessary for inference and hypothesis testing. Further,
contributions could be endogenous to NTR votes, and hence it may be difficult to interpret the ad-
ditional parameters. Table A.1 in Appendix report the results. Due to the computational burden,
we consider the following specifications, each with four parameters to estimate and information
sets to assess: (a) Baseline specification + campaign contributions from business organizations
(Panel A); (b) Baseline specification + campaign contributions from labor unions (Panel B); (c)
predicting future shocks for the case of Vietnam. The R-squared is generally around 53 percent.
  31
     The data on campaign donations employed in the analysis of special interests are obtained from opensecrets.org,
based on official Political Action Committee disclosure forms from the U.S. Federal Election Commission. opense-
crets.org is a website run by the Center for Responsive Politics, one of the main nonpartisan organizations in
Washington DC, dedicated to electoral transparency and to the collection of information related to campaign
spending and lobbying disclosures.


                                                        26
Baseline specification + the second principal component of contributions from business organi-
zations and labor unions32 (Panel C). Our main results appear robust to this inclusion and its
additional explanatory power is limited.
       Third, we explore the congressional committees closer to the policy decision and likely the
most important targets for special interests. In particular, we exclude the politicians working in
influential committees (including the committee on Appropriations, Commerce, and the committee
on Ways and Means), who may be more influenced by money in politics. As is reported in Table
A.2 in Appendix A, our results remain robust to this approach.




6        Counterfactuals
In this section we employ the estimated parameters of the model to perform two counterfactuals
that answer the following questions: (i) Would giving full information to legislators have changed
the results of the NTR roll call votes? (ii) Would the results of the NTR votes have changed if
legislators placed a larger weight on the labor market consequences of the China Shock?


6.1       The case of legislators informed about the China Shock
After establishing that, for most of the time period in our sample, politicians had less than perfect
knowledge of the labor market consequences of China's export expansion, a natural question we
can ask is whether providing more accurate information to politicians would have changed their
vote, and the overall passage of certain bills. The answer, for the case of China NTR votes, is not
substantially.
       As the construction of the counterfactual is not trivial and not commonplace in the literature,
we provide some details. Conditional on a particular value of the parameter vector t = {at , bt , t },
and information set Ii,t , the decision of voting in favor of China is given by:

                        Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t ) = {at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t  0} .

Integrating Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t ) over i,t generates the probability that politician i casts a pro-China
  32
    Note that for the first principal component, the loadings on contributions from business and labor are both
positive. Hence, the first component may just capture the fact that both interest groups are trying to curry favor
from more influential representatives. For the second principal component, the loading on money from business
is positive and the loading on money from labor is negative. So, it may be a summary statistics for the special
interests in favor of a normal trade relationship with China.




                                                        27
vote in period t. In particular,

                  Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t )(i,t )di,t =          1 {at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t  0} (i,t )di,t .
            i,t                                         i,t


Denote Nt be the set of politicians in period t, the share of votes in favor of China is then given
by:
                                                        1
                                 + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) =                     Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t )(i,t )di,t .
                                                        Nt    iNt   i,t

The corresponding 95 percent confidence set of the number of politicians vote in favor of China is:


                                    min     + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) , max              + (t , Ii,t , Nt )      ,
                                   t 95%
                                     t                               t 95%
                                                                       t



where 95%
      t   is the 95 percent confidence set for the underlying parameters.
      We simulate + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) under the case of baseline information Ii,t
                                                                             b
                                                                                 and the case of perfect
           p
foresight Ii,t . The change in share of votes (in percentage) in favor of China when we provide
politicians with full information is:

                          p                                                                  p
  min             + (t , Ii,t                  b
                              , Nt ) - + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) × 100, max                 + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) - + (t , Ii,t
                                                                                                                  b
                                                                                                                      , Nt ) × 100 .
 t 95%
   t                                                                      t 95%
                                                                            t



      Before we delve into the specific results, it is worth pointing out that the effect of information
provision on NTR votes is ambiguous, and depends on (i) the underlying distribution of the
expectational errors G(i,t+1 ), (ii) the weight on constituent interests that is governed by t , and
(iii) the policy position relative to individual ideology at i + bt . To see this, given the assumption
of normal distribution and with a large sample, the change of vote share in favor of NTR with
China can be written as:


                  p
          + (t , Ii,t , Nt ) - + (t , Ii,t
                                       b
                                           , Nt )
          1                                                           b
        =        [(at i + bt + t Si,t+1 ) - (at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])]
          Nt iN
                          t

                                                     b                                             b
        =                 [(at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] + t i,t+1 ) - (at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ])]dG(i,t+1 )
                                                                                                                   (19)
                  i,t+1


Regarding (i), our assumption of rational expectations dictate that i,t+1 has a mean zero condi-
           b
tional on Ii,t . Moreover, as is shown in Figure 6, the expectation errors are more or less symmet-


                                                                    28
rically distributed in different sample periods. In Figure 7, we illustrate the roles of (ii) and (iii)
given a symmetric distribution of i,t+1 . Point A represents the probability of casting a pro-China
                                                                               b
vote for legislators who are endowed with i and have an expectation E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. Note that
in this scenario, the general policy position is in favor of China, and point A is located in the
concave segment of (·). (This scenario is likely the case during 1993-1996 when the vote share
in favor of China was above 70 percent on average.) When these politicians are supplied with
                                                                                                b
complete information, they are facing import shocks Si,t+1 that are dispersed around E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]
in a mean-preserving way. As is represented by point B, the share of pro-China vote will be lower
in the counterfactual due to the concavity of (·) at this segment. The magnitude of the counter-
factual change hinges on the dispersion of t i,t+1 , which in turn depends on t and the variation
of i,t+1 . In section 5, we show that the effect of constituent interests reflected by the estimate of
 is moderate, and that the covariates in the baseline information set have significant explanatory
power in predicting future shock especially in the earlier period (i.e., the variation of expectational
errors is also moderate). These findings indicate that the effect of improving information could
be small. Points C and D in Figure 7 depict the case in which general policy position is against
China, and point C is located in the convex segment of (·). (This is related to the scenario in
1990-1992 when the vote share in favor of China was around 40 percent on average.) Under this
case, had the politicians been provided with complete information on Si,t+1 , the pro-China vote
share would have increased. The magnitude of the counterfactual change again depends on t and
the variance of i.t+1 .
     We also simulate the number of politicians who vote for China in the baseline, but switch vote
in the counterfactual according to

                      p
     N +- (t , Ii,t
                b
                     Ii,t , Nt )
                       b                          p
 =          Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t )(1 - Yi,t (t , Ii,t , i,t ))(i,t )di,t
      ,t

                                       b                                         p
 =          1 at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t  0 1 at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t < 0 (i,t )di,t .
      i,t


Analogously, we can derive the number of politicians in the other categories: vote in favor of China
in both the baseline and the counterfactual, vote against China in the baseline and switch in the
counterfactual, and vote against China in both scenarios. The share of politicians for each of the
cases, and the corresponding confidence sets are defined accordingly.
     Table 11 shows the results of this counterfactual exercise. There are only a few small changes
in the voting patterns across politicians who now possess full information, a result of the fact



                                                                 29
that they already possess a substantial amount of information to begin with and that the weight
on constituent interests is moderate. Moreover, the vote share in favor of China's NTR status
appears unaffected.33



6.2       Counterfactual: Heightened constituent interests
Another counterfactual that we explore here involves increasing the legislator's weight placed on
his or her local constituents. Specifically, we apply the lower bounds of t corresponding to the
confidence sets of two groups of politicians (i) Democrats and (ii) politicians with below median
victory margins in the previous election to all politicians, and then simulate the NTR votes. As is
demonstrated in section 5.3, both these groups place high weight on the subconstituencies affected
by the China Shock. By setting t at the highest possible (absolute) values, we assess whether
this margin of preferences may have played an important role in driving legislative outcomes for
given expectations of the legislators.
       Table 12 reports the confidence sets of the simulated vote shares. For all the simulations,
we assume that politicians have access to the baseline information set and make voting decisions
                    b
based on E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. In Panel A, we simulate the shares of pro-China votes based on the baseline
estimates reported in Table 5. The predicted vote shares in favor of China align with the actual
shares.
    In Panel B, we apply the largest possible weight that Democrats place on the expected China
shock to all politicians. The counterfactual weight in 1997-2001 (respectively, 1993-1996 and 1990-
1992) is nearly three times (respectively, two times and three times) larger than the lower bound
of the estimates of t . The simulated vote share is in the range of [15.711, 30.443] in 1997-2001,
indicating that bills in favor of NTR with China would have not passed in this counterfactual
scenario during this period. The only caveat is that the confidence set of the counterfactual vote
share still straddles 50 percent for the period 1993-1996.
    Panel C applies to all legislators the largest possible weight placed by the politicians facing
high electoral pressure (i.e., winning margins below median). In this counterfactual, the passage
of the bills in favor of NTR with China would have been overturned in 1993-1996, but not in
1997-2001.
  33
    Also note that in aggregate the counterfactual change in pro-China vote share in 1993-1996 is negative, while
that in 1990-1992 is positive, which is consistent with the scenarios depicted in Figure 7.




                                                       30
7     Conclusion
China's permanent NTR status in the U.S. and its accession to the WTO possibly represent one
of the most salient critical junctures in international trade (and certainly in trade policy decisions)
of the last fifty years. This paper investigates whether U.S. politicians had imperfect information
about the extent of China Shock's repercussions in their home district at the time when they
repeatedly voted on China's Normal Trade Relations status between 1990 and 2001.
    To isolate the role of preferences versus information of members of Congress, we present a
voting model and an application of a method of moment inequality approach designed to estimate
expectations in decision making and to formally test for the content of information sets of legis-
lators. We find that U.S. legislators had imperfect but fairly accurate expectations, yet placed a
relatively low weight on the constituencies that ended up being adversely affected by the China
Shock.
    The approach discussed in this paper may be a general and informative avenue for the study of
policy decisions made by politicians and to understand their expectations. Being able to resolve
across preference and information margins is a valuable step forward for political economy and po-
litical science scholars interested in both questions of political accountability and learning in policy
making. Future research should implement and extend our application outside the consequential
questions of trade policy that we address in this paper, including labor, housing, healthcare, and
fiscal policy.




                                                  31
References
Acemoglu, D., Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., Price, B., 2016. Import competition and the
  great us employment sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1), S141­S198.

Ahn, H., Manski, C. F., 1993. Distribution theory for the analysis of binary choice under uncer-
 tainty with nonparametric estimation of expectations. Journal of Econometrics 56 (3), 291­321.

Alesina, A., 1988. Macroeconomics and politics. NBER macroeconomics annual 3, 13­52.

Alesina, A., Miano, A., Stantcheva, S., 2020. The polarization of reality. In: AEA Papers and
  Proceedings. Vol. 110. pp. 324­28.

Alesina, A., Tabellini, G., 1990. A positive theory of fiscal deficits and government debt. The
  Review of Economic Studies 57 (3), 403­414.

Andrews, D. W., Shi, X., 2013. Inference based on conditional moment inequalities. Econometrica
 81 (2), 609­666.

Andrews, D. W., Soares, G., 2010. Inference for parameters defined by moment inequalities using
 generalized moment selection. Econometrica 78 (1), 119­157.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., 2019. When work disappears: Manufacturing decline and the
 falling marriage market value of young men. American Economic Review: Insights 1 (2), 161­78.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., Majlesi, K., 2020a. Importing political polarization? the electoral
 consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic Review 110 (10), 3139­83.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., Majlesi, K., 2020b. Importing political polarization? the electoral
 consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic Review 110 (10), 3139­83.

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., 2013. The china syndrome: Local labor market effects of
 import competition in the united states. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121­68.

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., 2016. The china shock: Learning from labor-market
 adjustment to large changes in trade. Annual Review of Economics 8, 205­240.

Baldwin, R. E., Magee, C. S., 2000. Is trade policy for sale? congressional voting on recent trade
  bills. Public Choice 105 (1-2), 79­101.

Bateman, D. A., Clinton, J., Lapinski, J. S., 2017. A house divided? political conflict and polar-
  ization in the u.s. congress, 1877- 2011. American Journal of Political Science 61 (3), 698­714.

                                                32
Blanchard, E. J., Bown, C. P., Chor, D., 2019. Did trump's trade war impact the 2018 election?
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bugni, F. A., Canay, I. A., Shi, X., 2015. Specification tests for partially identified models defined
  by moment inequalities. Journal of Econometrics 185 (1), 259­282.

Canen, N., Kendall, C., Trebbi, F., 2020. Unbundling polarization. Econometrica 88 (3), 1197­
  1233.

Che, Y., Lu, Y., Pierce, J. R., Schott, P. K., Tao, Z., 2020. Does trade liberalization with china
 influence us elections? Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Clinton, J., Jackman, S., Rivers, D., 2004. The statistical analysis of roll call data. American
  Political Science Review 98 (2), 355­370.

Colantone, I., Stanig, P., 2018. The trade origins of economic nationalism: Import competition
  and voting behavior in western europe. American Journal of Political Science 62 (4), 936­953.

Dickstein, M. J., Morales, E., 2018. What do exporters know? The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133 (4), 1753­1801.

Drazen, A., Masson, P. R., 1994. Credibility of policies versus credibility of policymakers. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3), 735­754.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., Goldberg, P. K., Kennedy, P. J., Khandelwal, A. K., 2020. The return to
  protectionism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1), 1­55.

Feenstra, R. C., Ma, H., Xu, Y., 2019. Us exports and employment. Journal of International
  Economics 120, 46­58.

Feigenbaum, J. J., Hall, A. B., 2015. How legislators respond to localized economic shocks: Evi-
  dence from chinese import competition. The Journal of Politics 77 (4), 1012­1030.

Feler, L., Senses, M. Z., 2017. Trade shocks and the provision of local public goods. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (4), 101­43.

Fenno, R. F., 1978. Home Style: House Members in their Districts. Boston: Little, Brown.

Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., Taddy, M., 2019. Measuring group differences in high-dimensional
 choices: method and application to congressional speech. Econometrica 87 (4), 1307­1340.

Greenland, A., Lopresti, J., 2016. Import exposure and human capital adjustment: Evidence from
  the us. Journal of International economics 100, 50­60.

                                                 33
Greenland, A., Lopresti, J., McHenry, P., 2019. Import competition and internal migration. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 44­59.

Heckman, J. J., Snyder, J. M., 1997. Linear probability models of the demand for attributes with
  an empirical application to estimating the preferences of legislators. The RAND Journal of
  Economics 28.

Ho, K., Pakes, A., 2014. Hospital choices, hospital prices, and financial incentives to physicians.
  American Economic Review 104 (12), 3841­84.

Jenkins, J. A., 2000. Examining the robustness of ideological voting: evidence from the confederate
  house of representatives. American Journal of Political Science, 811­822.

Jones, B. D., Baumgartner, F. R., 2005. The politics of attention: How government prioritizes
  problems. University of Chicago Press.

Kalt, J. P., Zupan, M. A., 1984. Capture and ideology in the economic theory of politics. The
 American Economic Review 74 (3), 279­300.

Kalt, J. P., Zupan, M. A., 1990. The apparent ideological behavior of legislators: Testing for
 principal-agent slack in political institutions. The Journal of Law and Economics 33 (1), 103­
 131.

Krehbiel, K., 1992. Information and legislative organization. University of Michigan Press.

Ladewig, J. W., 2010. Ideological polarization and the vanishing of marginals: Retrospective roll-
  call voting in the us congress. The Journal of Politics 72 (2), 499­512.

Levitt, S. D., 1996. How do senators vote? disentangling the role of voter preferences, party
  affiliation, and senator ideology. The American Economic Review 86 (3), 425­441.

Manski, C., 1991. Nonparametric estimation of expectations in the analysis of discrete choice under
 uncertainty. In: nonparametric and Semiparametric methods in Econometrics and Statistics:
 proceedings of the fifth International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics. Vol. 5.
 Cambridge University Press, p. 259.

McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., Rosenthal, H., 2006. Polarized America: The Dance of Ideology and
 Unequal Riches. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Mian, A., Sufi, A., Trebbi, F., December 2010. The political economy of the us mortgage default
 crisis. American Economic Review 100 (5).


                                                34
Mian, A., Sufi, A., Trebbi, F., 04 2014. Resolving debt overhang: Political constraints in the
 aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (2), 1­28.

Moskowitz, D. J., Rogowski, J., Jr., J. M. S., 2017. Parsing party polarization, mimeo.

Peltzman, S., 1984. Constituent interest and congressional voting. The Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics 27 (1), 181­210.

Pierce, J. R., Schott, P. K., 2016. The surprisingly swift decline of us manufacturing employment.
  American Economic Review 106 (7), 1632­62.

Poole, K., Rosenthal, H., 2017. Ideology and Congress: A Political Economic History of Roll Call
  Voting. 2nd Edition Routledge.

Poole, K. T., Rosenthal, H., 1984. The polarization of american politics. Journal of Politics 46 (4),
  1061­1079.

Poole, K. T., Rosenthal, H., 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting.
  New York: Oxford University Press.

Pregelj, V. N., 1998. Most-favored-nation status: Congressional consideration, 1989-1998. Tech.
  rep., Congressional Research Service.

Pregelj, V. N., 2001. Most-favored-nation status of the people's republic of china. Tech. rep.,
  Congressional Research Service.

Primiceri, G. E., 2006. Why inflation rose and fell: policy-makers' beliefs and us postwar stabi-
  lization policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (3), 867­901.

Rodrik, D., 1995. Political economy of trade policy. Handbook of international economics 3, 1457­
  1494.

Sargent, T., Williams, N., Zha, T., 2006. Shocks and government beliefs: The rise and fall of
  american inflation. American Economic Review 96 (4), 1193­1224.

Stimson, J. A., MacKuen, M. B., Erikson, R. S., 1995. Dynamic representation. American political
  science review, 543­565.

Stratmann, T., 2005. Some talk: Money in politics. a (partial) review of the literature. In: Policy
  challenges and political responses. Springer, pp. 135­156.




                                                 35
                     Figure 1: Roll call votes Pro China by Party

                                         215
                                 210
200




                                                 178
                                                         167                             164
                                                                                                 157
                                                                         149     150
150




                                                                 147
                                           141 143

                                                       119             115             117
                 112               108                         112             110
                                                                                               102
100




           90   92
      84
                            79

                       56
50
0




      1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

                                         Votes pro China NTR Republican
                                         Votes pro China NTR Democrat




                                                 36
            Figure 2: Roll call vote switching - Democrats


200
150
100
50
0




      1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

                         Con  Pro             Pro  Con
                         Stay Pro             Stay Con




           Figure 3: Roll call vote switching - Republicans
150
100
50
0




      1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

                         Con  Pro             Pro  Con
                         Stay Pro             Stay Con



                                 37
                Figure 4: Import Shocks from China and Pro-China NTR Vote Share




                                                                                                                     .6
                                        .8
                Vote Share: Pro-China
                                        .7




                                                                                                                     .5

                                                                                                                          Import Shocks
                                        .6




                                                                                                                     .4
                                        .5




                                                                                                                     .3
                                        .4
                                        .3




                                                                                                                     .2
                                              90

                                                    91

                                                          92

                                                                93

                                                                      94

                                                                            95

                                                                                  96

                                                                                        97

                                                                                              98

                                                                                                    99

                                                                                                          00

                                                                                                                01
                                             19

                                                   19

                                                         19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                           19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                               20



                                                                                Year
                                                              Past Shock: Sit                Future Shock: Sit+1
                                                              Vote Share

Notes: The bar chart shows the share of votes in favor of renewing China's NTR status for the bills introduced in
House over 1990 to 2001. The data in 2000 also includes the bill HR 4444 which granted China permanent normal
trade relations. The dot blue line represents the average of past import shock across congressional districts, and
the diamond red line shows the average of the future import shock. In order to put the data on a comparable
five-year scale, past import shocks over 1990-1992 are multiplied with the factor 5/2.




                                                                                 38
                                           Figure 5: The China Shock over Time
                .4
                .2
                0
                -.2
                      90


                             91


                                       92


                                               93


                                                     94


                                                           95


                                                                     96


                                                                           97


                                                                                 98


                                                                                       99


                                                                                             00


                                                                                                    01
                   19


                           19


                                      19


                                             19


                                                    19


                                                          19


                                                                    19


                                                                          19


                                                                                19


                                                                                      19


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                  20
                                                                Year

Notes: We explores the autocorrelation of import supply shock from China at the 4-digit SIC level by estimating
the following equation:

                                            oth               oth
                                        ln Mk,t,t +5 = t  ln Mk,t-5,t + Dt + kt
              oth                        oth
where  ln Mk,t  -5,t (respectively,  ln Mk,t,t+5 ) measures the change in log import from China by eight developed
countries (Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland) over the period
t - 5 to t(respectively, tto t + 5). Dt is the year fixed effects, and t captures the autocorrelation of import
supply shock from China in different periods. Standard errors are clustered at the 4-digit SIC level. We use
                                                                                                    oth    oth
                                                                             oth                   Mk,t -Mk,t -5
the Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh approximation of the log growth rate, i.e.,  ln Mk,t -5,t  2            oth +M oth
                                                                                                   Mk,t
                                                                                                                   and
                                                                                                          k,t-5
                       oth      oth
     oth              Mk,t +5 -Mk,t
 ln Mk,t,t +5  2       oth      oth
                      Mk,t+5 +Mk,t
                                       , to avoid dropping observations where imports are zero. The point estimates of
t and their 95% confidence intervals are reported in the figure.




                                                               39
                                                      Figure 6: Distribution of Expectational Errors
 0.14                                                                                             0.25



 0.12
                                                                                                   0.2

  0.1


                                                                                                  0.15
 0.08



 0.06
                                                                                                   0.1


 0.04

                                                                                                  0.05
 0.02



   0                                                                                                0
   -0.3    -0.2    -0.1     0       0.1         0.2         0.3         0.4     0.5    0.6           -0.3          -0.2     -0.1          0       0.1     0.2         0.3         0.4     0.5



                            A. 1997-2001                                                                                            B. 1993-1996
 0.25                                                                                             0.16



                                                                                                  0.14

  0.2
                                                                                                  0.12



                                                                                                   0.1
 0.15


                                                                                                  0.08


  0.1
                                                                                                  0.06



                                                                                                  0.04
 0.05

                                                                                                  0.02



   0                                                                                                0
    -0.3    -0.2     -0.1       0         0.1         0.2         0.3         0.4     0.5                   -0.4     -0.3   -0.2   -0.1       0     0.1   0.2   0.3         0.4     0.5   0.6



                            C. 1990-1992                                                                                            D. 1990-2001
Notes: The figure plots the distribution of expectaional errors based on the Baseline information set, i.e., i,t+1 =
                    b
Si,t+1 - E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]. Specifically, the expectational errors are the residuals from the OLS regression: Si,t+1 =
0 + 1 i + 2 ShareM f gi,t + 3 Si,t + i,t+1 .




                                                                                             40
                Figure 7: An Illustrative Example: Effects of Improving Information



                                                                   A

                                                                       B

                                                                           (x+ )dG( )< (x) when x>0




                    (x+ )dG( )> (x) when x<0


                                         D

                                             C


                                                        0
Notes: The figure presents an illustrative example on how the provision of information on the China shock changes
the pro-China vote share. The black solid curve represent the standard normal cumulative density function. In
                                                                    b
this figure x corresponds to the component at i + bt + t E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] and  corresponds to the component t i,t+1
in equation (19). In this example, the distribution of  has a mean zero and is symmetric. The spread represented
by the red dashed lines is determined by the variation of  .




                                                        41
                                        Table 1: Roll Call Votes

                                                            NTR (PNTR)
     Year Congress     President   House    Bill number   approved in House   Additional action
     Annual Renewal of NTR with China:
     1990    101    G.H.W. Bush     D       HJRES647               No         No action in Senate
     1991    102    G.H.W. Bush     D       HJRES263               No         No action in Senate
     1992    102    G.H.W. Bush     D       HJRES502               No         Did not pass in Senate
     1993    103      Clinton       D       HJRES208               Yes
     1994    103      Clinton       D       HJRES373               Yes




42
     1995    104      Clinton       R       HJRES96                Yes
     1996    104      Clinton       R       HJRES182               Yes
     1997    105      Clinton       R       HJRES79                Yes
     1998    105      Clinton       R       HJRES121               Yes
     1999    106      Clinton       R       HJRES57                Yes
     2000    106      Clinton       R       HJRES103               Yes
     2001    107     G.W. Bush      R       HJRES50                Yes

     Granting PNTR to China:
     2000    106       Clinton      R       HR4444                 Yes
Table 2: Summary Statistics of Detrended Import Shocks at the Congressional
                               District Level

          1990-2001            1997-2001            1993-1996             1990-1992
        Si,t+1    Si,t       Si,t+1     Si,t      Si,t+1     Si,t       Si,t+1    Si,t
 std   0.128 0.128            0.122 0.075          0.070 0.153          0.153 0.141
 p5    -0.172 -0.175         -0.171 -0.106        -0.095 -0.186        -0.189 -0.187
 p25   -0.077 -0.075         -0.084 -0.048        -0.043 -0.098        -0.093 -0.093
 p50   -0.017 -0.016         -0.010 -0.009        -0.009 -0.020        -0.022 -0.022
 p75   0.051 0.046            0.070 0.035          0.035 0.050          0.050 0.049
 p95   0.239 0.231            0.214 0.144          0.139 0.316          0.293 0.272
 Notes: In order to put the data on a comparable five-year scale, past import shocks over
1990-1992 are multiplied with the factor 5/2.




                                           43
                           Table 3: MLE Estimates Based on Different Information Sets

                                                                        a
                                                                        ^ (se.)            ^
                                                                                           b (se.)            ^ (se.)
                                                                                  Panel A: 1997-2001
      Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }               0.650 (0.063)      0.262 (0.025)      -0.810 (0.314)
      Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }       0.643 (0.062)      0.263 (0.025)      -0.786 (0.279)
      Perfect foresight                                             0.619 (0.062)      0.263 (0.025)      -0.018 (0.211)

                                                                                  Panel B: 1993-1996
      Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }               -0.046 (0.084)     0.678 (0.033)      -0.440 (0.611)
      Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }       -0.043 (0.084)     0.679 (0.033)      -1.116 (0.549)
      Perfect foresight                                             -0.051 (0.083)     0.678 (0.033)      -0.517 (0.452)




44
                                                                                  Panel C: 1990-1992
      Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }               1.019 (0.104)      -0.179 (0.037) 0.065 (0.351)
      Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }       1.000 (0.105)      -0.181 (0.037) -0.981 (0.288)
      Perfect foresight                                             1.013 (0.104)      -0.180 (0.037) -0.669 (0.244)

                                                                                  Panel D: 1990-2001
      Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }               0.532 (0.044)      0.280 (0.017)      -0.453 (0.222)
      Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }       0.534 (0.044)      0.280 (0.017)      -0.856 (0.198)
      Perfect foresight                                             0.523 (0.044)      0.280 (0.017)      -0.333 (0.147)
      Notes: This table reports the MLE estimates based on equation (6). For the case of minimal information, we replace
     the term E [Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] by the predicted value of the OLS regression: Si,t+1 = 0 + 1 i + 2 ShareM f gi,t + i,t+1 .
     For the case of baseline information, the term is replaced by the predicted value of the OLS regression: Si,t+1 =
     0 + 1 i + 2 ShareM f gi,t + 3 Si,t + i,t+1 . For the case of perfect foresight, the term is replaced by Si,t+1 . Robust
     standard errors are reported in parentheses.
  Table 4: Relevance of Manufacturing Employment Share and Past Import
                 Shock in Explaining Future Import Shocks

 Sample Period:                   1990-2001       1997-2001   1993-1996 1990-1992
 Dependent Variable: Si,t+1          (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)
 Si,t                              0.256***       0.735***     0.214***      0.636***
                                    (0.011)        (0.041)      (0.013)       (0.032)
 ShareM f gi,t                     0.753***       0.683***     0.455***      0.695***
                                    (0.020)        (0.036)      (0.020)       (0.045)

 Observations                        5,573          2,572        1,713         1,288
 R2                                  0.555          0.586        0.673         0.684
 Notes: In order to put the data on a comparable five-year scale, past import shocks over
1990-1992 are multiplied with the factor 5/2. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                             45
                    Table 5: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values

 Period             CS of a             CS of b             CS of           p-value BP      p-value RC       p-value RS      Num obs.
 1997-2001                                Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [0.465, 0.765]      [0.165, 0.275]      [-2.062, -0.137]        0.520           0.520           0.520           2546

                                       Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [0.450, 0.795]      [0.190, 0.280]      [-1.670, -0.020]        0.360           0.360           0.360           2546

                   Panel C: Perfect foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }
                       ­                   ­                    ­               0.010           0.010           0.010           2546

 1993-1996                         Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [-0.280, 0.100]     [0.583, 0.703]      [-2.375, 0.887]         0.330           0.330           0.330           1698

                                 Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [-0.325, 0.130]     [0.598, 0.740]      [-3.125, -0.125]        0.395           0.395           0.395           1698

                   Panel C: Perfect foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }
                       ­                   ­                    ­               0.010           0.010           0.010           1698

 1990-1992                                Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [0.800, 1.550]     [-0.325, -0.125]     [-1.125, 2.125]         0.955           0.955           0.955           1232

                                       Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [1.025, 1.438]     [-0.275, -0.150]     [-1.300, 0.000]         0.165           0.145           0.145           1232

                   Panel C: Perfect foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }
                [1.000, 1.550]     [-0.200, -0.200]     [-1.400, 0.025]         0.235           0.225           0.225           1232

 1990-2001                                Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [0.465, 0.615]      [0.210, 0.270]      [-1.188, -0.137]        0.185           0.185           0.185           5494

                                       Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
                [0.515, 0.620]      [0.240, 0.270]      [-1.275, -0.825]        0.085           0.070           0.070           5494

                   Panel C: Perfect foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }
                       ­                   ­                    ­               0.010           0.010           0.010           5494

 Notes: For the case of perfect foresight, we assume that in addition to Si,t , ShareM f gi,t and i , politicians also possess information
that is orthogonal to these covariates, i.e. Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ].




                                                                    46
                         Table 6: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values: Heterogeneity by Party

     Period         Group                 CS of a             CS of b             CS of            p-value BP       p-value RC p-value RS   Num obs.

     1997-2001      Democrats         [2.400, 4.425]      [0.850, 1.650]      [-4.740, -0.330]        0.410           0.410       0.410       1229
                    Republicans             ­                   ­                    ­                0.025           0.025       0.025       1326

     1993-1996      Democrats         [1.000, 3.250]      [1.050, 2.000]      [-5.800, 0.200]         0.500           0.500       0.500       888




47
                    Republicans             ­                   ­                    ­                0.020           0.020       0.020       806

     1990-1992      Democracts         [1.875, 4.375]      [0.050, 0.850] [-3.700, -0.400]            0.415           0.410       0.410       745
                    Republicans       [-1.300, 1.400]     [-0.300, 0.650] [-1.450, 1.850]             0.310           0.310       0.310       485

     1990-2001      Democracts        [1.500, 3.075]      [0.600, 1.200]      [-3.140, -0.667]        0.805           0.795       0.795       2862
                    Republicans             ­                   ­                    ­                0.010           0.010       0.010       2617
     Notes: The estimation in this table is based on the Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }.
                      Table 7: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values: Heterogeneity by Win Margin

     Period         Group                              CS of a             CS of b              CS of           p-value BP   p-value RC   p-value RS   Num obs.

     1997-2001      Win margin>median              [0.825, 1.050]       [0.075, 0.275]       [-1.985, 0.935]        0.685      0.685        0.685        1182
                    Win margin < median            [0.150, 0.375]       [0.250, 0.375]      [-1.905, -0.173]        0.175      0.175        0.175        1184

     1993-1996      Win margin>median              [-0.250, 0.250]      [0.475, 0.700]       [-3.000, 2.750]        0.525      0.520        0.520        799




48
                    Win margin < median            [-1.000, 0.250]      [0.650, 0.950]      [-8.550, -0.225]        0.950      0.950        0.950        800

     1990-1992      Win margin>median              [0.825, 2.100]      [-0.450, -0.100] [-2.950, 2.650]             0.755      0.755        0.755        568
                    Win margin < median            [0.450, 1.700]      [-0.300, -0.050] [-4.375, -0.750]            0.495      0.485        0.485        569

     1990-2001      Win margin>median              [0.600, 0.600]       [0.150, 0.200]       [-0.555, 0.240]        0.115      0.115        0.115        2551
                    Win margin < median            [0.150, 0.375]       [0.300, 0.400]      [-2.495, -0.882]        0.435      0.435        0.435        2551
     Notes: The estimation in this table is based on the Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }.
                         Table 8: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values: Heterogeneity by Tenure

     Period         Group                       CS of a              CS of b              CS of           p-value BP p-value RC   p-value RS   Num obs.

     1997-2001 Tenure > median               [0.825, 1.050]      [0.175, 0.225]       [-0.707, 0.388]         0.085     0.085       0.085        1372
               Tenure < median               [0.375, 0.600]      [0.250, 0.375]      [-2.535, -0.960]         0.170     0.170       0.170        1176

     1993-1996 Tenure > median               [-0.250, 0.250]     [0.550, 0.700]       [-3.400, 1.325]         0.460     0.460       0.460        863




49
               Tenure < median               [-0.500, 0.250]     [0.650, 0.900]       [-5.800, 0.200]         0.605     0.600       0.600        821

     1990-1992 Tenure > median               [0.825, 2.325]      [-0.150, 0.150]      [-5.475, 0.125]         0.900     0.900       0.900        572
               Tenure < median               [0.950, 1.750]     [-0.450, -0.300]      [-1.625, 0.875]         0.250     0.215       0.215        634

     1990-2001 Tenure > median               [0.825, 0.825]      [0.225, 0.250]      [-1.420, -0.775]         0.095     0.095       0.095        2488
               Tenure < median               [0.375, 0.375]      [0.275, 0.325]      [-1.420, -0.452]         0.120     0.120       0.120        2950
     Notes: The estimation in this table is based on the Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }.
                  Table 9: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values:
                               Votes on NTR with Vietnam (1998-2001)

     CS of a             CS of b              CS of             p-value BP      p-value RC      p-value RS      Num obs.

                            Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
 [-1.250, -0.462]    [0.532, 0.890]     [-85.000, -23.250]         0.990            0.990           0.990          1595

                                                                 V
                          Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
 [-1.250, -0.613]    [0.630, 0.792]      [-74.075, -6.700]         0.435            0.435           0.435          1595

                                         V                     V            V       V
     Panel C: Perfect Foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f git , Si,t +1 - E [Si,t+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }

         ­                   ­                    ­                0.010            0.010           0.010          1595
 Notes: For the case of perfect foresight, we assume that in addition to Si,t , ShareM f gi,t and i , politicians also possess
                                                          V            V      V
information that is orthogonal to these covariates, i.e. Si,t +1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ].




                                                             50
     Table 10: Parameter Confidence Sets and Specification Test p-values: Heterogeneity by Campaign Contributions from Business

      Period        Group                       CS of a             CS of b              CS of           p-value BP p-value RC   p-value RS   Num obs.

      1997-2001 Money > median              [-0.300, 0.375] [0.500, 0.725] [-2.693, -0.645]                  0.280     0.280       0.280        1273
                Money < median               [0.600, 1.050] [-0.050, 0.100] [-1.985, 0.388]                  0.320     0.310       0.310        1273

      1993-1996     Money > median          [-1.000, 0.250]      [0.750, 1.050]     [-6.825, -0.525]         0.680     0.670       0.670        844




51
                    Money < median          [-0.250, 0.500]      [0.475, 0.700]      [-3.500, 2.000]         0.545     0.545       0.545        844

      1990-1992     Money > median           [0.150, 1.100]     [-0.150, 0.000]      [-2.000, 0.250]         0.335     0.335       0.335        613
                    Money < median           [1.100, 3.500]     [-0.400, 0.250]      [-7.325, 0.775]         0.825     0.825       0.825        616

      1990-2001     Money > median           [0.600, 0.375]      [0.400, 0.475]     [-2.065, -1.097]         0.135     0.135       0.135        2730
                    Money < median           [0.600, 0.825]      [0.100, 0.225]     [-1.850, -0.130]         0.215     0.205       0.205        2733
     Notes: The estimation in this table is based on the Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }.
                               Table 11: Effects of Improving Information

                                                          1997-2001           1993-1996            1990-1992

 (1) Change in share of votes pro-CHN (%)              [-0.030, 0.012]     [-0.161, -0.000]      [-0.008, 0.064]
 (2) Share of always pro-CHN (%)                      [55.956, 61.668]     [70.382, 76.967]     [36.634, 42.352]
 (3) Share of pro-CHN to against-CHN (%)                [0.078, 1.694]      [0.054, 1.610]       [0.000, 1.265]
 (4) Share of Against-CHN to pro-CHN (%)                [0.078, 1.694]      [0.054, 1.485]       [0.000, 1.317]
 (5) Share of Always against-CHN (%)                  [36.720, 42.187]     [21.997, 27.645]     [56.264, 62.309]




                         Table 12: Effects of Heightening Constituent Interests

                                              1997-2001             1993-1996                 1990-1992
                                                                  Panel A: Baseline
(1) Value of                                [-1.670, -0.020]     [-3.125, -0.125]          [-1.300, 0.000]
(2) Share of votes pro-CHN (%)             [57.663, 61.760]     [71.999, 77.034]          [37.682, 42.427]

                                                  Panel B: Lower bound of CS for Democrats
(3) Value of                                    -4.740               -5.800                    -3.700
(4) Share of votes pro-CHN (%)             [15.711, 30.443]     [38.005, 61.502]          [11.983, 23.131]

                                           Panel C: Lower bound of CS for Win Margin < median
(5) Value of                                    -1.905               -8.550                     -4.375
(6) Share of votes pro-CHN (%)             [37.992, 58.049]     [24.606, 45.485]           [9.682, 19.424]
Notes: The simulation in this table is based on the Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }.




                                                        52
A      Data appendix and additional results

A.1     Other data
Roll call votes on NTR with Vietnam. We collect data on voting outcomes of bills related to
the renewal of Vietnam's Jackson-Vanik Waiver (i.e., whether to extend Vietnam's NTR status)
that existed over the period 1998 to 2002. Due to the congressional redistricting in 2002, we only
include the bills over 1998-2001. These bills are HJRES120, HJRES58, HJRES99 and HJRES55.
The share of votes in favor of NTR with Vietnam are 61.47%, 69.63%, 78.54% and 78.12% in 1998,
1999, 2000 and 2001, respectively.
Import shock from Vietnam. Analogous to the China shock, we construct the future import
supply shocks from Vietnam at the CZ level according to

                                                                oth,V
                                  V                Ljk,t     Mk,t  +1
                                 Sj,t+1    =                               ,
                                               k
                                                   Lj,t Yk,t + Mk,t - Xk,t
          oth,V
where Mk,t  +1 is the change in import of good k from Vietnam by eight other (non-U.S.) high-
income countries over 5 years in the future. The past import shock from Vietnam is

                                                              oth,V
                               V           Lik,t-5        Mk,t
                              Sj,t =                                       ,
                                       k
                                           Li,t-5 Yk,t-5 + Mk,t-5 - Xk,t-5
            oth,V
where Mk,t        denotes the change in import of good k from Vietnam by eight other (non-U.S.)
high-income countries over the past 5 years. We aggregate the CZ-level measures to congressional
                                                                                                 V
districts using the same procedure in section 4.2. The CD-level measures are denoted by Si,t       +1
       V
and Si,t . The the magnitude of the import shock from Vietnam is several orders smaller than
                                                   V
that from China. The standard deviation of Si,t      +1 over 1998-2001 is 0.0057. As with China,
local manufacturing share and past import shock have a large predicting power for future shock.
                            V                     V
Regressing (de-trended) Si,t  +1 on (de-trended) Si,t and ShareM f gi,t yields a R-squared of 0.528.



A.2     Evidence from congressional speech
The data on congressional speech is obtained from (Gentzkow et al., 2019). For each congressional
district×year cell, we count the number of speeches that refer "China" together with a mention of
trade issues or a mention of labor issues.34 The number of relevant speeches is related to import
  34
    We identify the issues that each speech cover by keywords. The keywords for trade issues include trade,
export/exports and import/imports. The keywords for labor issues include labor, employment, unemployment,
and job/jobs.



                                                       53
shocks from China according to:

                      yit =       c 1(t  c)HighExposurei + Xit + Dt + it ,                       (20)
                              c


where yit is the number of speeches related to the "China and trade" issue or the "China and
labor" issue delivered by the representative of i in year t. Congressional districts are classified
into groups based on their exposure to the increase in China's import penetration over the period
2001-2006. HighExposurei is an indicator variable equaling to 1 if i belongs to the top tercile of
the exposure to import shock from China. We allow its effect to vary across different congressional
sessions, and the differential effects are captured by coefficients c . Xi represents the total number
of speeches delivered by the representative in district i and year t, and Dt denotes the year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the congressional district level.
    Panel A of Figure A.1 reports the estimates of c and the corresponding 90% confidence
intervals. The estimated coefficients become positively significant from the 107th congress (2001-
02) and on, when the China Shock over 2001 to 2006 gradually revealed itself. In contrast, the
estimates are smaller in magnitude and statistical insignificant over the earlier period 1989-1998.
In panels B and C, we estimate equation (20) for Democrats and Republicans separately. For
the purpose of comparison, y-axes in these two panels share the same scale. Two results emerge.
First, after the China Shock is realized, the representatives from the high-exposure districts raise
the related trade and labor issues more often in their speeches, but such response is stronger for
Democrats than Republicans. Second, it appears that Democrats started taking actions before
the China shock is realized. Specifically, for Democrats the estimated c surged in 1999-2000
(i.e., the 106th congress), while for Republicans, the effect started picking up in 2001-2002. These
patterns are consistent with the findings in section 5 that (i) Democrats are more informed than
Republicans about the China shock before it was fully realized, and (ii) Democratic legislators
place more weights on the subconstituencies that would be adversely impacted by the future
import penetration from China.




                                                 54
                                                                                                                             89                 Coefficients                       89                           Coefficients
                                                                                                                                -90                                                  -9
                                                                                                                                          -.5   0   .5    1 1.5                           0               -.5     0     .5     1
                                                                                                                             91 (1                                                 91         (1
                                                                                                                               -9 01                                                 -9          0
                                                                                                                                 2     )                                                  2          1)
                                                                                                                             93 (1                                                 93         (1
                                                                                                                               -9 02                                                 -9          0
                                                                                                                                 4     )                                                  4          2)
                                                                                                                             95 (1                                                 95         (1
                                                                                                                               -9 03                                                 -9          0
                                                                                                                                 6     )                                                  6          3)
                                                                                                                             97 (1                                                 97         (1
                                                                                                                               -9    0                                               -9          0   4)
                                                                                                                                 8 4)                                                     8
                                                                                                                             99 (1                                                 99         (1




     China's accession to the WTO.
                                                                                                                               -0 05                                                 -0          0
                                                                                                                                 0     )                                                  0          5)
                                                                                                                             01 (1                                                 01         (1
                                                                                                                               -0 06                                                 -0          0
                                                                                                                                 2     )                                                  2          6)
                                                                                                                             03 (1                                                 03         (1
                                                                                                                               -0 07                                                 -0          0
                                                                                                                                 4     )                                                  4          7)




                                                                                                                                                                  B. Democrats
                                                                                                                             05 (1                                                 05         (1
                                                                                                                               -0 08                                                 -0          0                                 A. All Politicians
                                                                                                                                 6     )                                                6 8)
                                                                                                                             07 (1                                                 07 (1
                                                                                                                               -0    0                                               -0 09
                                                                                                                                  8 9)                                                  8     )
                                                                                                                                   (1                                                     (1
                                                                                                                                     10                                                     10
                                                                                                                                        )                                                      )




55
                                                                                                                             89                 Coefficients
                                                                                                                                -90
                                                                                                                             91 (1          -.5 0    .5   1 1.5
                                                                                                                               -9 01
                                                                                                                                 2     )
                                                                                                                             93 (1
                                                                                                                               -9    0
                                                                                                                                 4 2)
                                                                                                                             95 (1
                                                                                                                               -9 03
                                                                                                                                 6     )
                                                                                                                             97 (1
                                                                                                                               -9 04
                                                                                                                                 8     )
                                                                                                                             99 (1
                                                                                                                               -0 05
                                                                                                                                 0     )
                                                                                                                             01 (1
                                                                                                                               -0 06
                                                                                                                                 2     )
                                                                                                                             03 (1
                                                                                                                               -0 07
                                                                                                                                 4     )
                                                                                                                             05 (1
                                                                                                                                                                  C. Republicans




                                                                                                                               -0 08
                                                                                                                                 6     )
                                                                                                                             07 (1
                                                                                                                               -0    0
                                                                                                                                  8 9)
                                                                                                                                   (1
                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure A.1: Number of Speeches with Mentions of China & Labor or China & Trade Issues




     Standard errors are clustered at the congressional district level. The vertical red dashed line indicates the time of
     Notes: This figure plots the estimated coefficients c in equation (20). Error bands show 90% confidence intervals.
                                         Table A.1: Parameter Estimates and Content of Information Sets
                                    (Extended Model: Including Campaign Contributions from Interest Groups)

      Period             CS of a            CS of b            CS of                CS of           p-value BP p-value RC p-value RS                Num obs.
                       (Ideology)         (Constant)        (Import Shock)          (Money)
                                                  Panel A: Including Campaign Contributions from Business
      1997-2001      [-0.340, 0.940]     [0.267, 0.500]      [-5.000, -0.200]     [0.133, 0.333]        0.825           0.820          0.820           2546
      1993-1996      [-1.200, 0.000]     [0.627, 0.840]       [-8.267, 1.067]     [0.033, 0.333]        0.730           0.660          0.660           1688
      1990-1992       [0.833, 1.433]    [-0.233, -0.133]      [-1.400, 0.000]     [0.000, 0.100]        0.110           0.100          0.100           1229

                                                    Panel B: Including Campaign Contributions from Labor




56
      1997-2001      [-0.700, 0.740]      [0.167, 0.267]     [-1.933, -0.067]    [-0.200, 0.000]        0.145           0.145          0.145           2546
      1993-1996      [-3.667, 0.000]      [0.307, 0.893]     [-14.733, 1.733]    [-0.600, 0.000]        0.750           0.690          0.690           1688
      1990-1992      [-4.000, 5.000]     [-0.587, 0.207]      [-7.000, 5.000]    [-0.780, 0.660]        0.455           0.455          0.455           1229

                    Panel C: Including the 2nd Principal Component of Campaign Contributions from Business and Labor
      1997-2001     [-2.913, -0.273]      [0.100, 0.600]      [-8.133, 4.000]     [0.667, 2.167]        0.915           0.900          0.900           2546
      1993-1996     [-4.667, -0.667]      [0.440, 1.040]     [-16.000, 6.000]     [0.467, 2.567]        0.605           0.605          0.605           1688
      1990-1992      [-4.500, 0.300]     [-0.500, 0.000]     [-6.000, -0.400]     [0.700, 3.033]        0.765           0.765          0.765           1229
      Notes: The estimation in this table is based on the assumption that the information set possessed by politicians contains Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i , and the
     campaign contributions from the corresponding interest groups during the congressional cycle.
          Table A.2: Excluding Politicians Working in the Committee on Commerce, and the Committee on Ways and Means

      Period            CS of a              CS of b             CS of           p-value BP      p-value RC       p-value RS      Num obs.
      Panel A: Minimal information Zi,t = {ShareM f gi,t , i }
      1997-2001       [0.399, 0.740]      [0.060, 0.240]     [-2.487, -0.575]        0.700           0.700           0.700           2012
      1993-1996      [-0.140, 0.100]      [0.475, 0.573]     [-2.712, -1.050]        0.090           0.090           0.090           1361
      1990-1992       [0.600, 1.650]     [-0.500, 0.000]      [-1.825, 5.000]        0.990           0.990           0.990           1001
      1990-2001       [0.420, 0.585]      [0.115, 0.180]     [-1.363, -0.575]        0.135           0.135           0.135           4374

      Panel B: Baseline information Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i }
      1997-2001 [0.600, 0.825] [0.125, 0.250]                 [-2.378,-0.173]        0.660           0.660           0.660           2012




57
      1993-1996 [-0.250, 0.000] [0.600, 0.700]                [-2.975,-0.175]        0.210           0.210           0.210           1361
      1990-1992 [1.000, 1.500] [-0.350, -0.200]               [-1.375, 0.000]        0.205           0.190           0.190           1001
      1990-2001 [0.600, 0.600] [0.200, 0.225]                [-1.420, -0.775]        0.120           0.120           0.120           4374

      Panel C: Perfect foresight Zi,t = {Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ], i }
      1997-2001            ­                   ­                    ­                0.010           0.010           0.010           2012
      1993-1996            ­                   ­                    ­                0.010           0.010           0.010           1361
      1990-1992      [1.150, 1.500]     [-0.338, -0.238]     [-1.300, -0.300]        0.100           0.090           0.090           1001
      1990-2001            ­                   ­                    ­                0.010           0.010           0.010           4374
      Notes: For the case of perfect foresight, we assume that in addition to Si,t , ShareM f gi,t and i , politicians also possess information
     that is orthogonal to these covariates, i.e. Si,t+1 - E [Sit+1 |Si,t , ShareM f gi,t , i ].
B         Role of expectations about electoral sensitivity ( )
Our baseline model assumes that politicians have full knowledge of the electoral consequences of
the China Shock that are dependent on the NTR voting decisions. In this appendix, we relax
                                 1   2
this assumption. Denote t = t      - t as the electoral sensitivity to the China Shock. Suppose
politicians form expectation on both t and Si,t+1 . Then the voting decision is determined by

                               Yi,t = 1{at i + bt + ~E[t Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t > 0}.

The corresponding odds-based moment equality analogous to (8) is given by

                                        at i + bt + ~E[t Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]
                     E (1 - Yi,t )                                               - Yi,t Ii,t = 0.     (B.1)
                                     1 -  at i + bt + ~E[t Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]

Here we make two assumptions: (i) t and Si,t+1 are uncorrelated conditional on Iit , and (ii) the
distribution of t conditional on Iit is equal to its distribution conditional on an information set
common to all politicians at time t, It . Under these assumptions we can rewrite (B.1) as:

                                     at  i + bt + ~E [t |It ] E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]
                  E (1 - Yi,t )                                                     - Yi,t Ii,t = 0
                                  1 -  at i + bt + ~E [t |It ] E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ]


It is straightforward to redefine the coefficient t =  ~E [t |It ] and reinterpret all the results we re-
port under this slightly different definition. We believe assumptions (i) and (ii) are not implausible
because the sensitivity of voting to economic shocks is a common parameter that does not depend
on the individual politician's characteristics. We see t as a parameter that politicians estimate
from voter surveys on the importance of certain issues in an election.35 The independence of the
China Shock from this parameter t is also reasonable once we consider that this is a common
parameter that does not depend on specific constituencies.


C         Monte Carlo simulation: MLE bias
In this Appendix, we adopt Monte Carlo simulations to illustrate the bias that emerges when
estimating t by maximum likelihood in equation (6). We adopt a time horizon of 5 years to
define a future import shock, so that Si,t+1 corresponds to the increase in import penetration in
the next 5 years. The true information set throughout the exercise is what we have defined as
  35
       See Jones and Baumgartner (2005).



                                                          58
                          b
baseline information set Ii,t = {Sit, , ShareM f gi,t }. More specifically, Si,t+1 is simulated according
to the following linear model:

                         Si,t+1 = 0 + 1 Si,t + 2 ShareM f gi,t + 3 i +i,t+1 ,
                                                              b ]
                                                   E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t


where i,t+1 is the expectational error. To simulate Si,t+1 , we set 0 = 0, 1 = 0.721, 2 = 0.184,
3 = 0. Expectational errors i,t+1 are drawn from the normal distribution with mean 0 and
standard deviation of  = 0.525.36 We take Si,t , ShareM f gi,t and i from the real data over 1998-
                                                                                        b
2001. Then, the voting decision is simulated according to Yi,t = 1{ai + b +  E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t ] - i,t > 0}.
We set a = 0.5 and b = 0.3 and present two sets of results based on  = -1.3 and  = 0.
    We will evaluate the bias that arises when an econometrician mistakenly assumes that politi-
                                   m                        p
cians have minimal information Ii,t   or perfect foresight Ii,t . For the case of minimal information
set, we estimate t by maximizing the following log-likelihood:



                             ln L t | {Yi,t , i , Ii,t }N
                                                        i=1                                           (C.1)
                              N
                                                                     m
                         =         Yi,t ln  at i + bt + t E Si,t+1 |Ii,t
                             i=1
                                                                            m
                             + (1 - Yi,t ) ln 1 -  at i + bt + t E Si,t+1 |Ii,t     .

where the expectation is estimated as:

                              Si,t+1 = µ0 + µ1 ShareM f gi,t + µ2 i +ui,t+1
                                                              m]
                                                   E[Si,t+1 |Ii,t


For the case of perfect foresight the log-likelihood is maximized after replacing the expected future
shocks with Si,t+1 .
    Table C.1 reports the mean and the standard deviation of MLE estimates for 500 simulated
datasets. First, the simulations clearly indicate that when the model is correctly specified, the
average parameter estimates are very close to the true parameters. Second, when we assume the
politician has perfect foresight, i.e. more information than she actually does, there is a clear
attenuation bias. The average    ^ is -0.813 (the true  is -1.3). We discussed the intuition for this
attenuation bias as related to classical measurement error in the main text. A more nuanced
case is the one in which the politician is assumed to have a Minimal information set, i.e. the
  36
    The parameters  's are estimated based on the actual data over 1998-2001.  is set based on the empirical
distribution of the regression residuals.


                                                       59
econometrician assumes that the politician knows strictly less than what she actually knows. In
our simulations we find again an attenuation bias, as the average      ^ is -1.060. While it is not easy
to determine, in general, the direction of the bias, it is instructive to discuss the specific result. In
our example the true voting decision is taken base on the baseline information set, as follows:

                                        b
      Yi,t = 1{at i + bt + t E Si,t+1 |Ii,t - i,t  0}
                                         m                  b                m
            = 1{at i + bt + t E Si,t+1 |Ii,t + t E Si,t+1 |Ii,t - E Si,t+1 |Ii,t                  - i,t  0},

                       b               m
where it = E Si,t+1 |Ii,t - E Si,t+1 |Ii,t is the specification error, i.e. the difference between what
the econometrician assumes and what the politician actually knows. For the simulation exercises
in Appendix D.5 of Dickstein and Morales (2018) the correlation between the specification error
                                                 m
and the assumed expectation, here E Si,t+1 |Ii,t    , is by construction zero. Hence, their estimates
            m                                                               m
based on Ii,t display very minor biases. In our case, it and E Si,t+1 |Ii,t     happen to be negatively
correlated, which results in the attenuation bias. Finally, we consider the special case in which
 = 0. Clearly, if the China shocks truly do not matter for voting decisions, MLE biases are
negligible.

                     Table C.1: Maximum Likelihood - Monte Carlo Simulation

                             Assumed
                             Information Set                        Avg a
                                                                        ^ (std.)      Avg ^
                                                                                          b (std.)      Avg ^ (std.)
 a = 0.5, b = 0.3,  = -1.3   (1)   Minimal Information              0.449   (0.066)   0.303   (0.027)   -1.060   (0.047)
                             (2)   Baseline Information (correct)   0.498   (0.079)   0.319   (0.034)   -1.306   (0.058)
                             (3)   Perfect Foresight                0.421   (0.090)   0.304   (0.040)   -0.813   (0.190)
 a = 0.5, b = 0.3,  = 0      (4)   Minimal Information              0.499   (0.073)   0.300   (0.029)   -0.001   (0.046)
                             (5)   Baseline Information (correct)   0.499   (0.072)   0.300   (0.029)   -0.000   (0.036)
                             (6)   Perfect Foresight                0.500   (0.072)   0.300   (0.029)   -0.002   (0.041)




D      Estimation of confidence sets and specification tests

D.1     Confidence sets for parameters
The modified method of moment test statistics is:
                                                 K                           2
                                                            m
                                                            ¯ k (p )
                                      Q(p ) =          min{          , 0}                                          (D.1)
                                                k=1
                                                            ^k (p )

                                                                                   1
where p is a point in the space g , and K is the number of moments. m   ¯ k (p ) = n i   t mk (Si,t+1 , i , p )
is the mean value of the moment k evaluated at p , and  ^k (p ) is the corresponding standard error.

                                                        60
When Q(p ) = 0, it indicates that all the moment listed in (16) are satisfied at p , and hence
p could be included in the identified set. If Q(p ) > 0, it indicates that some sample moment
inequalities are violated when evaluated at p . This may result from two independent cases: (i)
some population moment inequalities are indeed violated at p ; and (ii) some sample moment
inequalities are violated because of sampling variation (Ho and Pakes, 2014).
    To account for the sampling variation, we adopt the Generalized Moment Selection (GMS)
test in Andrews and Soares (2010) which simulates the asymptotic distribution of Q(p ) under
the null hypothesis Ho :   = p . Here,   denotes the true parameter vector. More specifically,
the simulation is based on R draws from the multivariate normal distribution N (0K , IK ), where
IK is the identity matrix of dimension K . Each draw r yields the following statistics:

                                K
                                            1
                                           ^2
                                                               2        m ¯ k (p ) 
                 QAA
                  r (p )    =          min{   (p )r ]k , 0}        × 1{ n          ln n}                     (D.2)
                                k=1
                                                                          ^k (p )

where (^ ·) is the estimate of the variance-covariance matrix of m     ¯ k (p )
                                                                                . [  ^1 2 ( ) ]
                                                                                            p r k is the k th
                                                                       ^k (p )
                         1                                                   m
                                                                             ¯    (   )
element of the vector  ^ 2 (p )r , and it is the simulated counterpart of       k   p
                                                                                        in equation (D.1).37
                                                                             ^k (p )
Pooling all QAA
              r (p ) together renders the simulated distribution denoted by Q
                                                                                          AA
                                                                                             (p ).
          AA                                                 AA
        ^ (p , 1 - ) denote the (1 - )-quantile of Q (p ). p is included in the (1 - )%
    Let c
confidence set (CS) if Q(p )  c  ^AA (p , 1 - ). By repeating the procedure for each point p in the
grid space p , we derive the (1 - )% CS denoted by        ^ 1- .38 In the main text, we set  = 0.05,
and report the 95% confidence sets.


D.2      BP, RC, and RS test statistics and corresponding p-values
This appendix details the statistical tests of whether covariates in Zi,t are contained in the infor-
mation set possessed by politicians when they vote on the NTR with China. Intuitively, when the
original voting model is correctly specified, but the information set is misspecified by researchers,
i.e Zi,t   Ii,t , some moment inequalities will be violated and the confidence set is likely to be
empty. In the following, we discuss the BP, RS and RS tests based on Bugni et al. (2015).
  37
                        m  ¯ k (p ) 
     The component 1{ n    ^k (p )    ln n} is the generalized moment selection function which selects the moment
that are almost binding.
  38
     We conduct the grid search within a predefined grid space g . If some of the points in ^ 1- are at the boundary
of g , we expand the limits of the grid space and repeat the procedure described above. For our baseline model,
we fill the 3-dimensional space with 64,000 equidistant grids. For the augmented model in section 5.5, we fill the
4-dimensional space with 160,000 equidistant grids.




                                                        61
D.2.1       P-value of the Test BP

The test statistics for the Test BP is defined as (D.1). For a given value of , we infer whether
 p  g , Q(p ) > c    ^AA (p , 1 - ). If so, we lower  by a small amount, and repeat the procedure
until reaching the value BP such that  p  g such that Q(p )  c      ^AA (p , 1 - BP ). BP is then
the p-value for the test BP.39 As pointed out by Bugni et al. (2015), this test is too conservative.
Therefore, we turn to the test RC and the test RS proposed by the authors as follows.

D.2.2       P-value of the Test RC

To conduct the test RC, we first calculate the minimum of test statistics (D.1) across all p  g .
Denote the minimum by T = min Q(p ), and        g = arg min(Q(p )).
                                                                    40
                                                                       The p-value of the test RC
                                    g                              p
                                                             ^RC (1 - ) = min c
is constructed as follows. For a given value of , we compute c                ^AA (p , 1 - ). If
                                                                                          p g
       RC
T >c^ (1 - ), we lower  by a small amount, and repeat the procedure until reaching the value
 RC
 such that T  c  ^RC (1 - RC ). Then, RC is the corresponding p-value.

D.2.3       P-value of the Test RS

Similar to the test RC, to conduct the test RS, we first compute T and derive  g as defined above.
Then, we use the R draws from the multivariate normal distribution N (0K , IK ). For each draw r ,
                                      
we compute QAA r (p ) for each p  g according to equation (D.2), and derive the corresponding
minimum Tr = min QAA    r (p ). The p-value of the test RS is constructed as follows. For a given
                   p g
value of , we find the (1 - )-quantile of Tr , denoted by c      ^RS (1 - ). If T > c
                                                                                    ^RS (1 - ), we
lower  by a small amount, and repeat the procedure until reaching the value RS such that
T c  ^RS (1 - RS ). Then, RS is the corresponding p-value.
    Note that the test RC and the test RS are different in the following way. For the test RC,
                             ^RC (1 - ), we first compute the (1 - )-quantile for each asymptotic
to derive the critical value c
distributions QAA evaluated at each p         g , and then take the minimum across these quantiles.
                                              ^RS (1 - ), we first compute the minimum of QAA
For the RS test, to derive the critical value c                                              r (p )
across p                                                                            
               g , and then derive the (1 - )-quantile of these minimums. When g contains only
one point, c^RC (1 - ) = c ^RS (1 - ), and the p-values from the two tests are the same. When     g

  39
      In practice, we start the algorithm with  = 0.99 and reduce it by 0.005 at a time. We stop when  reaches
0.01. Hence, p-value=0.01 (respectively, 0.99) in our tables indicates that the p-value is less than or equal to 0.01
(respectively, greater than or equal to 0.99).
   40
      As discussed in Ho and Pakes (2014) (pg. 3868),       g could be a set of values all of which make (D.1) zero
(i.e., all the moments are satisfied), or it could be a point, indicating that no value of  satisfies all the moment
conditions. The latter case could be a result of sampling error, which is accounted for by the GMS approach
proposed by Andrews and Soares (2010). In our case,          g contains only one point as the case in Ho and Pakes
(2014).



                                                         62
                          ^RC (1 - )  c
contains multiple points, c           ^RS (1 - ), and the p-value of the test RS will be no larger
than that of the test RC.




                                               63
