                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             NEW TECHNOLOGIES, PRODUCTIVITY, AND JOBS:
THE (HETEROGENEOUS) EFFECTS OF ELECTRIFICATION ON US MANUFACTURING

                                         Martin Fiszbein
                                        Jeanne Lafortune
                                         Ethan G. Lewis
                                          José Tessada

                                      Working Paper 28076
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28076


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Javiera García and Sebastían Poblete for research assistance. We thank Daron
Acemoglu, David Autor and participants at the NBER SI 2020, SOLE/EALE 2020, Economics
Seminar of University of Virginia, University of San Andres, SECHI 2019 and LACEA-LAMES
2019 for their valuable suggestions and comments. A previous version of this paper circulated
under the title "Electrifying?How New Technologies Impact Productivity and Jobs." All
remaining errors are our own. Lafortune and Tessada thank Fondecyt (Grant Regular No
1181812). Corresponding author: Jeanne Lafortune, E-mail: jlafortune@uc.cl. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Martin Fiszbein, Jeanne Lafortune, Ethan G. Lewis, and José Tessada. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
New Technologies, Productivity, and Jobs: The (Heterogeneous) Effects of Electrification
on US Manufacturing
Martin Fiszbein, Jeanne Lafortune, Ethan G. Lewis, and José Tessada
NBER Working Paper No. 28076
November 2020
JEL No. J24,L11,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

We use city-industry data from 1890 to 1940 to identify the impact of electricity on
manufacturing. We exploit cross-industry variation in pre-electricity energy intensity combined
with geographic variation in proximity to early hydroelectric power plants. Labor productivity
gains from the arrival of electricity were rapid and long-lasting. Electricity was labor-saving,
induced capital deepening, and a hollowing out of the labor skills distribution. We document
significant heterogeneity in electricity's effects: in sector-county pairs where the average firm was
initially large, we find no significant expansion in employment, while in markets with relatively
small firms, output and employment increased.

Martin Fiszbein                                   Ethan G. Lewis
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Boston University                                 Dartmouth College
270 Bay State Road                                6106 Rockefeller Hall
Boston, MA 02215                                  Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                          and NBER
fiszbein@bu.edu                                   ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu

Jeanne Lafortune                                  José Tessada
Instituto de Economia                             Escuela de Administracion
Facultad de Ciencias Economicas                   Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile
y Administration                                  Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile          Macul, Santiago
Avda Vicuna Mackenna 4860                         Chile
Macul, Santiago                                   jtessada@gmail.com
Chile
and IZA
jlafortune@uc.cl
1    Introduction

    Technological progress has perennially been a source of optimism and a source of worry for
those who fear its impact on employment. As Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) formalize, new
technologies can both destroy jobs and have reinstatement effects, and the overall impact depends
on the strength of those forces. This paper investigates the many-sided impacts of one of the major
technological transformations of modern times: the electrification of manufacturing production.
David (1989, 1990), and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005) argue that the scope of the transformation
was comparable to that of the spread of computers. Furthermore, while Gordon (2016) argued that
electricity created sweeping productivity gains, the anxiety of workers who feared losing jobs to
"mechanization" were contemporaneously echoed in Jerome (1934)'s classic study. In this study,
we also investigate a role for product-market structure ­namely, whether firms are big or small­
mediating these competing forces, as it determines whether productivity gains translate more into
mark-up increases or higher labor demand (see Autor et al., 2020b; De Loecker et al., 2016). Like
today, big firms' rising power was seen as a potential threat to welfare (Lamoreaux, 2019), though
how this interacted with technological change has not been previously studied in this era.
    To examine how electricity adoption affected manufacturing production during the Second In-
dustrial Revolution, we use a rich dataset of manufacturing industries in the largest urban centers
from 1890 to 1940. We estimate the effects of electricity combining sector- and city-level variation
while controlling for sector and city fixed effects in each period. With this approach, our estimates
result from comparing outcomes across (i) industries with different levels of energy intensity within
a given city, and (ii) cities with different access to hydropower within a given industry. In other
words, our approach allows us to remove the direct effects of both geography (including any direct
"natural advantage" of hydropower-suitable sites) and industry. We examine outcomes over several
decades, exploring the manufacturing sector's dynamic response as electricity usage increases.
    We start by showing that the two sources of variation used in our empirical strategy have
strong predictive power: electricity adoption was significantly influenced by pre-determined energy
intensity at the sector level and by electricity rates by access to hydropower at the city level.
The importance of variation in proximity to large hydropower stations is in line with the results of
Severnini (2014), who argues that transmission of power over long distances was infeasible early on.
The importance of pre-electrification power intensity is consistent with the findings of Woolf (1984)
who shows that that electricity substituted for other forms of power. We then use the interaction of
these sources of variation to study the impacts of electricity adoption on manufacturing production
and job mix. To reiterate, we use the interaction conditional on city- and industry-trends, not
distance to hydropower per se. Among other things, this sweeps out the influence of any geographic




                                                 1
features that have a common influence on all industries, including access to water.1
       Using this novel approach, we find that productivity gains from electricity adoption were rapid
and long-lasting. Being close to a hydroelectric plant led to differentially faster productivity growth
in energy-intensive industries. By the early 1900s, having one power plant within 70 km increases
the labor productivity of an industry at the 75th percentile of energy-intensity by 5 percent com-
pared to one at the 25th percentile. The magnitude more than doubles by 1920 and remains stable
until 1940. Our findings are robust to considering different measures of access to hydropower and
to controlling for initial conditions. We show that these differences only started to appear once
electricity spread to manufacturing firms ­ i.e., there are no "pre-trends" ­ suggesting that our mea-
sure does not capture other advantages of their geographical location. We also show that they can
be reconciled with the existing literature (Crafts, 2002; David, 1990) that had argued productivity
gains lagged electricity adoption by several decades.2
       Growth in productivity fueled by electricity adoption was not, however, tied to an expansion
of employment. Energy-intensive sectors in cities with access to hydropower exhibit faster output
growth than those without access but have similar growth in employment--a labor-saving pattern.
We also find that electricity adoption induced capital deepening, consistent with the presence of
complementarities between electricity and capital. These results echo the historical account of new
technologies in the Second Industrial Revolution in Goldin and Katz (2009).
       Examining labor market effects in more detail, we find that electricity favored labor hollowing
out ­a decline of middle-skill jobs at the expense of high- and low-skill jobs. This hollowing-out
pattern is consistent with previous studies and with the notion that electricity adoption enabled
the reorganization of factory production (e.g., Devine, 1983; Gray, 2013; Katz and Margo, 2014).
While Jerome (1934) suggests that electricity could destroy low-skill jobs, our findings suggest
that for this level of skill, reinstatement effects were larger than job destruction effects.3 When
looking at a proxy for the task content of occupations, we see that polarization appears to have
been accompanied by an expansion of non-routine cognitive tasks and a fall in routine activities
(manual and cognitive), something similar to what has been observed as the modern impact of
computerization.4
   1
     The relevant geography for using water as a direct source of power was, in any case, quite different than for its
use in electricity generation. Furthermore, by the beginning of the electrification era, water was only a minor ­ and
declining ­ source of power in manufacturing.
   2
     The lag has traditionally been attributed to the costs and challenges of reorganizing the factory to take advantage
of purchased electricity (e.g., Devine, 1983). While these impediments may have been real, our findings suggest
adoption was also slow in most places due to the high cost of electricity itself, as immediate productivity gains are
concentrated in places with access to hydropower. Woolf (1984) also argued that cost was a key driver of electrification
in manufacturing.
   3
     As we build uniform sectors for the whole sample period, the appearance and disappearance of industries in the
raw data do not explain our results.
   4
     Given that we look at employment at the sector level, our results could represent a lower bound for employment
flows if those happen within sector. We do not observe gross job flows either.


                                                           2
    We then study the effects of electricity on employment by occupational categories. We show that
an increase in production workers entirely explains the increase in the share of low-skill workers and
that the destruction of medium-skill jobs corresponds to a collapse of craftsmen occupations. This
result is consistent with the notion that production line methods favored by electricity replaced
artisanal methods and required instead simple manual tasks performed by low-skill workers. We
also find that electricity adoption was associated with an overall increase in the number of distinct
occupations.
    We then argue that market structure can explain why productivity gains from electricity were
not tied to overall output growth at the city-sector level. To make our argument precise, we
introduce a simple model where the impact of improved energy depends on market structure,
expanding the model of Autor et al. (2020b) to include multiple factors of production (energy ­
the source of technological advance­ and labor). In markets with small firms, cheaper energy is
predicted to increase output and employment. In markets with large firms, the resulting inelastic
product demand curves (by Marshall's second law of demand) are predicted to induce firms to
increase mark-ups instead of output in response to the same fall in energy prices, leading labor
demand to increase by less (or even decrease). To test our hypothesis, we assess whether electricity
had heterogeneous effects by the average firm size before the diffusion of electricity. We find
electricity adoption had negative (though not usually significant) effects on employment in city-
sector cells with above-median firm size and positive effects on output and employment in cells
with below-median firm size. This result is robust to several different ways to approximate market
structure, including tradability. Thus, the reinstatement effects of technological change appear to
be tied to market structure, as the model predicts.5
    Our paper contributes to the literature on the role of electricity in the process of economic
growth. Our empirical strategy is closely related to the contributions of Gaggl et al. (2019, 2016),
who exploit geographic variation in access to hydropower to show that electricity induced real-
location of labor from agriculture to manufacturing. We combine that source of variation with
cross-sectoral variation, allowing us to control for the direct effects of local "geographic advantage"
­hopefully lending credibility to our approach­ as well as, for the first time, being able to examine
impacts within, not just across sectors.
    Beyond the analysis of productivity effects, our cross-county cross-sector approach also provides
interesting findings in our detailed examination of labor market effects. The hollowing out pattern
in the distribution of labor skills we find within sector complements the across sector findings of
Gray (2013) and Katz and Margo (2014). The most novel aspect of our contribution is to link
market structure, a previously neglected aspect with broad, important implications.
  5
    Our analysis is thus consistent with the only study that has shown strong negative employment effects of electricity
(Morin, 2019), which focused on the cement sector, one of the most concentrated ones in the US.



                                                           3
        Indeed, our insights on the impacts of new technologies on labor markets may go beyond the
context of the Second Industrial Revolution in the US. The burgeoning literature on the contem-
porary impacts of industrial robots mostly points to negative effects on employment, though not
in all cases (see Acemoglu et al., 2020; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020; Aghion et al., 2020; Dauth
et al., 2019; Graetz and Michaels, 2018), suggesting that the relationship between new technologies
and jobs may not be unique. Our analysis of electrification shows the labor market impacts of new
technologies may depend on product market structure. Our results on labor hollowing out have
points in common with studies on recent trends toward polarization in labor markets (Autor et al.,
2003; Goos and Manning, 2007), and, as previously mentioned, our arguments about the role of
market structure echo those of De Loecker et al. (2016), De Loecker et al. (2020), and Autor et al.
(2020a).
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature in
more detail and frames our contributions. Section 3 describes the data that we use and our em-
pirical strategy. Section 4 shows that electricity adoption was significantly influenced both by
pre-determined energy intensity at the sector level, and access to hydropower at the city level.
Section 5 presents our analysis of the impacts of electricity on manufacturing productivity, employ-
ment, capital deepening, and different types of labor. Section 6 studies the role of market structure.
The last section concludes.


2        Related Literature

        A large literature studies the effects of electricity on productivity. According to the usual narra-
tives, its impact on productivity was sizable, though lagged by over two decades from establishing
the first power plants.6 Using growth accounting methods, Crafts (2002) finds a sizable contribution
of electricity to total factor productivity but only starting in 1920. David (1990) and David and
Wright (2003) argue that adoption required time as innovations diffused progressively across differ-
ent activities and types of firms. Goldfarb (2005) suggests that multiple adaptations were needed
and that this delayed productivity gains. Jovanovic and Rousseau (2005) and Atkeson and Kehoe
(2007) analyze the slow adoption process of electricity and other general-purpose technologies and
their delayed effects on productivity. The idea of a slow adoption process echoes contemporaneous
studies noted that growth in energy use in manufacturing was below expectations and much slower
than in transportation (Daugherty, 1933; Thorp, 1929). Along these lines, we find significant lags
in the impacts of electricity when using cross-industry variation alone, but earlier, significant and
sizeable impacts when using cross-industry cross-city variation. This suggests that the existence
    6
    A notable exception is Ristuccia and Solomou (2014) who find no productivity gains from electricity diffusion in
the UK, Germany, France, and Japan using time series data, nor across industrial sectors in the UK.



                                                         4
of rapid productivity gains, though only in areas with access to cheap electricity thanks to hy-
dropower. This echoes the argument by David and Wright (2003) that the UK lagged the US in
productivity growth over 1920 due to the gap in the availability of cheap purchased electric power
for industrial districts.
    Historical narratives argue that electricity enabled a radical transformation in the organization
of production. Devine (1983) describes the differences between the organization of steam-powered
factories and electricity-powered factories. With steam power, many machines had to be connected
to the same power source using a system of belts and shafts. With electricity, each machine could
eventually have its own drive, which brought about energy savings and a considerable increase
in flexibility for organizing the factory floor layout. This created space for efficiency gains and
paved the way for Taylorism and continuous-process methods. Du Boff (1967) argues that elec-
tricity allowed for smaller machine size and lower fixed costs of using energy. We find evidence of
labor hollowing out and increased occupational diversity in energy-intensive firms with access to
hydropower. This is consistent with the notion that electricity favored continuous process methods
and reshaped labor demands accordingly.7
    Our results on the role of market structure provide a distinct addition to the literature. While
our simple model shows why the impact of technology in the labor market depends on product
demand elasticity, this insight has been absent in the literature. The relevance of market structure
in our analysis echoes the contemporaneous concerns about "bigness" in the period we study.
Increased capitalization required by technological change and the Great Merger Movement between
1895 and 1904 led to increased concentration. Concerns about this process gave rise to anti-trust
policies, but these did not reduce concentration in the short run (Adelman, 1951; Lamoreaux, 2019;
Nutter and Einhorn, 1969; Smythe, 2010).
    Our model and results complement the analysis of Smythe (2001), who shows a positive correla-
tion between a merger in an industry during the Great Merger Movement and the rate of electricity
adoption a decade later. Our results suggest that beyond accelerating adoption, concentration
influenced the impacts of electricity on labor demands. Furthermore, we find that in sector-cities
with larger average firms, electricity adoption favored further market concentration.
    Our analysis complements a number of recent studies that examine the impacts of electrification
in developing countries in more recent periods (e.g., Dinkelman, 2011; Fried and Lagakos, 2019;
Lipscomb et al., 2013). Thus, our results may be of broad interest for developing countries today.
At the same time, our study's context has some distinguishing features, as the technology was new
and complementary inputs had yet to be developed. Finally, our analysis complements other studies
   7
     However, we do not observe that more complex firms were more likely to adopt electricity nor that electricity in-
creased the presence of women, clerical workers, or managerial positions, casting doubt on the link between electricity
and Taylorism.



                                                          5
of electrification in the US that are focused on the effects of electrification for households and rural
areas (e.g., Lewis, 2013; Lewis and Severnini, 2019). A distinctive aspect of our study is the focus
on manufacturing activities in the US during the Second Industrial Revolution. While electricity
is commonly considered to have played a fundamental role in that major historical transformation,
ours is among a small set of rigorous, detailed quantitative studies on the topic.


3     Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1   Data

    Our data set combines information on energy intensity, access to hydropower, electricity adop-
tion, industrial output, employment, and other outcomes for a panel of consistently defined countries
and industrial sectors between 1890 and 1940.
    We use data at the city-industry level from decennial Censuses of Manufactures 1890­1940.
While not much micro-level data is available for historical Census of Manufactures in the United
States for the period we are interested in (the samples by Atack et al., 2008, end in 1880), summary
tables by industry and city (or county, depending on the year) are available in the published paper
versions for Census years and some intercensal periods. This is an extended version of the data
digitized by Lafortune et al. (2019) from the Censuses of Manufactures, now restricting it to the
post-1890 period and adding 1940 to capture long-term impacts of electricity diffusion. The key
outcomes of interest are electricity and energy use, capital, labor, and output. Value of products
and costs are available for the full period, which allows us to define value-added as our measure of
output (Y ). We use the total number of workers as our measure of employment (N ) and compute
labor productivity as value-added per worker or Y /N . We present summary statistics for these
outcomes in Appendix Table A.1.
    Energy-intensity, as proxied by horsepower use, is available at the city-industry level from 1910
to 1930. We use the prime movers as our definition of horsepower when measuring energy intensity
(HP/Y ) but we add to it the rented horsepower when calculating the fraction of horsepower that
is electric in the industry. We also obtained aggregate industry measures of horsepower use from
1890 to 1930. Unfortunately, electricity usage by city-industry is only available in 1920. In 1930,
we have the electricity rented by firms which is a significant portion, but not all, electricity used
by firms at that moment.
    The geographic coverage of the Manufacturing Census differs by year. The population threshold
above which cities were included in each year changed over time. In 1890, the 165 largest cities were
included. In 1900, there were 209 cities included since only cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants
were detailed in the reports. In 1910 and 1920, only cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants were


                                                   6
included. In 1930, the process was more complex and involved restricting cities to those that had
a significant amount of manufacturing workers (10,000 was a typical cut-off but it depended on
other factors). Due to this change of geography, and because, with rare exception, cities are within
county boundaries, we make "county" the unit of analysis, matching each city to the county they
corresponded to.8 We merged counties over time to ensure that borders were very similar between
years, as described in Lafortune et al. (2019).
       The map in Figure 1 shows the counties that enter into our sample (using 1920 county bound-
aries). The areas in our analysis are the largest metropolitan areas of the period (including counties
whose population was 5 to 6 times that of an average US county). The close relationship between
our analysis at the national level and that at the local level (without adding county-level fixed
effects) suggests that the focus on big cities does not strongly alter the results.
       Industry classifications changed significantly over the period. We use detailed information
provided by the Census Bureau on the change in industry definitions over this period to generate
groups that are consistent over the full period. This means that we loose some details in how fine
our industries are defined but we are sure that we have the same industries included in each group
in each period. Industries were matched across census tabulations using tabulated crosswalks in
years after 1900, and by hand before that. Appendix Table C.16 gives our final set of industry
crosswalks. We generate a balanced sample at the aggregate level from 1890 to 1940 with 156
industries consistently defined over the period. As a result of this procedure, new industries are
bundled with the closest original sector or are kept together with the sector where they were
originally included. Similarly, disappearing industries are grouped following the same idea. This
guarantees that we observe all the activity reported in manufacturing despite the change in the
number of industries reported by each Census.9
       At the industry-city level, some industries disappear since there is also a minimum "cell size" to
be included (often, at least 3 establishments). However, even with these reporting restrictions, there
is "balancedness" in the sense that the industries detailed for each city often repeat, allowing us to
use panel methods as detailed in the empirical methods section. In the industry by area analysis,
we exclude the residual "All other industries" cells, as they are not comparable across years or
areas. Merged all together, we obtain a panel including 16,279 industry-city-year observations.
This includes a total of 178 areas (more in some years than in others) and 150 industries. We
capture around a quarter of all manufacturing output in our database.
   8
      The only significant exception to this is New York City, which spans multiple counties and whose county compo-
sition changes over time. We therefore construct New York City to cover the five "boroughs" (counties) that make
it up at the end of the period. This aggregates together Brooklyn and New York City, which reported as separate
cities in earlier years.
    9
      It also means that (potentially endogenous) changes in the number of industries observed do not drive our results,
particularly about employment levels.




                                                           7
       We identify access to early hydropower using the Census of Central Electric Light and Power
Stations and Street and Electric Railways of 1912. This edition of the Census provides a map of all
hydroelectric central stations reporting water power of at least 1,000 horsepower. We digitized this
map geocoding each power plant. Given the absence of historical literature determining the length
of distribution that was possible over the years, we employ our own data to determine how far away
from these power plants one needs to be to obtain benefits. Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2 show
that there appears to be a benefit to being close to a power plant in terms of electricity prices and
electricity usage until one is further than 70 km. We thus use as our main measure whether there
are any hydro power plants were within a radius of 70 km of the centroid of the county. We also
measured the distance of each centroid to the closest power plant on the map. We present this map
in Figure 1. As an alternative measure, we use the 44 hydroelectric power stations identified in the
1900 Census of Manufactures and identify the county where each of them was located. This data,
however, is of lower quality given the lack of exact geographic location and the unclear definition
the Census of Manufactures employed to classify these stations.
       We also use data on electricity prices. Our preferred source is the Census of Manufacturing
1947 which provides, for each county, the total cost of electricity and the number of KWh consumed
by manufacturing firms. This is the only source we found with reliable price information for the
manufacturing sector. Our analysis suggests, in line with Severnini (2014), that even by 1947
prices remained very local, as the distribution network was not yet well developed. We also show
results using the National Electric Light Association (NELA) Rate Book from 1921 and 1935, which
provide information on residential rates for a subset of cities in our sample.
       For labor related outcomes, we exploit data from the Census of Population with IPUMS micro-
data from 1900 to 1940 full counts (Ruggles et al. (2019)). We obtain information regarding the
number of workers and their characteristic by county and industry. Since the Census of Population
data uses IND1950 as an industry classification, we generate a cross-walk between the Census of
Manufacturing and the Census of Population. Given that our classification is finer than that pro-
vided in the Census, sometimes one IND1950 is matched to multiple industries in our database, as
shown in Appendix Table C.16.10


3.2      Empirical strategy

       Using our detailed data at the sector-county every decade in the period 1890-1940, we use a
difference-in-difference estimator to exploit variation in energy intensity across industries and vari-
ation in access to cheap electricity across locations. This approach is essentially the cross-country
cross-industry design pioneered by Rajan and Zingales (1998), discussed in detail by (Ciccone and
  10
    As mentioned earlier, we observe sector level outcomes, thus flows between finer industries within a sector are
not observed, neither are gross job flows at the sector level.


                                                        8
Papaioannou, 2016), though in our case geographic variation is across cities rather than countries.
We run regressions for outcomes at different points in time, focusing on observed patterns before
and after the arrival of electricity--this time variation is an additional layer that in intuitive terms
implies we adopt a triple-difference approach.
       We estimate the following equation:

                              log (y )ict = t · HPi,0 · P roxc + it + ct + ict ,                                (1)

where i denotes an industry, c a county and t a time period. We estimate the regression separately
for each year. This lets all the coefficients estimated in this model change by year. We control for
fixed effects by industry (it ) and by county(ct ) separately, for each year in our sample. log (y )ict
corresponds to outcomes related to either growth in employment or output or productivity between
year t and year 1890, which pre-dates the diffusion of electricity in manufacturing. In some speci-
fications, we also include a control for the 1890 value of the outcome variable at the industry-city
level, thus allowing for differential trends across years by initial levels. Regressions are weighted by
the number of establishments in each sector-county cell.
       Our parameter of interest is t , which measures the differential impact of the arrival of electricity
on a given sector given its location. HPi,0 measures the initial horsepower usage per worker of the
industry in 1890 at the national level. This attempts to compare sectors with high versus low
energy needs before the widespread adoption of electricity. As discussed below, this is a strong
predictor of electricity adoption.
       We interact sector-level energy intensity with a city-level proxy for access to electricity: the
availability of a hydroelectric plant in a near vicinity. The generation of electricity was developed
before the technological innovations that allowed its distribution over long distances. Moreover,
electricity was much cheaper when produced by hydroelectric power than through (mostly thermal)
alternatives. Using information on the geographic location of all large hydroelectric plants in 1912,
we define P roxc as the distance to the nearest station or the number of stations within a 70km
radius. We also obtained a list of all large hydroelectric plants in 1900 and assigned a value of one
to counties that had a plant in 1900. Thus, this interaction allows us to add another "difference" to
the empirical strategy comparing two counties that differed in their access to hydroelectric power.
       While locations with early hydroelectric potential may confer some direct geographic advantage
city effects control for the direct effects of any geographic advantage as it affects city growth rates.11
The threat to identification here is that power plants may have located in areas that were anticipated
  11
    Though water was used as an alternative power source historically, it was a minority source on the decline as
electricity was spreading. According to the Census of Manufactures, steam power accounted for 78% of power use
at the dawn of electrification in 1890, while water accounted for only 21%, a number which fell to 13% by 1900.
In any case, the impact of local water sources or any other relevant geographic features are controlled for with our
unrestricted city trends. See U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census Office (1902).


                                                         9
(for reasons other than the availability of electric power) to increase their growth rate, not overall,
but in historically power-intensive industries relative to less power-intensive industries. But this is
unlikely to be the primary driver of power plant location: in the early 20th century manufacturing
continued to rely on other power sources (water, but mainly steam) and was not the main source
of growth in demand for purchased electricity (see, e.g., Bureau of Census, 1910; Bureau of the
Census, 1902, p. cccxxix). We formally test the existence of pre-trends by using outcomes measured
in 1880 as placebo and show that there were no benefit to being in those locations before 1900.


4     Energy intensity, access to hydropower, and electricity adoption

    This section establishes the building blocks of our empirical strategy to identify the impacts of
electricity adoption on manufacturing production. Our strategy is based on combining two sources
of variation in electricity adoption: cross-sectoral variation in energy intensity (before the diffusion
of electricity) and cross-county variation in access to hydropower.
    We start by showing that energy-intensity before the arrival of electricity is a good predictor
of electricity-intensity once electricity has been implemented. We do that by regressing electricity
use in 1920 (this is the only year in our county-industry data where we have all the required data
to compute these values) on the industry-level energy intensity in 1890, previous to the diffusion of
electricity in manufacturing.12 We include county-level fixed effects to capture any factor related
to the location of these industries across the United States.          13   The results are presented in Table 1.
In the first column, we use electric horsepower per worker as our measure of electricity use while in
the next column, we employ electric horsepower per value added. Finally, the last column focuses
on the percentage of horsepower that were electrified.
    We find a strong and robust relationship between how energy intensive an industry was in 1890
(either by using horsepower per worker or per output) and the intensity in the use of electricity
of that industry in subsequent years. A one percent increase in horsepower per output in 1890
is associated with 60 percent higher electric horsepower per worker, 65 percent higher electricity
per output and 77 percent higher fraction of horsepower being electrified in 1920. A one percent
increase in horsepower per worker in 1890 is associated with 35 percent higher electricity per worker,
39 percent higher electricity per output and 58 percent higher fraction of electrified horsepower in
1920. The results are very statistically significant.
    We now address the concern that these results may not reflect the role of energy-intensity
but rather some other industry-level characteristic that was correlated with energy-intensity and
   12
      This section does not include a control for the outcome variable in 1890 since we do not have electricity at the
city-industry level for that year.
   13
      However, results are almost identical when excluding these controls. Results available upon request.



                                                         10
with electricity adoption. First, note that our measure of energy-intensity does not just capture
established versus new industries. Appendix Table A.2 shows the list of sectors that were more
and less energy-intensive before the arrival of electricity. While some of the most energy-intensive
industries are the ones that led the Second Industrial Revolution (e.g., iron and steel, electrical
machinery), others are more traditional industries (e.g., flouring, vinegar).
   We explore the relationship of energy adoption and various of industry-level characteristics
(early adoption, capital intensity, human capital intensity, complexity) in Appendix Table A.3.
The first panel shows that the few industries that started employing electricity in 1890 were not
those that ended up using it more intensively. Early adoption of electricity is actually associated
with lower electricity intensity in subsequent years.
   One could be worried that energy-intensity is simply a proxy for "heavy industries." We explore
this using measures of capital intensity in Panel B. We find that capital-labor ratios in 1890 are
negatively correlated with electricity intensity in 1920, although capital output ratios in 1890 are
positively correlated with electricity intensity in 1920. This suggests that energy-intensity was more
correlated with higher capital-output ratios than capital-labor ratios. Overall, the results suggest
that our measure of energy-intensity is not the same as capital intensity.
   Panel C turns to variables related to human capital. Lafortune et al. (2019) suggest that the
Second Industrial Revolution led to skill becoming complementary with capital and the arrival of
electricity could have played a role in that transformation. This would suggest that higher skill
ratios would have been essential for the adoption of electricity. However, the results presented in
this panel do not support this hypothesis, which is not surprising since electricity is one of the
last changes to occur during the Second Industrial Revolution. We first use the average literacy
of workers who report working in that industry in the Census of Population in 1900. We find no
evidence that industries that were more literate in 1900 at the national level had higher electricity
intensity in 1920. If anything, the results suggest a negative relationship between literacy and
electricity intensity.
   The results above could be imperfect since we have to merge two industry categories, introducing
noise in the analysis. The next set of results use the number of white-collars per blue-collars in the
Census of Manufactures in 1890. This has the advantage of being in our database and thus can
be generated for all industries in our classification directly. However, it is less clearly a measure of
skill than literacy, since blue-collar workers may have also been "skilled." The results presented in
Table 1 show that a similar conclusion as when using literacy can be drawn: industries with fewer
high-skill workers are less likely to have adopted electricity, contrary to our hypothesis.
   We finally include measures of industry complexity since some authors argue that the arrival of
electricity was particularly relevant for allowing a better division of labor through a change in floor
organization. We find no evidence that proxies of complexity such as the number of occupations

                                                  11
employed in an industry or the Herfindahl index of occupations are positively correlated with more
use of electricity.
    In sum, the results show that energy intensity in 1890 (before the diffusion of electricity in
manufacturing) is a good predictor of electricity intensity a few decades later, and that this does
to simply mask a pattern related to other variables.
    When did the difference by energy intensity arise and was it long lasting? To answer this ques-
tion, we must rely on cross-industry variation only, since we do not have measures of electricity
usage at the industry-city level for years other than 1920. Thus, our sample consists of 156 indus-
tries, and we cannot control for differences in location patterns across industries. We regress our
three measures of electric intensity at the industry-year level on our measure of energy intensity
in 1890 separately for each year. To show the results graphically, we predicted what the electric
intensity was for the industries at the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile of initial energy-intensity. This
is presented in Figure 2 where the dependent variable is in difference of log for each outcome. The
pattern of the industry at the median is reflective of the typical "S-shape" adoption curve of new
technology. From our data, in 1890, the average industry used less than 0.005 electric horsepower
per worker in a given year, that number jumped to 0.07 in 1900 and then to 0.5 in 1910, virtually
being multiplied by 100 over 20 years. It then increased to 0.6 in 1920 to then continue growing at
a slower rate in the following decades, reaching 1.8 by 1940. This is visible in our graph as a change
between 6 and 8 log points between 1890 to 1940 but much more rapid between 1890 to 1910 than
after. This figure shows that initial energy intensity strongly influenced adoption of electricity as
early as 1900 with the gap increasing until 1930. By 1940, initial energy-intensity is not a good
predictor of electricity per worker or per output but remains one for the fraction of horsepower
electrified. Coefficients used to obtained the predicted measures for each year are presented in
Appendix Table A.4. Thus, the results suggests that energy intensive industries became more elec-
tricity intensive from 1900 onward and that this relationship became stronger as electricity spread
more widely.
    We now turn to show that cross-county differences in access to hydropower were also a key
determinant of electricity adoption. This is the second building block of our empirical strategy. We
measure this using proximity to large hydroelectric plants. In Table 2, we show how the presence
of hydroelectric power plants in 1912 or 1900 are correlated with lower electricity prices, obtained
from our preferred measure which employs manufacturing rates for 1947. We explore the correlation
between the level (in the first three columns) and the logarithm (in the last 3 columns) of the rates
and 3 different measures of proximity to a hydroelectric plant. Our first measure is the number of
power plants within a 70km radius of the centroid of the county in 1912. Our second is the inverse
distance of the centroid of the country to the nearest hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Finally,
our last measure is a dummy for the presence of a large hydroelectric power plant in 1900.


                                                  12
   The results in Table 2 show that our three measures of proximity are all significantly correlated
with lower manufacturing electricity prices in 1947. Appendix Figure A.1 Panel A displays the
effects of distance to 1912 hydropower stations on 1947 prices. The results show that being further
than 70km from hydropower is associated with an increase of 0.8-1 cents per KW/h--over one
standard deviation and about half of the mean price for that period. In Appendix Table A.5, we
use two alternative measures of electricity prices. In Panel A, we use residential rates for 1920 while
in Panel B, we use residential rates for 1935. This table shows in general a negative correlation
between proximity and electricity prices but it is only significant for the earliest power plants.
Residential electricity prices were likely to be different from those paid by manufacturing firms
which may explain the difference. We also consider these measures in Appendix Figure A.1 Panels
B and C. Overall, these results indicate that electricity prices paid by manufacturing firms were
likely to be significantly lower when they were located closer to a large power plant.
   Having established that both industry-level energy intensity and county-level access to hy-
dropower were relevant determinants of electricity adoption, we now show that the interaction
between these two factors is also a strong predictor of electricity adoption even controlling for in-
dustry and city fixed effects. We do this in Table 3, where each panel corresponds to a different way
of measuring proximity. In the first panel, we use the number of power plants within a 70km radius
of the centroid of the county. We find that industries that were more energy-intensive in 1890 and
were located in counties with a power plant had substantial increases in electricity intensity (i.e.,
electric horsepower per output or per worker) by 1920.
   The next panel uses the inverse of the distance to the nearest power plant in 1912. We find
again a strong relationship between the interaction between the inverse distance and the energy
intensity of the industry in 1890. This suggests that energy-intensive industries became particularly
more electricity-intensive in places that were closer to a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Finally,
the last panel uses a more demanding specification using a simple dummy for whether the county
had one of the 44 power stations already in existence in 1900. This is a very small number of
counties but where the location of the power plant may have been particularly driven by topological
characteristics that favored the production of hydro-electricity. We find again a strong "first stage"
in that industries that were more energy intensive in 1890 that were located in one of these counties
was observed to be more electricity intensive in 1920, when defined as electric horsepower by output
or by workers.
   We are unable to run this first stage in other years because of data availability. However, in
1930, we have rented electric power as one of our available measure. While this does not correspond
fully to all electric horsepower since many industries produced their own electricity over this period,
we have tried using it as an outcome and have found that the first stage, while a bit weaker, does




                                                  13
continue to exist in 1930 with that proxied measure of electricity-intensity.14
       In the above regression, we weight our regressions by the number of establishments represented
for each industry-county cell in our sample. We do this for two reasons. First, while we do not have
firm-level data, we wish our results to be representative of the impact of electricity on an average
firm. Second, the variables for sector-county cells with less establishments are likely to be noisier,
so weighting can increase the precision of the estimates. This is particularly true since the number
of establishments is the criteria that the Census of Manufactures used to determine whether a cell
would or would not be included in the report. Thus, by weighting by the number of establishments,
we also give more weight to observations that are more continuously in our sample, ensuring that
our fixed effects strategy is well identified.
       Weighting by the number of establishments is only valid if our interaction does not influence the
number of establishments present in the sample. To check for this, we run as an outcome variable
three different measures of "size" of a cell against our interaction on a sample that includes every
single industry ever present in our sample for every single county ever included in our sample. We
continue to include county and industry fixed effects. The results of these regressions are presented
in Appendix Table A.6. The first column shows the impact of our interaction on the cell being in the
sample in that year. The second column uses as an outcome variable the number of establishments
imputing as "0" as cell that is not in our sample while the third does the same thing with the
number of workers in that cell.
       Overall, the results suggest that industries that were more energy-intensive and that were
close to a power plant were not more likely to be in the sample, nor more likely to have more
establishments or more workers. In 1900, we actually find a significant impact of the interaction
on the likelihood of being in the sample but the impact is negative suggesting that those cells were
less likely to be in the sample. We find a significant and positive impact between our variable of
interest and the number of workers (including 0s for missing cells) but the significance disappears
in other years. Similarly, we find no significant correlation between our interaction and the number
of establishments in any years. This suggests that we can use the number of establishments as a
weighting variable since our variable of interest does not seem to be correlated with it. While energy
intensity and access to hydropower affected various outcomes of interest, they did not significantly
change the likelihood of being sampled. Furthermore and consistent with our argument, we find
that the results are similar qualitatively when we omit our weights but much noisier.15
  14
       Results not presented but available upon request.
  15
       Results available upon request.




                                                           14
5     Impacts on productivity and jobs

5.1   Productivity Growth and Employment

    Having shown that our interaction between early energy-intensity and proximity to power plants
generated sufficient variation in electricity-intensity, we now turn to exploring the impact of elec-
tricity on productivity. Given that we only have a "first stage" for 1920, we focus exclusively on
the reduced form approach.
    Figure 3 shows the estimates of the estimation of equation (1) for three outcomes: labor produc-
tivity, output, and employment. The first figure thus shows how the interaction between proximity
to hydropower and energy-intensity impacted the growth in productivity of industry-county cells
over the period. First, the figure demonstrates that in 1880, industries that had higher horsepower
intensity did not growth differentially in counties that were close to a power plant compare to
those that were further away. This is indicative that our measure does not capture something
that was permanently influencing the growth of these industry-county cells but rather a change
that occurred immediately after electricity began to diffuse to the manufacturing sector. We see
that, even as early as 1900, there was clearly a higher labor productivity growth in industries that
were energy-intensive in 1890 who had a power plant close to them by 1912 than amongst these
same industries in different locations or amongst other industries within the same county. Similar
to our pattern of electricity adoption, magnitudes are such that they suggest that growth bene-
fits increased until 1920 and that the growth advantage remained fairly constant for the following
decades. To get a sense of the magnitudes, having one power plant within 70 km increases the labor
productivity of an industry that was at the 75th percentile of energy needs by 4 percent compared
to one at the 25th percentile as early as 1900. The magnitude increases to around 11 percent by
1920 and remained at that level until 1940. In 1920, this, combined with the first stage presented
in Table 3, implies that having one more percent in electric horsepower per value-added leads to
1.5 percent higher labor productivity. In Appendix Figure A.3, we show the same estimations but
this time controlling for labor productivity in 1890. We find a similar pattern with slightly smaller
magnitudes. This suggests that the growth may have been larger in part because there industries
in these counties may have had lower than average productivity in 1890. Nevertheless, in either
version, our results suggest strong, large and very robust impacts of electricity-intensity on labor
productivity.
    The next table explores the robustness of these results. The first two columns of Table 4 show
how different our results may be when restricting the sample to industry-county cells that were
present in all of the 5 years we include. This is to make sure that the early impact on productivity
we documented before is not driven by changes in samples between years. The next two columns
use the inverse distance to the closest power plant to check whether our results are robust to how

                                                 15
we measure exactly proximity. Finally, the last two columns use our other proxy of closeness to a
power plant which is whether the county had a power plant in 1900. The first two columns suggest
that the time pattern we observed in Figure 3 is not because of changes in which cell were included
since the results show significant and strong initial productivity growth gains as before, despite
losing, in some years, more than half of the sample. The next column shows that our results are
robust to changing the way in which we measure proximity to the 1912 power plants. The results
suggest, as before, that productivity growth would have been larger in county and cells that were
able to electrify more intensively as early as 1900. It again shows that by 1920, there is no doubt
that productivity gains were strong and very robust. Furthermore, we also repeated our main
analysis for 1920 but changing the definition of "close" to 10km intervals. The coefficients on the
interaction of each measure of proximity and initial energy intensity are presented in Appendix
Figure A.4 for 1920. Our results show the same type of discontinuity around 70km suggesting that
exactly at the distance from a power plant where firms stopped benefiting from lower electricity
prices, productivity gains also disappeared. Finally, the last two columns change more dramatically
our definition of proximity by using the very few hydropower plants in existence in 1900. In those
columns, we observe much noisier results but we still see that the magnitudes suggests that by as
early as 1920, productivity gains existed. Thus, overall, our robustness analysis confirms that firms
that became more electricity-intensive earlier observed labor productivity gains relatively quickly.
   Why do we find this result while the previous literature ­ which tends to look at the industry
level (e.g., David (1989)) ­ does not? We explore this in Appendix Table A.7 where we contrast
the results we obtained with those that we would have observed had we done a cross-industry
comparison instead of a "double difference" type of approach. In the first two columns, we report
the impact we would have measured on productivity by comparing industries, at the national level,
that had high energy demands in 1890 to those who had lower ones. The next two columns repeat
the same analysis but this time using our industry-county data and adding county fixed effects. We
find that our results are very different from those obtained through a cross-industry comparison.
In particular, the results in Table A.7 are more aligned with the existing literature. They suggest
no or, in the case of the county-level analysis, negative initial impact of electrification on labor
productivity. The benefits of the new technology are only visible in 1930 or 1940 in this table,
which is 20 to 40 years later than our cross-industry cross-county analysis would suggest. This is
consistent with the previous literature, and appears to indicate that not all firms in industries that
were highly demanding in energy were able to gain in terms of productivity from electrification;
these gains depended on the access these firms had to hydropower plants.
   Finally, we explore the reasons behind this increased labor productivity in the two bottom
graphs of Figure 4, by looking at output and employment separately. It shows that the increased
productivity stem from slightly increased production without any gains in employment. The co-


                                                 16
efficients for output are not significant in 1900 and 1930 but overall suggest sizeable increases in
output when a cell is close to a hydropower plant and was intensive in energy before the arrival
of electricity. For employment, we observe the coefficients hovering around zero, without allowing
us to reject significant decreases in employment in cells that were benefited more significantly by
electricity until at least 1920. This would suggest that electricity may have initially replaced some
workers with more or better machines. Including controls for 1890 outcomes shows larger increases
in output but also sometimes significant increases in employment, as can be seen in the last two
graphs of Appendix Figure A.3.


5.2      Capital Deepening and Labor Hollowing Out

       The previous section suggests that electrification led to growth in labor productivity, driven by
an increase in output that was significantly larger than the small change in labor demand. To better
understand these effects, we now examine how electricity modified factor demands by manufacturing
firms. This section shows that electricity adoption induced increases in energy-intensity and capital-
intensity, as well as a hollowing out in the skills distribution of the manufacturing labor force.
       First, we consider the effects of energy intensity and access to hydropower on horsepower per
worker and capital per worker. The results are displayed in Table 5. We find that sector-city
cells with higher propensity to electricity adoption exhibit lower levels of energy intensity when we
do not control for 1890 value. None of the coefficients is significant in this case. However, with
controls, we find that more intensive electricity adoption is correlated with higher levels of energy
intensity, significantly so for 1920. This is consistent with them having access to cheaper energy
and increasing their demand in response to it. Moreover, electricity appears to be complementary
to capital since cells with higher propensity to adopt electricity also increased their capital per
worker. This suggests that electricity complemented capital which may explain why increases in
labor were relatively muted if the complementarity of electricity with labor was smaller.
       We now turn to further investigate how electricity adoption affected labor demand. First, we
examine which types of workers were displaced.16 We rely on micro-level data from the Census
of Population, which records workers' industries and occupations, and (following the classification
proposed by Katz and Margo, 2014)consider three broad occupational groups: high-, medium-
and low-skill. The results, displayed in the first three panels of Figure 4, indicate that electricity
adoption induced hollowing out of the labor force--a reduction of middle-skill jobs in favor of
low- and high-skill employment, although not significantly so for the latter. While in Lafortune
et al. (2019), no indication that the changing relationship between capital and skill was masking
polarization was found, we do see a strong pattern in the case of electricity.
  16
   We also divided workers by "blue-" versus "white-collar" workers as defined in the Census of Manufacturing.
Results are unclear which is consistent with electricity having a non-monotonic relationship with skills.


                                                     17
    Our findings match the overall trend documented by Katz and Margo (2014) and echo their
interpretation of changes in occupational structure as driven by technological change in the Second
Industrial Revolution. This suggests that the results presented by Gaggl et al. (2016) are not
only due to sectoral shifts but rather suggests that electricity adoption led to polarization within
industries.
    We break down occupational groups into finer sub-groups to understand better the reasons
behind this pattern. For low-skill occupations, we consider four groups: transportation workers,
service workers, apprentices, and production workers. The latter includes operative and kindred
workers not elsewhere classified and laborers not elsewhere classified, the two largest occupational
groups in our sample, preventing us from obtaining a better picture of that sub-group. For medium-
skill, we use OCC1950 division between clerks and salesmen, and then divide the remaining occu-
pations into craftsmen and machine operators. Historical narratives suggest that craftsmen were
more likely to be replaced by machines powered by electricity, while machine operators were plau-
sibly complementary to machines technological changes in the period; we also expect craftsmen
occupations to be more prevalent in small firms and machine operators in large ones. For high-skill
workers, we consider the OCC1950 division into professionals, technical and kindred workers on
one side, and managers on the other.
    Figure 5 presents the results. The increase in the fraction of employees concentrated in low-
skill occupations is entirely due to a large increase in production workers, consistent with the
notion that electricity increased line production tasks performed by low-skill workers. The share
of apprentices fell significantly by 1940, although in terms of magnitude this is irrelevant for low
skill workers overall. When looking at medium skill workers, we find that the "hollowing out" of
the occupational distribution is due to the collapse of craftsmen. The share of craftsmen within
manufacturing employment was substantially lower in cells that benefited more from electricity
in all years although less strongly after 1920. Clerical workers had lower employment shares in
those cells in 1940. Electricity may thus have induced the replacement of some clerical tasks
like accounting or secretarial activities. We also see a significantly lower relative size of the sales
workforce in manufacturing in 1930 and 1940. Finally, machine operators first benefit from the
arrival of electricity, increasing significantly their share of workforce in 1910 but then falls to zero.
The reason behind this shift may be found in the last panel of Figure 5, which shows that the share
of high-skill workers is not due to more managers but rather to more professional and technical
workers. Thus, while medium-skill workers may have initially been well suited to work with electric
machinery, by 1930 firms may have started to require more skilled workers, such as engineers.17
    While we do not have task contents for the period in question, we matched the 1950 occupational
  17
     We found no evidence that the share of female workers or literate workers was affected by electricity, suggesting
that occupations changed more than demographic characteristics of workers.



                                                         18
categories of IPUMS with the 1977 Dictionary of Occupations classification as provided by Autor
et al. (2003). We then computed the average task component for each industry-county-year cell in
our data for five categories: non-routine manual, routine manual, non-routine interactive, routine
cognitive and non-routine analytical. Results are reported in Appendix Table A.9. We observe
that industry-county cells that benefited more from electricity saw an increase in the non-routine
cognitive task component of the occupations they employed. This is visible for all years except
1910 and for both interactive and analytical tasks. On the other hand, electricity appears to have
decreased the intensity of routine tasks, although initially, routine manual tasks appear to have
increased. Finally, non-routine manual tasks also decreased. This suggests that electricity had a
similar impact as the arrival of computers on the labor market Autor et al. (2003) and is in line
with the results of Gray (2013).
         Finally, we provide some suggestive evidence that electricity-induced productivity gains may
have partly operated through reorganization of factory production processes. Specifically, we look
at how electricity adoption affected occupational diversity, as measured by the number of distinct
occupations in each sector-city cell. The results in the last panel of Figure 4 show the relationship
was positive and large after 1910 until 1930. This is consistent with the hypothesis of Acemoglu
and Restrepo (2019) that new technologies can create new "tasks".            18


         Overall, our results suggest that electricity replaced craftsmen and clerical workers with line
production workers and professionals. This is consistent with manufacturing production becoming
more concentrated in larger firms, something we explore in the next section.


6         The role of market structure

         The previous section suggests that electricity increased productivity as output growth signifi-
cantly outpaced the null employment growth. In the language of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019),
this would imply that this technology had displacement effects that were fully compensated by re-
instatement effects. In this section, we show the role that market structure can play in rationalizing
these findings and show additional empirical results that confirm our theoretical predictions.


6.1        Model

         We first set up a model that links labor demand, energy prices and firm/market characteristics.
This model adds multiple factors of production in the model of Autor et al. (2020b) to show that
    18
    We found no evidence that the Herfindahl index of occupations increased, suggesting that the increase in oc-
cupations was driven by occupations that had a small share of total employment.We do not find the increase in
occupations was driven by the appearance of electricity-related occupations such as electricians.




                                                      19
a decrease in the price of one factor may have differential impact on the demand for the other
depending on the structure.
   Firms in city c and industry i at time t have a production function given by

                                                 
                                Ycit = Act z (i Ecit + (1 - i )Lcit )
                                                                      1/



where E is energy and L is labor and  represents the substitution parameter between both inputs
where - <  < 1. We assume firms have constant return to scale. As  increases, the industry
is more energy intensive. Productivity is allowed to depend on county-level characteristics (Act )
and on firm characteristics (z ). The price of energy is rct and the price of labor is wct . We will
thus follow the literature on skill-biased technological change as modelling electricity as a fall in
the price of one of the inputs in the production function.
                                -       1     -
                           1
                             1-
   Define ict = (1 - i ) 1- wct + i1- rct
                                       1-
                                          , the CES aggregate of the factor costs. We can show
                                                        -1
                                                   
that firms have constant marginal costs equal to ict /Act z .
   We now follow Autor et al. (2020b) in defining the market in which firms are operating. We
assume an industry with monopolistic competition and firm-level heterogeneity in productivity (zi ),
each producing a differentiated variety. Individual demand for a good  from industry i is of the
type
                                            q (p ) = p-i
                                                       d(p )


   Each firm produces one good/variety  . The function d(·) is assumed to satisfy additional
                                                        ¯ such that d(p) = 0p  p
conditions. In particular, there exists a "choke price" p                      ¯. Secondly, d(·)
must be such that Marshall's Second Law is satisfied which implies that the absolute elasticity of
demand must be decreasing in the quantity demanded. This implies specifically that d(p ) > 0,
d (p ) < 0, d log d(p)/d log p <  - 1 and d2 log d(p)/d log p2 < 0.
   Firms who want to enter into the market need to pay an entry cost  > 0. Once this fixed cost
has been paid, firms draw their productivity level z from a known distribution with pdf (z ). The
firm will thus maximize its profits by selecting the price that maximizes

                                                  -1
                                             
                                       p - ict /Act z q (p )

   This will imply that firms will produce until:

                                                   -1
                                              
                               q (p ) + p - ict /Act z q (p ) = 0




                                                   20
   Defining the mark-up as

                                                   -i + p d (p )/d(p )
                                    m(p , i ) =
                                                  1 - i + p d (p )/d(p )

we obtain that

                                                      -1
                         log p = log m(p , i ) +         log ict - log Act - log z
                                                      

   Autor et al. (2020b) shows that prices will be decreasing in marginal costs. We will extend this
result to show that prices will fall in response to a fall in the price of electricity.
                                 m
   First, we can show that       p   < 0. Using that

                                     log p      -1      1 -   log ict
                                           =      log m
                                     log r   1 -  log p       log r
                                                                 1   
                                      log p      1       1- r 1-
                                            =     log m
                                                                 >0
                                      log r   1-          ict
                                                  log p

   Finally, we can show that

                                log q   i - p d (p )/d(p ) 1 -   log ict
                                      =
                                log r       1 -  log m
                                                     log p
                                                                 log r
                                                                     1   
                               log q   -i + p d (p )/d(p )  1- r 1-
                                     =                              <0
                               log r       1 -  log m log p
                                                             ict

   A decrease in the price of electricity thus leads firms to produce more and to decrease prices.
Mark-ups will also increase.
   Our focus, however, will be in the impact of lower electricity prices on productivity and hiring.
(Unconditional) labor demand is given by

                                                              1            1           1
        log Lict = log q (p , wct , rct ) - log z - log A -      log(i ) -    log wct - log ict
                                                              -1           -1          

   which implies that


                          log L        1 i - p d (p )/d(p ) 1 -              log ict
                                =     - +
                          log r              1 -  log m  log p
                                                                             log r

   or


                                                       21
                                                                          1   
                        log L        1   -i + p d (p )/d(p )            1- r 1-
                              =        +
                        log r       1-       1 -  log m  log p
                                                                         ict

   The impact of a fall in r will thus be undetermined since the substitution effect (the first term)
may or may not dominate the scale effect (second term).
   Finally, labor productivity will increase in response to a fall in electricity price since combining
the above equations give us

                                                            1    
                                 log(Y /L)        1       1- r 1-
                                           =                      >0
                                   log r         1-        ict

   It is easy to show that all these impacts will be larger for sectors where i is larger.
Proposition 1. The impact of a decrease in electricity price on labor will be more negative on
labor the larger the firm's productivity (z ).

Proof. See Appendix B.


   Thus, our model suggests that labor demand will decrease in response to a fall in electricity prices
when the output response will be more muted. This will happen when the firm is more productive.
This is a direct corollary of Marshall's Second Law. More productive firms will produce more for
their market. This will imply that they will face a more inelastic demand. In response to a fall in
their marginal costs because of electricity prices, they will thus increase less their output, leading
to the substitution effect of r to be larger relative to the substitution effect.
   A similar result would be obtained if we modelled the arrival of electricity not simply as cheaper
electricity but also as a skill-biased technological change that increases the marginal productivity
of energy relative to labor. However, modeling electricity as a TFP shock would not produce the
same results as it would not lead to a substitution pattern between labor and energy.
   Finally, we could model labor in a richer fashion by adding multiple types of skills. What would
differ then is that the substitution effect may lead to an increase in the demand for some types of
workers and a decrease in the demand for others. Looking at how the labor demand for each type
of workers respond to changes in energy demands would be indicative of the type of substitutability
or complementarity that one would observe between energy and that type of labor.


6.2   Evidence on the heterogeneous effects of electricity adoption

   Our findings on the impacts of electricity adoption on levels of productivity and employment
are consistent with a setup in which firms were relatively large and faced less elastic demand

                                                   22
functions and energy was complementary to capital, low- and high-skill workers but substitute to
middle-skill employees. Our model suggests that these patterns would be strongly influenced by
the productivity of the firm (and thus their size). This section presents evidence that supports the
relevance of the basic idea captured in the model.
      How can we measure the degree of "biggness" of an industry in a given city in our data?
The ideal would involve computing mark-ups but our data does not provide us with information
regarding quantities produced, only the value of the products. We are thus unable to distinguish
between firms that sell large quantities from those that sell at high prices. We also do not have
information regarding the distribution of firms in a given sector-city cell. What we can compute is
the average size of a firm in a given cell, as value-added per firm or number of workers per firm. We
hypothesize that cells where these numbers are larger would be an indication of higher productivity.
We thus measure this in 1890 and classify each cell as competitive (non-competitive) if the value
is below (above) the median. About a third of the sector-county pairs in our subsequent years did
not exist in 1890 and thus are eliminated from the rest of the analysis. This generates sizeable
differences as average firms in "large" cells have 9 times as large workforce and output as those in
"small" cells.
      What type of indication can we have that cells with large average firms face less elastic demand
curves? We use Atack et al. (2008) state level sample and compute mark-ups for each firm in
that sample (since quantity of output and value of output are separately available in that sample).
We find that there is a very strong and statistically significant relationship between the average
size of a firm and the average mark-up observed in the state-industry cell.19 Thus, our measure
is correlated with demand elasticity. Nevertheless, too few cells are available in that sample to
allow us to directly measure market competitiveness in the Atack data and contrast the impact of
electricity by that division in our Census of Manufacturing setting.
      One may also be worried that our measure of market structure is actually a measure of returns
to scale. We studied this in a companion paper Lafortune et al. (2020) and actually find that the
less competitive sector-cities cells have slightly lower, and not bigger, returns to scale than those we
classify as competitive.20 This would match the argument given by some historians that "bigness"
in the turn of the twentieth century was driven by collusive practices more than by technological
advantage (for a discussion of competitive behavior and anti-trust responses over this period, see
Lamoreaux (2019)).
      Table 6 shows the impacts of access to cheaper electricity on productivity, output and labor
hiring, depending on whether the country sector-city cell had above the median or below the median
firm size as measured by output per firm. All regressions here include a control for 1890 outcome.
 19
      Results are available on request.
 20
      See Appendix Figure A.5.



                                                   23
We observe two completely different patterns depending on whether the cell was more or less large in
1890. In cells that had large firms, we observe large and immediate increases in labor productivity,
more muted changes in output and large decreases in labor hiring until 1940. On the other hand, in
cells that had small firms in 1890, we observe no change in labor productivity until 1930, with large
increases in output and hiring. This supports our hypothesis that the impact of a new technology
appears to have been radically different depending on the elasticity of demand curve faced by the
firms.
    We show, in Appendix Table A.10 that these results are extremely similar if one does not
include controls for 1890 outcomes. We then show, in Appendix Table A.11 that results are also
very similar when separating large and small cells using the 1890 average firm size in terms of
employees instead of output. The output results appear slightly noisier but the difference between
the two types of cells remains very striking.
    One may be worried that our definition of large and small cells is correlated with other char-
acteristics that make adoption of electricity more worthwhile. To verify that this is not the case,
we try to construct a "technology-driven" measure of size. As a first approximation, we can think
of industries in tradeable industries facing much more elastic demand curves than those in non-
tradeable sectors. To measure the degree of tradability of an industry, we regress in the 1940
Census the employment of a given manufacturing sector in a given county against the total wage
income of that county and allow that coefficient to vary by industry. This is inspired by Hong
and McLaren (2016) who compute this using modern data. The idea is that the local size of more
tradeable sectors should be less dependent on the level of income of the county where they are
located than sectors that are less tradeable.21 We thus use the coefficients of this regression for
each industry and rank them. We call a "tradeable sector" one whose coefficient was below the
median. Table A.12 shows that output and employment responded much more positively in sectors
that were tradeable than in those that were not. This would be consistent with our hypothesis that
firms that faced more elastic demand curves would respond to lower electricity prices by increasing
output and employment.
    This is however a very coarse division and only at the industry-level. To pursue this idea at the
county-industry level, we combine a ranking of tradability by industry called the "Hoover index"
(Kim, 1995) at the two-digit level calculated in 1880 with the inverse of the cost of reaching every
person in the US from a given county, available from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). The intuition
is that an industry-city cell will be larger if it is in a tradeable industry and if it can reach at low
cost many customers. If the good is not easily tradeable or the city is isolated from other markets,
it is likely that the cell will be producing less and thus facing a more elastic demand curve.
  21
     The less data-intensive approach in Hong and McLaren (2016) is better suited for our data compared to other
similar measures in the literature, but follows the same basic idea.



                                                      24
    In Appendix Tables A.13 and A.14, we expand this analysis in two different ways. In the first,
we divide the Hoover index by the average transportation a city faces and divide the sample by the
median value. Large firms in this context are thus those in geographically concentrated industries
and centrally located cities. In the second, we denote as large any industry-city cell where the
Hoover index is above the median in terms of tradability or the transportation costs are below the
median, those with low tradability and high transportation costs are then classified as small. In
both cases, we observe patterns that are, in general, in agreement with our previous results, in
particular for output and labor. We see that cells that should be, for technological reasons, larger
and thus facing less elastic demand, appear to have seen larger increase in labor and output than
those that were less technological.
    Next, we examine whether the labor hollowing out effect discussed earlier was also stronger
in larger or smaller firms. Table 7 presents these results contrasting cells with large (in the odd
columns) to small firms (even columns) for each outcome. We observe that only in cells that had
large average firms in 1890 did we observe a consistent pattern of polarization. These are exactly the
cells where labor growth was null or negative. On the other hand, in cells with smaller average firms,
we observe limited impact on skill mix (though there also appears to be some reallocation to lower
skill jobs in small firms in 1900). Thus, only when electricity appeared to have led to no positive
impact on employment did middle-skill workers decreased their relative share of employment.
    Finally, we explore, in Appendix Table A.15, whether electricity adoption led to even more
market concentration, measured through the change in log number of firms in the cell. Cells where
firms were on average larger before the arrival of electricity are in the odd columns and smaller
in the even ones. We observe that in cells that had larger average firms in 1890, if anything, the
number of firms decreases. Output and employment growth were more timid in this case and this
would imply that the average firm got larger. On the other hand, in cells that had smaller average
firms in 1890, we observe the opposite: significant growth in the number of firms. Thus, not only
did the impact of electricity differ by the initial size in the city-industry cell, it also appears to have
strengthened this initial pattern, with cells that had larger firms becoming even larger.


7    Conclusion

    This paper uses a new approach to study the impact of electricity's spread on production,
exploiting cross-industry cross-county variation in how accessible and beneficial the arrival of elec-
tricity may have been to the manufacturing sector. Using this approach, we find that electricity
increased labor productivity of manufacturing firms but not employment. Thus, fears about "tech-
nological unemployment", as stated by Keynes (2008), may have been warranted, mirroring the
today's concerns about automation ( Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) ). We also find evidence that


                                                    25
more electrification led to labor polarization, not only because of sectoral shifts as detailed by
Gaggl et al. (2016), but even within a given sector. The previous literature, in contrast, found that
productivity gains significantly lagged the spread of electricity, a result that also appears in our
data using a simpler, cross-industry approach. Thus, it appears that immediate productivity gains
were localized to areas with cheap access to power.
   Our main conclusions highlight the important role of initial market conditions in shaping the
impact of a new technology. Consumers and workers appear to gain from cheap electricity when
this occurs in a market where firms face high elasticity of demand. On the other hand, larger
firms used cheap electricity to shed workers, particularly those in the middle of the distribution,
and increase mark-ups. This is a relevant lesson for industrial revolutions of the past, present
and future. Public policy should be particularly concerned about "biggness" when faced with new
technological changes that may be competing with labor hiring.
   Finally, our results raise the question of whether electricity generated agglomeration economies
within given geographical areas. Our empirical strategy abstracts from this by focusing on variation
across industry within a given geographical area. Klein and Crafts (2011) argue that natural
comparative advantages influenced the location of manufacturing firms until the end of the 19th
century when market access and market size became the only determinants. Hanlon and Miscio
(2017) find that there were cross-industry agglomeration effects in British cities at the end of the
19th century, early 20th century. More specific to electricity, Severnini (2014) argues that dams
built before 1950 in the United States, compared to those built after where alternative producing
technologies were more readily available, generated strong agglomeration economies that lasted
beyond the initial construction period. We leave this question to further research.




                                                 26
References
Acemoglu, D., C. Lelarge, and P. Restrepo (2020): "Competing with Robots: Firm-Level
  Evidence from France," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 110, 383­88.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2019): "Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Dis-
  places and Reinstates Labor," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33, 3­30.

------ (2020): "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 128, 2188­2244.

Adelman, M. A. (1951): "The Measurement of Industrial Concentration," The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 33, 269­296.

Aghion, P., C. Antonin, S. Bunel, and X. Jaravel (2020): "What Are the Labor and
  Product Market Effects of Automation? New Evidence from France," .

Atack, J., F. Bateman, and R. A. Margo (2008): "Steam power, establishment size, and labor
  productivity growth in nineteenth century American manufacturing," Explorations in Economic
  History, 45, 185­198.

Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe (2007): "Modeling the transition to a new economy: lessons from
  two technological revolutions," American Economic Review, 97, 64­88.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2020a): "The fall
  of the labor share and the rise of superstar firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135,
  645­709.

------ (2020b): "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 135, 645­709.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): "The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1279­1333.

Blackburn, C. J. and J. Moreno-Cruz (2019): "Energy Efficiency in General Equilibrium
  with Input-Output Linkages," Working paper.

Ciccone, A. and E. Papaioannou (2016): "Estimating cross-industry cross-country interaction
  models using benchmark industry characteristics," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Crafts, N. (2002): "The Solow productivity paradox in historical perspective," .



                                              27
Daugherty, C. R. (1933): "Horsepower Equipment in the United States, 1869-1929," The Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 428­440.

Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, J. Suedekum, and N. Woessner (2019): "The Adjustment of
  Labor Markets to Robots," University of W¨
                                           urzburg.

David, P. A. (1989): "Computer and dynamo: The modern productivity paradox in a not-too
  distant mirror," Tech. rep.

------ (1990): "The dynamo and the computer: an historical perspective on the modern produc-
  tivity paradox," The American Economic Review, 80, 355­361.

David, P. A. and G. Wright (2003): "General purpose technologies and surges in productivity:
  historical reflections on the future of the ICT revolution," in The economic future in historical
  perspective, ed. by P. A. David and M. Thomas, North-Holland.

De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020): "The rise of market power and the
  macroeconomic implications," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 561­644.

De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2016): "Prices,
  Markups, and Trade Reform," Econometrica, 84, 445­510.

Devine, W. D. (1983): "From shafts to wires: Historical perspective on electrification," The
  Journal of Economic History, 43, 347­372.

Dinkelman, T. (2011): "The effects of rural electrification on employment: New evidence from
  South Africa," American Economic Review, 101, 3078­3108.

Donaldson, D. and R. Hornbeck (2016): "Railroads and American economic growth: A ?mar-
  ket access? approach," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 799­858.

Du Boff, R. B. (1967): "The introduction of electric power in American manufacturing," The
  Economic History Review, 20, 509­518.

Fried, S. and D. Lagakos (2019): "Electricity and Firm Productivity: A General-Equilibrium
  Approach," .

Gaggl, P., R. Gray, I. Marinescu, and M. Morin (2019): "Does Electricity Drive Structural
  Transformation? Evidence from the United States," Working Paper 26477, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Gaggl, P., R. Gray, and M. Morin (2016): "Technological Revolutions and Occupational
  Change: Electrifying News from the Old Days," .


                                                28
Goldfarb, B. (2005): "Diffusion of general-purpose technologies: understanding patterns in the
  electrification of US Manufacturing 1880­1930," Industrial and Corporate Change, 14, 745­773.

Goldin, C. D. and L. F. Katz (2009): The race between education and technology, Harvard
  University Press.

Goos, M. and A. Manning (2007): "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work
  in Britain," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 118­133.

Gordon, R. J. (2016): The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living since the
  civil war, Princeton University Press.

Graetz, G. and G. Michaels (2018): "Robots at Work," The Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 100, 753­768.

Gray, R. (2013): "Taking technology to task: The skill content of technological change in early
  twentieth century united states," Explorations in Economic History, 50, 351­367.

Hanlon, W. W. and A. Miscio (2017): "Agglomeration: A long-run panel data approach,"
  Journal of Urban Economics, 99, 1­14.

Hong, G. and J. McLaren (2016): "Are Immigrants a Shot in the Arm for the Local Economy?"
  Available online at www.people.virginia.edu/~jem6x/hongmclaren0615shotinthearm.pdf.

Jerome, H. (1934): Mechanization in Industry, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau (2005): "General purpose technologies," in Handbook of
  economic growth, Elsevier, vol. 1, 1181­1224.

Katz, L. F. and R. A. Margo (2014): Technical Change and the Relative Demand for Skilled
  Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective, University of Chicago Press, 15­57.

Keynes, J. M. (2008): "Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren," in Revisiting Keynes:
  Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren, ed. by L. Pecchi and G. Piga, Cambridge, MA:
  MIT Press, chap. 1, 17­26.

Kim, S. (1995): "Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activities: the
  trends in US regional manufacturing structure, 1860­1987," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  110, 881­908.

Klein, A. and N. Crafts (2011): "Making sense of the manufacturing belt: determinants of US
  industrial location, 1880­1920," Journal of Economic Geography, 12, 775­807.


                                                  29
                                   inez, and J. Tessada (2020): "Changing returns to
Lafortune, J., E. Lewis, J. P. Mart´
  scale in manufacturing 1880-1930: The Rise of Capital?" .

Lafortune, J., E. Lewis, and J. Tessada (2019): "People and Machines: A Look at the
  Evolving Relationship between Capital and Skill in Manufacturing, 1860­1930, Using Immigra-
  tion Shocks," Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 30­43.

Lamoreaux, N. R. (2019): "The Problem of Bigness: From Standard Oil to Google," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 33, 94­117.

Lee, K., E. Miguel, and C. Wolfram (2019): "Does Household Electrification Supercharge
  Economic Development?" Working Paper 26528, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lewis, J. (2013): "Fertility, child health, and the diffusion of electricity into the home," Tech.
  rep., Working Paper, Universit´
                                e de Montr´
                                          eal.

Lewis, J. and E. Severnini (2019): "Short-and long-run impacts of rural electrification: evidence
  from the historical rollout of the US power grid," Journal of Development Economics, 102412.

Lipscomb, M., A. M. Mobarak, and T. Barham (2013): "Development effects of electrifi-
  cation: Evidence from the topographic placement of hydropower plants in Brazil," American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 200­231.

Morin, M. (2019): "The Labor Market Consequences of Technology Adoption: Concrete Evidence
  from the Great Depression," Available online at http://www.columbia.edu/~mm3509/docs/
  Miguel_Morin_Great_Depression.pdf.

Nutter, G. W. and H. A. Einhorn (1969): Enterprise monopoly in the United States: 1899-
  1958 [by] G. Warren Nutter and Henry Adler Einhorn, Columbia University Press New York.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1998): "Financial Dependence and Growth," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 559­586.

Ristuccia, C. A. and S. Solomou (2014): "Can general purpose technology theory explain
  economic growth? Electrical power as a case study," European Review of Economic History, 18,
  227­247.

Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, J. Grover, E. Meyer, J. Pacas, and M. Sobek
  (2019): "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 9.0 [dataset]," Tech. rep., University
  of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.

Severnini, E. (2014): "The power of hydroelectric dams: Agglomeration spillovers," .



                                                 30
Smythe, D. J. (2001): "The Great Merger Movement and the Diffusion of Electric Power Utiliza-
  tion in American Manufacturing, 1899-1909: A Simple Test of the Schumpeterian Hypothesis,"
  Eastern Economic Journal, 27, 253­266.

------ (2010): "A Schumpeterian view of the Great Merger Movement in American manufactur-
  ing," Cliometrica, Journal of Historical Economics and Econometric History, 4, 141­170.

Thorp, W. L. (1929): "Horsepower statistics for manufactures," Journal of the American Statis-
  tical Association, 24, 376­385.

U.S. Department of Interior, United States Census Office (1902): Manufactures Part I:
  United States by Industries, vol. VII of Twelfth Census of the United States: 1900, Washington,
  DC: Government Printing Office.

Woolf, A. G. (1984): "Electricity, productivity, and labor saving: American manufacturing,
  1900-1929," Explorations in Economic History, 21, 176.




                                               31
8   Tables and Figures


Figure 1: Location of hydropower plants with 1,000 or more horsepower in 1912 and counties
included in our sample (1920 county boundaries shown)




                      !
                     !!                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                         !
                           !!
                 !        !
                            !       !                                   !
                                   ! !                   !
                                                                    !
                                             !                     !                                      !                                                                                                                   !
                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                       !!
                                    !
             !                    !!                           !                                                           !                                                                                      !    ! !
                                                                                                                            !                       ! !       !                                              ! !!        !!
                                                                                                                                    !               !                                                 ! !! ! !! ! !! !
                                                                                                              !                                                                                        ! ! !    !!      !
                                                                                                                      !                                       !
                                                                                                                                        !                             !                              !!             !
         !                              !                                                                              !   !                                                                        !!!!     ! ! !!   !!
                                         !                 !                                                             ! !!                             !
                                                                                                                                                          !                                                !! !    !!
                 !                               !                                                                                                                 !                               !      !
             !                                        !!                                     !                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!  !    !!!
                                                 !                                            !                        ! !          !                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                              !!                 !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
    !
         !
                                                     !         !
                                                                                                                                            !             !!                                      !          !     !!! !
         !!                                                    !                                          !                     !                          !!!! !                                          !   !  !!
        !! !                                                 !!                                                                                 !         !!!! ! !!
          !!                                                                                                                                                 !!! !
                                                             !                                                                                            ! !!                                                      !
     !    !!                                                                                                                                    !         !                                                         !
                   !                                                                                                                                !!    !      !                    ! !
          !!    !                                        !                                                                                                                                            !!     !       !
             !!                                          !!                                                                                                                                                 !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
             !                                           !!
           !!                                            !!!                                                                                                                          !
          !! !                                                                                                                                                                                        !!    !
                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .
              ! !
              !                                                                    ! !! !
         ! ! !!                                                             !
                                                     !                              !                                                                                                                 !    !
       !       !      !
               !! !                                                                   !
                                                                                         !                        !                                       !
                !    !                                                          !!                                                                                                                              !
                !                                                               !
                                                                            !                                                                                                                               !
                  !                                                                                                                                                                           !   !        !
                  !                                                                                   !               !!                                                            !
                       !!                                                                                                               !                                          ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                     !!!
                       !!!
                         !
                          !
                          !                                                                                                                                                       !          !
                       !!                                                                                                                                                 !            ! !
                                                 !                                                                                                                                 !  !!   !
                                                                                                  !                                                                                 !! ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                              !
                                                                                                                                                                  !           !
                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                  !       !
                                                                                                                                                                              !




                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                      32
Figure 2: Difference in predicted electricity adoption depending on initial energy-intensity

                                     Electricity per worker


              8
              6
              4
              2
              0




                  1890      1900            1910            1920     1930            1940
                                                   year

                            10th ptile                  50th ptile          90th ptile



                                         Electricity per output
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0




                  1890      1900            1910            1920     1930            1940
                                                   year

                            10th ptile                  50th ptile          90th ptile



                                            % electric HP
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0




                  1890      1900            1910            1920     1930            1940
                                                   year

                            10th ptile                  50th ptile          90th ptile




                                                   33
Figure 3: Impact of electricity on productivity, employment and output

                               Productivity


    15
    10
    5
    0
    -5
    -10
    -15




                 1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                      year


                                  Output
    10 15
    5
    0
    -15 -10 -5




                 1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                      year


                               Employment
    15
    10
    5
    0
    -5
    -15 -10




                 1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                      year




                                      34
                           Figure 4: Impact of electricity on labor market outcomes

                                                 Fraction low-skill


-2.5-1.5 -.5 .5 1.5 2.5




                              1880      1900       1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                          year


                                               Fraction medium-skill
-2.5-1.5 -.5 .5 1.5 2.5




                              1880      1900       1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                          year


                                                Fraction high-skill
-2.5 -1.5 -.5 .5 1.5 2.5




                              1880      1900       1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                          year


                                           N. of distinct occupations
-200 0 200400600800




                              1880      1900       1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                          year




                                                          35
Figure 5: Impact of electricity on occupational shares-by sub-groups




                                36
                             Table 1: Predicting Electricity Use in 1920
                          Electricity per Worker          Electricity per Output       % elec. HP
                                    (1)                              (2)                   (3)
                                Panel A: Using HP/Y as measure of energy intensity
       ln HP/Y1890               0.595***               0.641***            0.767***
                                  (0.054)                (0.054)             (0.054)
       r2                          0.138                  0.155               0.128
       N                           2,633                  2,637               2,637
                                Panel B: Using HP/N as measure of energy intensity
       ln HP/N1890               0.345***               0.390***            0.584***
                                  (0.075)                (0.076)             (0.077)
       r2                          0.103                  0.118               0.080
       N                           2,633                  2,637               2,637

       Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in 1920. Standard errors are presented
       between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log electricity per
       worker, log electricity per output and percent of horsepower electrified on industry-level log
       horsepower per worker in 1890 in Panel A and log horsepower per output in 1890 in Panel B.
       Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



Table 2: Correlations between 1947 manufacturing electricity prices and hydroelectric plants
                                         Levels                                 Logarithms

  Plant within 70km        -0.010***                              -0.567***
                            (0.003)                                (0.159)
  Inverse distance                       -0.038*                                -2.103*
                                         (0.020)                                (1.158)
  Plant in 1900                                      -0.008**                                  -0.535**
                                                      (0.004)                                   (0.237)
  r2                         0.212        0.160        0.066        0.160        0.126           0.085
  N                          2,433        2,433        2,433        2,421        2,421           2,421
  Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell. Clustered standard errors by county are pre-
  sented between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of electric prices in level
  (columns (1)-(3)) and in log (columns (4)-(6)) on each measure of proximity to an electric power plant.
  Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     37
        Table 3: Relationship between access and need for electricity and use of electricity
                                               Electricity per Worker         Electricity per Output         % elec. HP
                                                         (1)                             (2)                     (3)
                                                           Number of 1912 power plants within 70km
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                        14.593***                 8.044***           1.504
             100                                         (1.880)                  (1.875)          (1.024)
r2                                                        0.859                    0.867            0.475
N                                                         2,581                    2,583            2,583
                                                                 Distance to 1912 power plants
     ln HP/Y1890×inv. distance                         68.023***                48.661***           3.723
               100                                      (12.627)                 (12.599)          (6.881)
r2                                                        0.859                    0.867            0.475
N                                                         2,581                    2,583            2,583
                                                                  Had a power plant in 1900
  ln HP/Y1890× had early plant                         18.120***                 10.097**          4.638*
             100                                         (4.558)                  (4.546)          (2.476)
r2                                                        0.858                    0.866            0.476
N                                                         2,581                    2,583            2,583
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in 1920. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log electricity per worker, log electricity per output and percent of
horsepower electrified on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with proximity to a hydroelectric
power in each panel. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are
included. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          38
                        Table 4: Robustness checks for impact on productivity
                                     Balanced panel             Using inv. distance           Using plants in 1900
                                     (1)        (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                                           1900
ln HP/Y1890× proximity            7.405***      3.933***      17.824***        6.688         0.853            0.497
         100                       (1.526)       (1.325)       (5.571)        (4.954)       (1.942)          (1.721)
r2                                  0.599         0.714         0.299          0.448         0.297            0.448
N                                    449           449          4,263          4,263         4,263            4,263

                                                                        1910
ln HP/Y1890× proximity             7.086*         3.132         19.849     -0.967            -0.256           2.558
         100                       (3.807)       (3.685)       (12.734)   (12.073)          (5.124)          (4.818)
r2                                  0.344         0.408         0.229      0.318             0.227            0.318
N                                    449           449           1,599     1,599             1,599            1,599

                                                                           1920
ln HP/Y1890× proximity           15.115***      11.991***     46.053***      27.081***      6.234**         7.843***
         100                      (2.091)        (1.583)       (6.784)        (5.183)       (2.461)          (1.862)
r2                                 0.771          0.871         0.600          0.768         0.593            0.767
N                                   449            449          2,633          2,633         2,633            2,633

                                                                        1930
ln HP/Y1890× proximity           12.378***      10.726***     27.659*** 17.937**             3.342            3.585
         100                      (2.771)        (2.199)       (10.025)    (7.686)          (3.083)          (2.357)
r2                                 0.666          0.791         0.581       0.754            0.578            0.754
N                                   449            449           1,178      1,178            1,178            1,178

                                                                           1940
ln HP/Y1890× proximity           11.738***      7.515***      44.287***      22.717***       1.627            1.892
         100                      (2.372)        (1.649)       (8.922)        (6.376)       (2.537)          (1.797)
r2                                 0.622          0.821         0.508          0.751         0.499            0.749
N                                   449            449          1,599          1,599         1,599            1,599

1890 Control                         No            Yes             No            Yes          No               Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker on industry-level log horsepower per worker in
1890 interacted with a dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power
plant in 1912 in the first two columns, with the inverse distance between the centroid and the closest hydroelectric power
plant in 1912 in columns (3) and (4) and with a dummy for having a hydroelectric plant in one's county in 1900 in the last
two columns. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. The
first two columns include only industry-county cells that are in every single year of our panel data. Even columns include
values of the dependent variable in 1890 as control. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       39
                        Table 5: Impact on energy and capital intensity
                                                  ln HP/N                          ln K/N
                                               (1)     (2)                 (3)           (4)
                                                                       1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                                        4.410***           2.755***
             100                                                        (1.282)            (0.968)

                                                                       1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km             -10.466        4.453       8.267***           5.382***
             100                            (6.665)       (3.761)       (2.124)            (1.530)

                                                                       1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              -4.583      13.380***    10.548***           7.551***
             100                            (4.615)       (1.888)       (1.671)            (1.057)

                                                                       1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              -4.501        3.671
             100                            (7.635)       (2.469)

1890 Control                                   No           Yes            No                Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented
between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log horsepower per worker
(first two columns) and log capital per worker (last two columns) on industry-level log horsepower per
worker in 1890 interacted with a dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km
of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects
for county and industry are included. Even columns include values of the dependent variable in 1890 as
control. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    40
            Table 6: Heterogeneity by initial firm size-productivity, output and hiring
                                                     ln Y/N                       ln Y                         ln N
                                                 Large    Small             Large     Small              Large     Small
                                                  (1)      (2)               (3)       (4)                (5)       (6)
                                                                                  1900
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                4.620***     -2.051        0.955     16.109***         -5.878*** 19.157***
                  100                            (0.846)    (1.578)       (1.944)       (2.824)         (1.924)    (3.471)
F-test of equality                                   15.27***                  919.67***                     43.25***
N                                                 1,725      1,597         1,725         1,597           1,725      1,597
                                                                                  1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km m                 2.048       0.319      10.238***      10.227           5.256            9.163
                  100                            (2.380)     (5.138)      (3.742)       (8.357)         (3.727)          (8.020)
F-test of equality                                      0.08                      0.00                            0.17
N                                                  893         460          893           460             899             463
                                                                                  1920
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                8.661***     0.373       10.934*** 20.014**              -2.297    22.115***
                  100                            (0.966)    (1.622)       (3.465)       (7.823)         (3.306)     (7.602)
F-test of equality                                   12.83***                     0.99                         7.93**
N                                                 1,188       741          1,188          741            1,188        741
                                                                                  1930
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km               10.264*** 7.108**           9.862     37.458***           -3.765   32.204**
                  100                           (1.747)    (3.522)        (6.302)      (13.125)         (6.193)   (12.778)
F-test of equality                                    0.44                        2.58                        4.61*
N                                                 533        310            533           310             533        310
                                                                                  1940
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                3.290**    5.946**       18.111*** 38.687***           12.109** 33.967***
                  100                           (1.529)    (2.543)        (6.035)      (10.643)         (5.939)     (10.045)
F-test of equality                                    0.49                        1.83                          2.19
N                                                 729        383            729           383             729         383

1890 "Y" Control                                   Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
(3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights
are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent
variable in 1890 are included in all regressions In odd columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above median output
per establishment are included while those below the median are included in even columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                         41
                                                    Table 7: Heterogeneous impact on labor markets
                                                 Fraction of high-skilled      Fraction of medium-skilled         Fraction of low-skilled       Number of dist. occ.
                                                  Large        Small             Large         Small               Large        Small            Large       Small
                                                   (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)                  (5)         (6)              (7)          (8)
                                                                                                         1900
     ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              0.409       -0.818***        -0.951***       -1.496***            0.540        2.313***      43.293***       12.918
                      100                        (0.264)       (0.297)          (0.313)          (0.551)           (0.383)        (0.622)       (15.365)      (14.321)
     F-test of equality                                    8.66**                           0.80                             6.16*                       1.77
                                                                                                         1910
     ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              0.032         -0.834         -2.627***          -0.183          2.595***           1.018     425.706*** 245.209*
                      100                        (0.263)       (0.510)          (0.555)          (1.004)           (0.601)          (1.081)     (103.314)    (125.820)
     F-test of equality                                     1.80                            3.31                             1.18                       0.59
                                                                                                         1920
     ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              0.019          0.084         -2.742***           0.386          2.722***       -0.470        149.504***     49.492*
                      100                        (0.195)       (0.381)          (0.452)          (0.918)           (0.444)      (0.939)         (23.324)      (29.070)
     F-test of equality                                     0.02                           7.42**                          7.84**                        3.42




42
                                                                                                         1930
     ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              0.099         -0.301         -2.324***          -0.201          2.225***           0.501     425.105*** 206.248**
                      100                        (0.253)       (0.684)          (0.614)          (1.116)           (0.657)          (1.315)     (72.172)      (88.660)
     F-test of equality                                     0.29                            1.68                             0.93                        1.44
                                                                                                         1940
     ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km 0.010                      -0.200        -2.456***           -1.266        2.431***       1.445        123.680***       116.514
                       100                     (0.154)         (0.252)          (0.463)          (0.798)         (0.490)      (0.898)         (41.976)       (77.790)
     F-test of equality                                   0.30                              1.06                         0.63                           0.00
     1.2Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those
     from a regression of fraction of workers in high-level occupations (columns (1) and (5)), medium level occupations (columns (2) and (6)) and low level occupations
     (columns (3) and (7)) and the number of distinct occupations (columns (4) and (8)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a dummy
     indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed
     effects for county and industry are included. In the first four columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above output per establishment are included while
     those below the median are included in the next four columns.* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
A   Additional figures and tables


    Figure A.1: Impact of closeness to hydropower plants on energy prices, by distance

                                                                              1947

                -.05-.04-.03-.02-.01 0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                         10   20   30   40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                              distance


                                                                              1920
                -.05-.04-.03-.02-.01 0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                         10   20   30   40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                              distance


                                                                              1935
                -.05-.04-.03-.02-.01 0 .01.02.03.04.05




                                                         10   20   30   40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                              distance




                                                                              43
Figure A.2: Impact of closeness to hydropower plants on energy use, by distance

                                                               Electricity per worker


         -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                10   20   30     40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                       distance


                                                               Electricity per output
         -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                10   20   30     40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                       distance


                                                               % electric Horsepower
         -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                10   20   30     40   50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                       distance




                                                                       44
Figure A.3: Impact of electricity on productivity, employment and output, including 1890 controls

                                                  Productivity


                 5 10 15 20 25 30
                 -15 -10 -5 0




                                    1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                         year


                                                     Output
                 5 10 15 20 25 30
                 -15 -10 -5 0




                                    1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                         year


                                                  Employment
                 5 10 15 20 25 30
                 -15 -10 -5 0




                                    1880   1900   1910          1920   1930   1940
                                                         year




                                                         45
Figure A.4: Impact of closeness to hydropower plants on productivity, output and employment, by
distance, 1920

                                                                 Productivity

                 10 15 20 25
                 5
                 0
                 -15 -10 -5




                                             10   20   30   40     50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                    distance


                                                                   Output
                 -15-10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25




                                             10   20   30   40     50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                    distance


                                                                 Employment
                 -15-10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25




                                             10   20   30   40     50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                                    distance




                                                                    46
                Figure A.5: Returns to Scale: Value Added/Number of Establishments
            6
            4
  Density
            2
            0




                 .6                      .8                      1                     1.2
                                              Returns to scale

                              Above median Y/E                   Below median Y/E


Notes: The calculation of returns to scale is done as in Lafortune et al. (2020) for 1890-1930.
Industry-city cells are divided by whether their average firm size (in terms of value added) was
above the median or below the median in 1890.




                                                 47
       Table A.1: Summary statistics, county-industry database
Variable                                               N          Mean       St. Dev.
Log Electricity per worker                            2,828       0.014        1.114
Log Electricity per output                            2,830      -7.928        1.045
Log (% elec. HP)                                     2,830       -0.320        0.575
Was in sample                                       169,830       0.098        0.297
Number of establishments                            169,830       3.938       78.671
Number of establishments (if cell exists)            16,600      40.293       248.711
Number of workers                                   169,830       88.5       1556.45
Number of workers (if cell exists)                   16,600     905.802      4903.617
 ln Y/N                                              11,696       0.435        0.611
 ln Y                                                11,708       1.828        2.442
 ln N                                                11,719       1.396        2.460
 ln HP/N                                             5,610       1.926         2.529
 ln K/N                                              8,827        0.710        0.916



      Table A.2: Large sectors in top, bottom 5% of HP/Y, 1890
  Most Horsepower Intensive               Least Horsepower Intensive
  (4)    Flour                            (63)     Turpentine and Rosin
  (52)   Paper Goods                      (146)    Feathers/Plumes/Artificial Flowers
  (96)   Iron and Steel                   (33)     Fur Goods
  (124)  Electrical Machinery             (30)     Clothing
  (18)   Cotton Goods                     (58)     Photoengraving
  (95)   Mineral Grinding                 (36)     Awnings, Tents & Sails
  (21)   Dyeing and Finishing Textiles    (90)     Plaster & Wallboard
  (15)   Vinegar                          (82)     Leather
  (110)  Iron & Steel Forgings            (17)     Tobacco products
  See Appendix Table C.16 for detailed sector descriptions, using reference number.




                                          48
                  Table A.3: Predicting Electricity Use in 1920
                        Electricity per Worker Electricity per Output                           % elec. HP
                                   (1)                       (2)                                    (3)
                                         Panel A: Early Adopters
ln EHP1890/HP1890              -0.870***                 -0.874***                               -0.916***
                                (0.031)                   (0.032)                                 (0.032)
r2                               0.307                     0.312                                   0.291
N                                2,633                     2,637                                   2,637

                                               Panel B: Capital Intensive Industries
ln K/N1890                                  -0.631***             -0.669***        -0.616***
                                             (0.084)               (0.085)           (0.086)
r2                                            0.115                 0.130             0.078
N                                             2,633                 2,637             2,637

ln K/Y1890                                  2.281***                       2.371**                3.055***
                                             (0.208)                       (0.211)                 (0.209)
r2                                            0.137                         0.151                   0.132
N                                             2,633                         2,637                   2,637

                                                Panel C: Human Capital Measures
Average literacy                           -27.574***          -24.669**       -23.617***
                                             (1.738)            (1.783)          (1.807)
r2                                            0.178              0.171            0.119
N                                             2,633              2,637            2,637

White-Collars/Blue-Collars                  -1.188***                     -1.258***              -1.420***
                                             (0.073)                       (0.074)                (0.074)
r2                                            0.181                         0.200                  0.179
N                                             2,633                         2,637                  2,637

                                                  Panel D: Complexity Measures
Distinct Occ.                               -0.057***           -0.057***                        -0.053***
                                             (0.003)             (0.003)                          (0.003)
r2                                            0.218               0.226                            0.164
N                                             2,633               2,637                            2,637

HHI Occ. 1900                                0.620**                        0.010                   0.066
                                             (0.272)                       (0.277)                 (0.279)
r2                                            0.098                         0.109                   0.059
N                                             2,633                         2,637                   2,637
1890 Control                                   No                            No                      No
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in 1920. Standard errors are presented
between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log electricity per worker
(columns (1) and (2)), log electricity per output (columns (3) and (4)) and percent of horsepower
electrified (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level characteristics in each panel. Weights are the
number of establishments in a cell. Even columns include values of the dependent variable in 1890
as control. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                                     49
       Table A.4: Predicting Electricity Use, with Energy Intensive Industries in 1890
                   Electricity per Worker           Electricity per Output              % elec. HP
                   (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)                 (5)      (6)
                                                          1900
ln HP/Y1890        0.389**        0.415***         0.374**     0.392***            0.623***        -0.126
                   (0.153)         (0.120)         (0.155)      (0.121)             (0.152)       (0.147)
r2                  0.040           0.414           0.037        0.417               0.098          0.419
N                    156             156             156          156                 156            156

                                                           1910
ln HP/Y1890       0.484***        0.516***         0.467***     0.489***           0.902***        0.007
                   (0.127)         (0.052)          (0.127)      (0.047)            (0.119)       (0.058)
r2                  0.086           0.847            0.080        0.875              0.273         0.882
N                    156             156              156          156                156           156

                                                           1920
ln HP/Y1890       0.876***        0.913***         0.860***     0.885***           0.874***     -0.073***
                   (0.168)         (0.103)          (0.170)      (0.104)            (0.116)      (0.021)
r2                  0.150           0.686            0.143        0.682              0.269        0.984
N                    156             156              156          156                156          156

                                                           1930
ln HP/Y1890       1.010***        1.044***         0.976***     0.999***           0.919***      -0.035**
                   (0.199)         (0.157)          (0.196)      (0.152)            (0.116)       (0.016)
r2                  0.143           0.473            0.138        0.486              0.288         0.990
N                    156             156              156          156                156           156

                                                           1940
ln HP/Y1890        0.292*         0.326***          0.279*      0.302***           0.959***        -0.025
                   (0.152)         (0.091)          (0.147)      (0.086)            (0.120)       (0.021)
r2                  0.023           0.655            0.023        0.671              0.292          0.986
N                    156             156              156          156                156            156

1890 Control          No             Yes              No              Yes              No           Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry cell in a given year for each panel. Standard errors are
presented between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log electricity per
worker (columns (1) and (2)), log electricity per output (columns (3) and (4)) and percent of horsepower
electrified (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per output in 1890. Even columns
include values of the dependent variable in 1890 as control. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    50
Table A.5: Correlations between electricity prices and hydroelectric plants, alternative sources
                                            Levels                                Logarithms
                                                 Panel A: 1920 residential rates
   Plants within 70km         -6.889                             -0.191
                             (4.434)                            (0.117)
   Inverse distance                       9.802                            0.247
                                        (25.765)                          (0.680)
   Plant in 1900                                   -13.954***                                  -0.407**
                                                     (4.537)                                    (0.170)
   r2                         0.043       0.005       0.104       0.038    0.004                 0.118
   N                          2,637      2,637        2,637      2,637     2,637                 2,637

                                                   Panel B: 1935 residential rates
   Plants within 70km         0.600                                0.051
                             (0.743)                              (0.061)
   Inverse distance                       -3.091                             -0.149
                                         (3.088)                            (0.282)
   Plant in 1900                                     -2.848***                                -0.262***
                                                      (0.735)                                  (0.070)
   r2                         0.002       0.010        0.104       0.000     0.004              0.136
   N                          2,519       2,519        2,519       2,519     2,519              2,519
   Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell. Clustered standard errors by county are pre-
   sented between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of electric prices in level
   (columns (1)-(3)) and in log (columns (4)-(6)) on each measure of proximity to an electric power plant.
   Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      51
       Table A.6: Impact on sample selection, number of establishments and employment
                                             Was in sample       Number of establishments          Number of workers
                                                  (1)                      (2)                           (3)
                                                                                1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                 -0.583***                    20.753                     1634.135**
             100                                 (0.211)                    (51.953)                     (756.838)
r2                                                0.565                      0.148                         0.132
N                                                 28,182                     28,182                        28,182

                                                                                1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -0.107                     35.074                      1487.680
             100                                 (0.163)                    (38.174)                     (991.409)
r2                                                 0.343                     0.117                         0.094
N                                                28,182                      28,182                        28,182

                                                                                1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -0.242                     53.150                       1944.715
             100                                 (0.198)                   (118.152)                     (2372.600)
r2                                                 0.400                     0.063                          0.068
N                                                28,182                      28,182                        28,182

                                                                                1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -0.224                     35.908                       359.902
             100                                 (0.147)                    (44.233)                     (1019.819)
r2                                                 0.290                     0.083                          0.070
N                                                28,182                      28,182                        28,182

                                                                                1940
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -0.263                     32.239                       584.890
             100                                 (0.167)                    (40.592)                     (976.493)
r2                                                 0.320                     0.082                         0.064
N                                                28,182                      28,182                        28,182
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
Coefficients presented are those from a regression of dummy for whether was in the sample (column (1)), number of
establishments (columns (2)) and number of workers (columns (3)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890
interacted with a dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in
1912. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       52
Table A.7: Comparing productivity results with cross-industry methodology
                                National level          County-level data
                                (1)       (2)            (3)         (4)
                                                  1900
        ln HP/Y1890            0.015       0.015 -0.055***          -0.047***
                              (0.013)     (0.013)   (0.004)          (0.004)
        r2                     0.008       0.009     0.135            0.291
        N                       156         156      4,263            4,263

                                                    1910
        ln HP/Y1890            0.017       0.015     -0.028***       -0.019**
                              (0.015)     (0.014)     (0.009)         (0.009)
        r2                     0.009       0.034       0.128           0.172
        N                       156         156        1,599           1,599

                                                    1920
        ln HP/Y1890            0.016       0.018     -0.051***      -0.053***
                              (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.006)        (0.004)
        r2                     0.006       0.029       0.293          0.638
        N                       156         156        2,633          2,633

                                                  1930
        ln HP/Y1890           0.034*      0.034* -0.025***          -0.027***
                              (0.020)     (0.020)   (0.009)          (0.008)
        r2                     0.019       0.019     0.268            0.470
        N                       156         156      1,178            1,178

                                                    1940
        ln HP/Y1890            0.013       0.012      0.015*          0.012
                              (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.008)        (0.008)
        r2                     0.002       0.008       0.081          0.148
        N                       156         156        1,599          1,599

        1890 Control            No          Yes          No             Yes
        County Effects?                                  Yes            Yes
        Each observation corresponds to an industry in the first two columns
        and to an industry-county cell in a given year in the last two columns.
        Standard errors are presented between parentheses. Coefficients pre-
        sented are those from a regression of log output per worker on industry-
        level log horsepower per worker in 1890. Weights are the number of
        establishments in a cell in the last columns. Fixed effects for county
        are included in the last two columns. Even columns include values of
        the dependent variable in 1890 as control. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
        p < 0.01.




                                          53
               Table A.8: Impact on labor markets-from Census of population
                                               High       Medium           Low         N. of dist. occ.
                                                (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)
                                                                         1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.011     -0.896***     0.908***           21.800**
             100                              (0.165)      (0.247)       (0.288)            (9.795)

                                                                         1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.093     -1.572***     1.665***          522.432***
             100                              (0.211)      (0.423)       (0.458)           (78.687)

                                                                         1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.007     -1.714***     1.721***          105.528***
             100                              (0.144)      (0.331)       (0.327)           (15.580)

                                                                         1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                0.133      -0.904**       0.771*           216.174***
             100                              (0.185)      (0.390)       (0.430)           (44.271)

                                                                         1940
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.002     -1.727***     1.717***           75.178***
             100                              (0.104)      (0.306)       (0.332)            (28.376)

1890 "Y" Control                                No           No            No                  No
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented
between parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of fraction of workers in high-level
occupations (first column), medium level occupations (column (2)) and low level occupations (column (3))
and the number of distinct occupations (last column) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890
interacted with a dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric
power plant in 1912. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and
industry are included. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                     54
                        Table A.9: Impact on tasks-from Census of population
                                              Non-routine       Routine       Non-routine       Routine       Non-routine
                                                manual          manual        interactive       cognitive      analytical
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)
                                                                                 1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -0.073          -1.534       10.331***        -9.547***       4.244***
             100                                 (0.597)         (1.002)        (3.120)          (3.136)         (1.395)

                                                                                  1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -3.203***        3.545***          -2.793          4.624           1.850
             100                                (1.001)          (1.337)         (3.831)         (3.827)         (1.954)

                                                                                  1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -2.233***         -1.731*         5.244*         -6.725***         2.401
             100                                (0.781)          (1.000)         (2.674)         (2.567)         (1.554)

                                                                                  1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   -2.028          -1.689         6.546**          -3.260        4.843***
             100                                 (1.511)         (1.381)         (3.075)         (3.589)         (1.811)

                                                                                  1940
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                   0.620        -3.117***         4.861**         -4.320*        2.850***
             100                                 (0.801)        (0.922)          (1.927)         (2.353)         (1.086)

1890 "Y" Control                                   No              No               No              No              No
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between
parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of average tasks content of workers in a given industry-
county-year on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a dummy indicating whether the
centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are the number of establish-
ments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         55
Table A.10: Heterogeneity by market competitiveness-productivity, output and hiring, without
1890 controls
                                         ln Y/N                   ln Y                    ln N
                                     Large      Small      Large       Small       Large      Small
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                                                   1900
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              8.392*** -3.837**            -0.338     16.177***       -8.730*** 20.015***
                  100                          (0.916)     (1.671)        (2.028)        (3.155)       (2.004)    (3.591)
 F-test of equality                                 44.89***                     20.00***                   52.94***
 N                                              1,725       1,597          1,725          1,597         1,725      1,597
                                                                                   1910
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              6.904***      -2.688        8.756**         4.432          1.871            6.636
                  100                          (2.490)     (5.228)        (3.841)        (8.971)        (3.871)          (8.484)
 F-test of equality                                   2.37                         0.19                           0.24
 N                                               893         460             893           460            899             463
                                                                                   1920
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              14.520*** -5.198**         10.139***        9.660          -4.380     14.835*
                  100                          (1.210)     (2.289)        (3.448)        (8.124)        (3.276)     (7.951)
 F-test of equality                                 42.79***                       0.00                        4.79*
 N                                              1,188        741            1,188          743           1,188        741
                                                                                   1930
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              15.030***     2.476           5.656      32.891**          -9.374   30.415**
                  100                          (2.325)     (4.636)        (6.374)       (13.786)        (6.270)   (13.399)
 F-test of equality                                  3.96*                         2.39                       5.30*
 N                                               533         310             533           310            533       310
                                                                                   1940
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              8.866***      0.781         11.699*     35.610***          2.833    34.829***
                  100                          (1.967)     (3.855)        (6.256)       (11.917)        (6.189)    (11.397)
 F-test of equality                                   2.52                         2.21                       4.09*
 N                                               729         383             729           383            729        383
 1890 "Y" Control                                No          Yes             No            Yes            No         Yes
 Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
 Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
 (3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
 dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are
 the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. In odd columns, industry-county
 cells that had in 1890 above median output per establishment are included while those below the median are included in
 even columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        56
Table A.11: Heterogeneity by market competitiveness-productivity, output and hiring, using em-
ployees per firm as measure of firm size
                                                    ln Y/N                       ln Y                        ln N
                                                Large    Small             Large     Small             Large    Small
                                                 (1)      (2)               (3)       (4)               (5)       (6)
                                                                                  1900
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              3.972***     -2.359          1.474     16.076***        -4.325** 19.389***
                  100                          (0.817)    (1.593)         (1.882)       (2.899)        (1.888)    (3.547)
 F-test of equality                                13.86***                     17.97***                    38.03***
 N                                              1,726       1,596          1,726         1,596          1,726      1,596
                                                                                  1910
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              7.100***     -0.463       12.994***        6.703         3.724         8.349
                  100                          (2.696)    (4.051)         (3.841)       (7.812)       (3.725)       (7.652)
 F-test of equality                                  1.46                         0.44                          0.25
 N                                               886        467             886           467           892           470
                                                                                  1920
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              8.721***     -1.440        9.825***     15.751**         -3.062     19.009***
                  100                          (0.967)    (1.593)         (3.442)       (7.560)       (3.273)      (7.289)
 F-test of equality                                19.52***                       0.44                        6.80**
 N                                              1,166       763            1,166          765           1,166        763
                                                                                  1930
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              10.416***    5.219           8.118      32.686**         -4.903   30.223**
                  100                          (1.715)    (3.800)         (6.283)      (13.168)       (6.190)   (12.706)
 F-test of equality                                  1.21                         2.11                      4.53*
 N                                               526        317             526           317           526        317
                                                                                  1940
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km               3.787**    6.397**       17.069*** 41.939***           10.225*      37.168***
                  100                          (1.500)    (2.772)         (6.140)      (10.871)       (6.081)       (10.106)
 F-test of equality                                  0.50                         2.78                          3.45
 N                                               704        408             704           408           704           408

 1890 "Y" Control                                Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
 Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
 (3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
 dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights
 are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent
 variable in 1890 are included in all regressions. In odd columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above median
 workers per establishment are included while those below the median are included in even columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
 *** p < 0.01.




                                                        57
             Table A.12: Heterogeneity by tradability-productivity, output and hiring
                                                    ln Y/N                        ln Y                     ln N
                                                High     Low                High       Low            High      Low
                                                 (1)      (2)                (3)       (4)             (5)      (6)
                                                                               1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.185        3.702***    16.715***   2.620         17.175***       -2.092
             100                              (1.124)         (0.913)     (3.099)   (2.175)         (3.186)       (2.507)
N                                              1,730           2,533       1,730     2,533           1,730          2,533
                                                                               1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km               6.172**        4.178*      25.976*** 9.050*          18.641***       3.949
             100                              (3.011)        (2.319)      (5.706)   (4.883)         (5.399)       (4.737)
N                                               608            991          608       991             615          1,002
                                                                               1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              16.824***       3.681***    49.327*** -0.283          33.409***       -5.702
             100                              (1.419)         (0.815)     (5.703)   (3.935)         (5.548)       (3.747)
N                                              1,006           1,627       1,008     1,629           1,006         1,627
                                                                               1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              17.106***       3.428**     45.510***   2.156         29.193***       -1.861
             100                              (2.354)        (1.480)      (8.766)   (6.261)         (8.599)       (5.935)
N                                               445            733          445       733             445           733
                                                                               1940
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.202        4.531***    59.311*** 10.096*         59.868***       5.089
             100                              (2.449)         (1.064)     (8.366)   (5.523)         (8.282)       (5.286)
N                                               555            1,044        555      1,044            555          1,044

1890 "Y" Control                                Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
(3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights
are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent
variable in 1890 are included in all regressions In odd columns, industries with Hoover index above 0.2 are presented while
those with indices smaller than this value are included in even columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        58
Table A.13: Heterogeneity by market competitiveness-productivity, output and hiring, using trad-
ability divided by trade costs
                                                     ln Y/N                       ln Y                       ln N
                                                Large     Small             Large    Small             Large    Small
                                                 (1)       (2)               (3)       (4)              (5)      (6)
                                                                                  1900
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.874    4.350***          0.306      14.606***       1.251    9.667***
                  100                          (1.140)     (1.052)         (3.001)      (2.553)       (3.256)    (2.913)
 F-test of equality                                  11.21***                    13.19***                    3.69
 N                                              2,106       2,157           2,109        2,161         2,106      2,157
                                                                                  1910
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km               6.625**           3.267      4.476      23.847***       -2.127 19.814***
                  100                          (3.186)          (2.087)    (5.855)      (5.203)       (5.635)    (4.872)
 F-test of equality                                      0.78                      6.12*                     8.68**
 N                                               829             770         829          770           838        779
                                                                                  1920
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              6.308*** 10.886***            2.836      33.905***       -3.806 22.338***
                  100                          (1.427)     (0.883)         (6.285)      (4.117)       (5.919)    (4.045)
 F-test of equality                                   7.83**                     17.58***                   13.47***
 N                                              1,263       1,370           1,265        1,372         1,263      1,370
                                                                                  1930
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.581    14.343***         3.516      28.006***       3.502       13.670**
                  100                          (3.032)     (1.424)        (10.660)      (6.260)       (9.882)       (6.183)
 F-test of equality                                  22.38***                      4.04*                        0.76
 N                                               574         604             574          604           574           604
                                                                                  1940
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.290   5.614***          15.352 20.223***           15.146       14.473**
                  100                          (2.092)    (1.393)          (9.638)      (5.810)       (9.353)       (5.670)
 F-test of equality                                  5.07*                          0.18                        0.00
 N                                               774        825              774          825           774           825

 1890 "Y" Control                                Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
 Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
 (3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
 dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are
 the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent variable
 in 1890 are included in all regressions. In odd columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above median Hoover index
 divided by transportation costs are included while those below the median are included in even columns. * p < 0.1, **
 p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         59
Table A.14: Heterogeneity by market competitiveness-productivity, output and hiring, using as
competitive industry-city cells with below median Hoover index and above median trade costs
                                                     ln Y/N                      ln Y                       ln N
                                                Large     Small            Large    Small            Large     Small
                                                 (1)       (2)              (3)      (4)              (5)       (6)
                                                                                  1900
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.495    5.181***         -0.094 18.516***          0.354    12.850***
                  100                          (0.871)     (1.512)        (2.340)      (3.321)      (2.546)    (3.911)
 F-test of equality                                  13.29***                    22.98***                  8.28**
 N                                              3,092       1,171           3,096       1,174        3,092      1,171
                                                                                  1910
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km               4.668*     4.605**           6.168 26.190***          1.276    20.963***
                  100                          (2.699)     (2.029)        (4.891)      (6.129)      (4.825)    (5.534)
 F-test of equality                                   0.00                        6.56**                   6.81**
 N                                              1,159        440            1,159        440         1,167       450
                                                                                  1920
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              4.230*** 12.891***            0.457 38.393***          -3.984 24.866***
                  100                          (1.081)    (1.049)         (4.952)      (4.727)      (4.750)     (4.587)
 F-test of equality                                 32.74***                     30.39***                 218.96***
 N                                              1,847       786             1,850        787          1,847       786
                                                                                  1930
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.762    15.791***        -2.077 28.122***          -1.871      12.366*
                  100                          (1.974)     (1.880)        (7.644)      (7.256)      (7.295)      (6.951)
 F-test of equality                                  36.43***                     8.09**                      1.97
 N                                               828         350             828         350           828         350
                                                                                  1940
 ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                -0.204    6.180***          4.349     16.674**       4.271     10.179
                  100                          (1.496)     (1.821)        (7.074)      (6.474)      (6.853)   (6.357)
 F-test of equality                                   8.19**                       1.65                    0.40
 N                                              1,144        455            1,144        455         1,144      455

 1890 "Y" Control                                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
 Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between parentheses.
 Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log output per worker (columns (1) and (2)), log output (columns
 (3) and (4)) and log workers (columns (5) and (6)) on industry-level log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a
 dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are
 the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent variable
 in 1890 are included in all regressions. In odd columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above median Hoover index
 or below median trade costs while those that had below median Hoover and above median trade costs are included in even
 columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                         60
               Table A.15: Heterogeneous impact on log number of establishments
                                                Large           Small         Large               Small
                                                 (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)
                                                                            1900
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              -9.255*** 9.110***             -4.375**          6.733***
                 100                          (1.700)    (2.299)             (1.849)           (2.203)
F-test of equality                                 40.43***                             14.54***
                                                                            1910
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                 -0.582           2.791        -3.528               4.726
                 100                           (2.875)          (5.999)      (3.188)              (5.907)
F-test of equality                                       0.22                              1.29
                                                                            1920
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km              -6.941***      0.133          -16.218***              0.150
                 100                          (2.436)      (5.644)           (2.726)              (5.649)
F-test of equality                                    1.21                                6.42*
                                                                            1930
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                 3.355     35.753***           -5.210           35.729***
                 100                           (4.636)     (10.566)          (5.430)            (10.599)
F-test of equality                                    6.22**                              9.62**
                                                                            1940
ln HP/Y1890× plants within 70km                 -4.728    29.435***           -7.313          29.750***
                 100                           (4.183)     (9.398)           (4.672)           (9.143)
F-test of equality                                    9.34**                            10.81***

1890 "Y" Control                                 No               No           Yes                 Yes
Each observation corresponds to an industry-county cell in a given year. Standard errors are presented between
parentheses. Coefficients presented are those from a regression of log number of establishments on industry-level
log horsepower per worker in 1890 interacted with a dummy indicating whether the centroid of the county was
within 70km of a hydroelectric power plant in 1912. Weights are the number of establishments in a cell. Fixed
effects for county and industry are included. Values of the dependent variable in 1890 are included in even
columns. In the first two columns, industry-county cells that had in 1890 above output per establishment are
included while those below the median are included in the next two columns. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                        61
B      Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1.
     Whether a fall in electricity prices will increase or decrease unconditional labor demand depends
entirely on whether the substitution effect dominates the scale effect. The first effect is independent
on characteristics linked to productivity. Thus, the impact of a fall in electricity prices will depend
on the latter variables only in so it affects the scale of production.
     We thus need to determine the sign of

                  2 log q      2 log d  log pw  log pw         log d                2 log pw
                            =                          + -i +
                log r log z    log p2  log z  log r            log pw              log r log z

     For this, we will need to obtain how the price response to a fall in electricity price depends on
z.
     We find that
                                                        2 log m  log pw  log pw
                                         2 log p        log p2  log r  log z
                                                   =
                                       log r log z            1 - logm
                                                                   logp

     Combining the two derivatives, we conclude that

                                                   2 log q
                                                             >0
                                                 log r log z

              3 log d
as long as    log p3
                        is not too negative. In that case, more productive firms will respond less strongly
to a fall in electricity in terms of output. This will make their effect on labor demand be more
negative.




                                                       62
C   Industry classification

                     Table C.16: Industries included in each industry group

                                 Industry 1 (Industry 1950: 406 )
Slaughtering and meat packing, not including retail butchering; Slaughtering, wholesale, not in-
cluding meat packing; Sausage; Slaughtering and meat packing, wholesale; Meat packing, whole-
sale; Sausage, meat puddings, headcheese, etc., and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing
establishments; Poultry, killing and dressing, not done in slaughtering and meatpacking estab-
lishments; Slaughtering and meat packing; Sausage casings--not made in meat-packing establish-
ments; Sausages, prepared meats, and other meat products--not made in meat-packing establish-
ments; Poultry killing, dressing, and packing, wholesale; Slaughtering and meat-packing, wholesale;
Sausage, meat puddings, headcheese, etc, and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing estab-
lishments, sausage; Sausage, not made in slaughtering and meat-packing establishments; Sausage,
meat puddings, headcheese, etc, and sausage casings, not made in meat-packing establishments,
sausage casings; Poultry dressing and packing, wholesale; Custom slaughtering, wholesale


                                 Industry 2 (Industry 1950: 497 )
Cheese; Butter; Butter, reworking; Cheese and butter (factory); Condensed and evaporated milk;
Butter, cheese, and condensed milk; Cheese, butter, and condensed milk; Cheese and butter, urban
dairy product; Condensed milk; Creamery butter




                                               63
                           Industry 3 (Industry 1950: 408, 416, 417, 419)
Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods.
Macaroni, vermicelli and noodles; Confectionery; Bread and other bakery products; Pickled fruits
and vegetables and vegetable sauces and seasonings; Bread and other bakery products (except
biscuit, crackers, and pretzels); Ice cream; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except
breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods-for animals and fowls; Pickles, preserves, and
sauces, pickles and sauces; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except macaroni, vermicelli
and noodles-for human consumption; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, except breadstuff
preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods; Feeds, prepared, for animals and fowls; Food prepara-
tions, not elsewhere classified; Canning and preserving, fruits and vegetables, canned vegetables;
Food preparations; Fish, canning and preserving; Food preparations, not elsewhere specified; Can-
ning and preserving, fruits and vegetables; Canning and preserving, fruits and vegetables, canned
fruits; Fruits and vegetables, canning and preserving; Food preparations, not elsewhere classi-
fied, except macaroni, vermicelli and noodles and peanut butter and sweetening sirups-for human
consumption; Coffee and spice, roasting and grinding, coffee; Food preparations, not elsewhere
classified, except breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods-for human consumption;
Confectionery and ice cream; Oysters, canning and preserving; Cereal preparations; Confectionery
and ice cream, confectionary; Lard, not made in slaughtering and meat-packing establishments;
Coffee and spice, roasting and grinding; Chewing gum; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified,
breadstuff preparations, cereals, and breakfast foods; Food preparations, not elsewhere classified, all
other food preparations; Canning and preserving: Fruits and vegetables: pickles, jellies, preserves,
and sauces; Canned and dried fruits and vegetables (including canned soups)


                                  Industry 4 (Industry 1950: 409)
Flouring and grist mill products; Flour and other grain-mill products; Flour-mill and gristmill
products


                                  Industry 5 (Industry 1950: 419)
Rice, cleaning and polishing; Rice cleaning and polishing


                                  Industry 6 (Industry 1950: 417)
Sugar, refining, not including beet sugar; Sugar refining, cane; Sugar and molasses, refining; Cane-
sugar refining; Sugar, beet; Beet sugar; Sugar and molasses, beet; Cane sugar-except refineries;
Sugar and molasses, not including beet sugar; Sugar, cane; Sugar, cane, not including products of
refineries




                                                64
                                     Industry 7 (Industry 1950: 417)
Chocolate and cocoa products; Chocolate and cocoa products, not including confectionery


                                     Industry 8 (Industry 1950: 418)
Mineral and soda water: except mineral and carbonated waters; Mineral and soda waters; Bever-
ages; Nonalcoholic beverages; Mineral and soda water: mineral and carbonated waters


                                     Industry 9 (Industry 1950: 418)
Alcohol, ethyl, and distilled liquors; Liquors, malt; Liquors, distilled; Liquors, vinous; Wines;
Liquors, rectified or blended; Malt liquors


                                     Industry 10 (Industry 1950: 418)
Malt


                                     Industry 11 (Industry 1950: 409)
Baking powders and yeast; Baking and yeast powders; Baking powder, yeast, and other leavening
compounds; Baking powders, yeast, and other leavening compounds


                                     Industry 12 (Industry 1950: 419)
Oleomargarine; Oleomargarine and other butter substitutes; Oleomargarine--not made in meat-
packing establishments; Oleomargarine, not made in meat-packing establishments


                                     Industry 13 (Industry 1950: 419)
Corn sirup, corn sugar, corn oil, and starch; Glucose; Starch; Glucose and starch


                                     Industry 14 (Industry 1950: 419)
Flavoring extracts; Flavoring extracts and flavoring syrups; Flavoring extracts and flavoring syrups,
not elsewhere classified; Cordials and syrups; Cordials and flavoring syrups


                                     Industry 15 (Industry 1950: 419)
Vinegar and cider


                                     Industry 16 (Industry 1950: 419)
Ice, manufactured; Ice, artificial




                                                  65
                                Industry 17 (Industry 1950: 429)
Tobacco, chewing, smoking, and snuff; Tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes; Tobacco manufactures;
Tobacco, chewing and smoking, and snuff; Cigars; Tobacco, cigars and cigarettes; Cigarettes; Cigars
and cigarettes; Tobacco (chewing and smoking) and snuff; Tobacco: Chewing and smoking, and
snuff


                                Industry 18 (Industry 1950: 439)
Cotton goods; Cotton thread; Cotton small wares; Cotton, compressing; Cotton, ginning; Cotton
yarn; Cotton broad woven goods; Cotton goods, including cotton small wares; Cotton lace; Cotton,
cleaning and rehandling; Cotton narrow fabrics; Lace goods


                                Industry 19 (Industry 1950: 439)
Silk and rayon manufactures; Rayon narrow fabrics; Silk throwing and spinning--contract factories;
Rayon throwing and spinning--contract factories; Silk and silk goods, including throwsters; Rayon
broad woven goods--regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Silk broad woven goods--
regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Rayon yarn and thread, spun or thrown--regular
factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Silk and silk goods; Silk broad woven goods--contract
factories; Silk goods; Silk and silk goods, finished products; Silk narrow fabrics; Silk yarn and
thread, spun or thrown--regular factories or jobbers engaging contractors; Rayon broad woven
goods--contract factories; Silk and silk goods, throwsters and winders




                                               66
                                 Industry 20 (Industry 1950: 448)
Woolen, worsted, felt goods, and wool hats; Wool scouring; Men's and boys' hats and caps (ex-
cept felt and straw); Finishing of men's and boys' hats of fur-felt, wool-felt, and straw; Clothing,
women's, factory product; Clothing, women's, contract work, except suits, skirts, and cloaks, shirt
waists and dresses, except house dresses; Women's, children's and infants' underwear and nightwear
of cotton and flannelette woven fabrics; Hat and cap, except felt and straw men's; Millinery and
lace goods, except trimmed hats and hat frames; Wool pulling; Fur hats; Clothing, women's, except
suits, skirts, and cloaks, shirt waists and dresses, except house dresses, undergarments and petti-
coats and wrappers and housedresses; Collars and cuffs, paper; Furnishing goods, men's; Woolen
and worsted goods; Embroideries; House dresses, uniforms, and aprons--made in inside factories or
by jobbers engaging contractors; Clothing, women's, contract work, undergarments and petticoats;
Clothing, women's, regular factory products, except suits, skirts, and cloaks and shirt waists and
dresses, except house dresses; Embroideries, other than Schiffli-machine products--contract facto-
ries; Woolen goods; Men's and boys' underwear--made in contract factories; Hat and cap materials;
Millinery and lace goods; Women's and misses' clothing, not elsewhere classified--made in contract
factories; Trimmings (not made in textile mills), stamped art goods, and art needlework--contract
factories; Coats, suits, and skirts (except fur coats)-made in contract factories; Clothing, women's;
Men's neckwear--made in contract factories; Women's and misses' dresses (except house dresses)--
made in contract factories; Wool hats; Children's and infants' wear not elsewhere classified-made
in contract factories; Clothing, women's, except suits, skirts and cloaks, shirt waists and dresses,
except house dresses; House dresses, uniforms, and aprons--made in contract factories; Robes,
lounging garments, and dressing gowns; Straw goods, not elsewhere specified


                                 Industry 21 (Industry 1950: 437)
Dyeing and finishing textiles; Dyeing and finishing textiles, exclusive of that done in textile mills;
Dyeing and finishing cotton, rayon, silk, and linen textiles; Dyeing and cleaning; Dyestuff and
extracts; Dyeing and finishing woolen and worsted


                                 Industry 22 (Industry 1950: 436)
Hosiery and knit goods; Knitted underwear; Knitted outerwear (except knit gloves)--contract
factories; Hosiery--seamless; Knitted outerwear (except knit gloves)--regular factories or jobbers
engaging contractors; Knit goods; Knitted gloves; Knitted cloth; Hosiery--full-fashioned


                                 Industry 23 (Industry 1950: 437)
Cloth, sponging and refinishing; Cloth sponging and miscellaneous special finishing; Cloth sponging
and refinishing


                                                67
                                 Industry 24 (Industry 1950: 438)
Carpets and rugs, other than rag; Carpets, rag; Carpet yarn, woolen and worsted; Carpets, rugs,
and mats made from such materials as paper fiber, glass, jute, flax, sisal, cotton, cocoa fiber, and
rags; Mats and matting, from cocoa fiber, grass, and coir; Mats and matting, grass and coir; Mats
and matting; Carpets and rugs, wool; Carpets and rugs, wool, other than rag; Carpets and rugs,
rag


                                 Industry 25 (Industry 1950: 438)
Oilcloth, enameled; Asphalted-felt-base floor covering; Oilcloth; Artificial leather and oilcloth;
Oilcloth, floor; Oilcloth and linoleum, floor; Artificial leather; Oilcloth and linoleum; Linoleum;
Linoleum, asphalted-felt-base and other hard-surface floor coverings, not elsewhere classified


                                 Industry 26 (Industry 1950: 449)
Felt goods; Haircloth; Felt goods, wool, hair, or jute; Felt goods, wool, hair, and jute (except woven
felts and hat bodies and hats)


                                 Industry 27 (Industry 1950: 446)
Upholstering materials; Batting, padding, and wadding: upholstery filling; Excelsior; Upholstering
materials, not elsewhere specified; Upholstering materials, not elsewhere classified


                                 Industry 28 (Industry 1950: 446)
Processed waste and recovered wool fibers--contract factories; Waste; Cotton waste; Wool shoddy;
Shoddy; Oakum; Processed waste and recovered wool fibers--regular factories or jobbers engaging
contractors


                                 Industry 29 (Industry 1950: 449)
Cordage and twine; Cordage and twine and jute and linen goods; Linen goods; Jute goods; Bags,
other than paper; Jute and jute goods; Bags, other than paper, not made in textile mills; Jute goods
(except felt); Bags, other than paper, not including bags made in textile mills; Textile bags--not
made in textile mills; Thread, linen; Bagging, flax, hemp, and jute




                                                68
                                 Industry 30 (Industry 1950: 448)
Gloves and mittens; Clothing (except work clothing), men's, youths', and boys', not elsewhere clas-
sified; Clothing, men's, contract work, men's and youths' and boys'; Clothing, men's, buttonholes;
Dress and semidress gloves and mittens: cloth, cloth and leather combined; Trousers (semidress),
wash suits, and washable service apparel; Clothing, men's, factory product, buttonholes; Clothing,
men's; Leather gloves and mittens; Clothing, men's, custom work and repairing; Work shirts; Men's
and boys' suits, coats, and overcoats (except work clothing)--made in contract factories; Clothing,
men's, contract work, boys'; Clothing, men's, regular factory products, men's, youths'; Clothing
men's, factory products buttonholes; Collars, men's; Clothing, men's, regular factory products,
boys'; Clothing, men's, contract work; Shirts; Men's and boys' shirts (except work shirts), collars,
and night-wear made in inside factories or by jobbers engaging contractors; Clothing, men's, in-
cluding shirts; Clothing, men's, contract work, except men's and youths'; Men's and boys' suits,
coats, and overcoats (except work clothing)--made in inside factories or by jobbers engaging con-
tractors; Clothing, men's, regular factory products; Clothing, men's, contract work, men's, youths';
Clothing, men's, regular factory products, except men's, youths' and boys'; Clothing men's, factory
products; Gloves and mittens, cloth; Work clothing (except work shirts), sport garments (except
leather), and other men's and boys' apparel, not elsewhere classified; Clothing, men's, contract
work, men's and youths'; Clothing, men's, factory product; Men's and boys' shirts (except work
shirts), collars, and night-wear--made in contract factories; Work gloves and mittens: cloth, cloth
and leather combined; Gloves and mittens, leather; Clothing, men's, regular factory products, ex-
cept men's, youths', and boys'; Clothing, men's, regular factory; Clothing, leather and sheep-lined;
Raincoats and other waterproof garments (except oiled cotton)


                                 Industry 31 (Industry 1950: 448)
Corsets; Corsets and allied garments


                                 Industry 32 (Industry 1950: 489)
Saddlery and harness; Pocketbooks, purses, and card cases; Trunks and valises; Women's pocket-
books, handbags, and purses; Leather goods not elsewhere classified; Suitcases, brief cases, bags,
trunks, and other luggage; Belts (apparel), regardless of material; Pocketbooks; Leather goods, not
elsewhere classified; Trunks, suitcases, and bags; Leather goods; Belting other than leather and
rubber, not made in textile mills; Whips; Leather board; Small leather goods; Bellows; Saddlery,
harness, and whips; Belting and hose, woven, other than rubber; Leather goods, not elsewhere
specified; Leather-boards




                                               69
                                Industry 33 (Industry 1950: 449)
Fur goods; Fur coats and other fur garments, accessories, and trimmings


                                Industry 34 (Industry 1950: 478)
Tires and inner tubes; Suspenders, garters, and other elastic woven goods, made from purchased
webbing; Belting and hose, rubber; Rubber goods other than tires, inner tubes, and boots and
shoes; Rubber and elastic goods; Suspenders, garters, and elastic woven goods; Rubber tires, tubes,
and rubber goods, not elsewhere specified; Rubber products not elsewhere classified; Belting and
hose, linen; Rubber goods, not elsewhere specified; Belting and hose, woven and rubber; Reclaimed
rubber; Suspenders, garters, and other goods made from purchased elastic material; Belting and
hose, other than leather; Rubber tires and inner tubes


                                Industry 35 (Industry 1950: 449)
House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, mops and dusters; House-furnishing goods, not
elsewhere specified; Curtains, draperies, and bedspreads--made in regular factories or by jobbers
engaging contractors; Curtains, draperies, and bedspreads--contract factories; House-furnishing
goods, not elsewhere classified; Aluminum ware, kitchen, hospital, and household (except electrical
appliances); Housefurnishings (except curtains, draperies, and bedspreads); Aluminum products
(including rolling and drawing and extruding), not elsewhere classified; Aluminum manufactures;
House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, comforts, quilts, feather pillows, and beds; House
furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified; House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified, except
comforts, quilts, feather pillows, and beds and mops and dusters; House-furnishing goods, not
elsewhere specified, except mops and dusters


                                Industry 36 (Industry 1950: 449 )
Awnings, tents, and sails; Canvas products (except bags); Awnings, tents, sails, and canvas covers


                                Industry 37 (Industry 1950: 449)
Regalia, and society badges and emblems; Flags and banners; Regalia and society banners and
emblems; Clothing, horse; Nets and seines; Miscellaneous fabricated textile products not elsewhere
classified; Nets and selnes; Flags, banners, regalia, society badges, and emblems; Horse blankets,
fly nets, and related products; Regalia, badges, and emblems




                                               70
                                 Industry 38 (Industry 1950: 308)
Charcoal; Lumber and timber products; Boxes, wooden packing; Wooden boxes except cigar boxes;
Sawmills, veneer mills, and cooperage-stock mills, including those combined with logging camps and
with planing mills; Boxes, wooden, except cigar boxes; Lumber and timber products, not elsewhere
classified; Wood distillation; Charcoal, not including production in the lumber and wood distillation
industries; Logging camps and logging contractors (not operating sawmills); Boxes, wooden packing,
except cigar boxes; Plywood mills; Hardwood distillation and charcoal manufacture; Lumber and
other mill products from logs or bolts; Wood distillation, not including turpentine and rosin; Wood
distillation and charcoal manufacture


                                 Industry 39 (Industry 1950: 307)
Window shades; Venetian blinds; Planing-mill products (including general millwork), not made in
planing mills connected with sawmills; Lumber, planing mill products, including sash, doors, and
blinds; Planing mills not operated in conjunction with sawmills; Lumber, planing-mill products,
not including planing mills connected with sawmills; Window shades and fixtures; Window and
door screens and weather strip; Window and door screens and weather strips


                                 Industry 40 (Industry 1950: 309)
Mattresses and spring beds; Mattresses and spring beds, not elsewhere specified; Mattresses and
bed springs, not elsewhere classified; Mattresses and bedsprings


                                 Industry 41 (Industry 1950: 309)
Hammocks; Furniture, including store and office fixtures; Furniture, including cabinetmaking, re-
pairing, and upholstering; Refrigerators; Office furniture; Laboratory, hospital, and other profes-
sional furniture; Public-building furniture; Show cases; Upholstered household furniture; Furniture,
wood and rattan and willow; Furniture, except wood, other than rattan and willow; Partitions,
shelving, cabinet work, and office and store fixtures; Furniture, rattan and willow and metal; Fur-
niture, chairs; Refrigerators, domestic (mechanical and absorption), refrigeration machinery and
equipment, and complete air-conditioning units; Household furniture, except upholstered; Fur-
niture, metal furniture and store and office fixtures; Furniture, factory products; Furniture and
refrigerators; Refrigerators, mechanical; Furniture, rattan and willow, store and office fixtures;
Furniture, cabinet making, repairing and upholstering; Furniture, rattan and willow; Furniture,
metal; Furniture; Furniture, wood, other than rattan and willow; Furniture, metal and store fix-
tures; Furniture, factory product; Refrigerators and refrigerator cabinets, exclusive of mechanical
refrigerating equipment; Furniture, store and office fixtures




                                                71
                               Industry 42 (Industry 1950: 466, 467)
Chemicals; Perfumery and cosmetics; Druggists' preparations, not including prescriptions; Cellu-
loid and celluloid goods; Drug grinding; Drugs and medicines (including drug grinding); Perfumes,
cosmetics, and other toilet preparations; Druggists' preparations; Foundry supplies; Insecticides,
fungicides, and related industrial and household chemical compounds; Patent medicines and com-
pounds, patent and proprietary medicines; Patent medicines and compounds; Druggists' prepara-
tions; Plastic materials; Coal-tar products; Rayon and allied products; Perfumes, cosmetics, and
other toilet preparations; Sulphuric, nitric, and mixed acids; Compressed and liquefied gases--not
made in petroleum refineries or in natural-gasoline plants; Patent medicines and compounds and
druggists' preparations; Compressed and liquefied gases; Patent medicines and compounds , patent
and proprietary compounds, not elsewhere specified; Foundry supplies; Chemicals, not elsewhere
classified; Chemicals not elsewhere classified; Patent or proprietary medicines and compounds;
Patent medicines and compounds, except patent and proprietary medicines; Coal-tar products,
crude and intermediate


                                 Industry 43 (Industry 1950: 308)
Baskets, and rattan and willow ware; Baskets and rattan and willow ware, not including furniture;
Baskets and rattan and willow ware; Whalebone and rattan; Baskets for fruits and vegetables;
Rattan and willow ware (except furniture) and baskets other than vegetable and fruit baskets


                                 Industry 44 (Industry 1950: 308)
Boxes, cigar; Boxes, cigar, wooden; Cigar boxes: wooden, part wooden


                                 Industry 45 (Industry 1950: 308)
Rules, ivory and wood; Wood products not elsewhere classified; Woodenware, not elsewhere spec-
ified; Wood turned and shaped and other wooden goods, not elsewhere classified; Cooperage;
Wood, turned and carved; Kindling wood; Cooperage and wooden goods, not elsewhere specified;
Cooperage, except hogsheads and barrels; Wooden goods, not elsewhere specified; Wood work -
Miscellaneous; Cooperage, hogsheads and barrels


                                 Industry 46 (Industry 1950: 308)
Caskets, coffins, burial cases, and other morticians' goods; Coffins, burial cases, and undertakers'
goods


                                 Industry 47 (Industry 1950: 308)
Cork products; Cork, cutting


                                               72
                                   Industry 48 (Industry 1950: 308)
Matches


                                   Industry 49 (Industry 1950: 308)
Wood preserving; Wood, preserving


                                   Industry 50 (Industry 1950: 308)
Lasts; Lasts and related products


                                   Industry 51 (Industry 1950: 309)
Looking-glass and picture frames; Mirror and picture frames; Mirror frames and picture frames


                                   Industry 52 (Industry 1950: 456 )
Pulp, from fiber other than wood; Paper; Paper and wood pulp; Pulp goods; Pulp mills; Pulp, wood;
Pulp goods (pressed, molded); Wood pulp; Fabricated plastic products, not elsewhere classified;
Paper and paperboard mills; Pulp (wood and other fiber)


                                   Industry 53 (Industry 1950: 458)
Converted paper products not elsewhere classified; Die-cut paper and paperboard, and converted
cardboard; Envelopes; Stationery goods, not elsewhere specified; Cardboard, not made in paper
mills; Cardboard; Card cutting and designing; Paper goods, not elsewhere classified; Stationery
goods, not elsewhere classified; Paper goods, not elsewhere specified; Coated and glazed paper;
Pencil cases; Greeting cards (except hand-painted); Card board


                                   Industry 54 (Industry 1950: 458 )
Bags, paper; Bags, paper, exclusive of those made in paper mills; Paper bags, except those made
in paper mills


                                   Industry 55 (Industry 1950: 457)
Boxes, fancy and paper; Boxes paper, not elsewhere classified, shipping containers; Boxes, paper,
not elsewhere classified; Boxes, paper and other, not elsewhere specified; Paperboard containers
and boxes not elsewhere classified; Boxes paper, not elsewhere classified, cartons; Boxes paper, not
elsewhere classified, set-up paper boxes; Fiber cans, tubes, and similar products; Boxes paper, not
elsewhere classified, all others




                                                 73
                                  Industry 56 (Industry 1950: 458 )
Paper hangings; Wall paper; Wallpaper; Wall paper, not made in paper mills


                                  Industry 57 (Industry 1950: 459)
Printing and publishing, newspapers and periodicals; Engraving and diesinking; Printing and pub-
lishing, music; Printing and publishing, newspaper and periodical; Bookbinding and blank book
making; Printing, tip; Printing and publishing; Printing and publishing, book and job, job print-
ing and book publishing and printing; Type founding; Labels and tags; Printing and publishing,
book and job; Engraving on metal (except for printing purposes); Lithographing and engraving;
Engraving, steel, including plate printing; Type founding and printing materials; Printing and
publishing, newspaper and periodical, printing, publishing, and job printing; Machine and hand
typesetting (including advertisement typesetting); Engravers' materials; Paper patterns; Engrav-
ing, wood; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing and printing, linotype work
and typesetting; Engravers materials; Periodicals: publishing without printing; Bookbinding and
blank-book making; Printing and publishing, book and job , book publishing and printing; Printing
materials; Printing and publishing, book and job, job printing; Newspapers: publishing without
printing; Printing and publishing, book and job ; Engraving (steel, copperplate, and wood); plate
printing; Printing and publishing, book and job, except job printing; Printing-trades machinery
and equipment; Books: publishing without printing; Periodicals: publishing and printing; Printing
and publishing, music ; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing without printing
and linotype work and typesetting; Printing materials, not including type or ink; Lithographing
and photo-lithographing (including preparation of stones or plates and dry transfers); Books: print-
ing without publishing; General commercial (job) printing; Lithographing; Newspapers: publishing
and printing; Printing and publishing, book and job, book publishing and printing, linotype work
and typesetting; Bookbinding and related industries; Books: publishing and printing; Engraving
(other than steel, copperplate)


                                  Industry 58 (Industry 1950: 459)
Photolithographing and photoengraving; Photo-engraving, not done in printing establishments;
Photo-engraving; Photoengraving, not done in printing establishments (including preparation of
plates); Gravure, rotogravure, and rotary photogravure (including preparation of plates); Pho-
tolithographing and engraving


                                  Industry 59 (Industry 1950: 459)
Stereotyping and electrotyping; Stereotyping and electrotyping, not done in printing establishments;
Electrotyping and stereotyping, not done in printing establishments


                                                74
                                  Industry 60 (Industry 1950:459 )
Paint and varnish; Varnishes; Paints and varnishes; Colors and pigments; Paints; Varnish; Dyestuffs
and extracts; Paints, varnishes, and lacquers; Tanning materials, natural dyestuffs, mordants and
assistants, and sizes; Tanning materials, natural dyestuffs, mordants, assistants, and sizes; Dyestuffs
and extracts--natural


                                  Industry 61 (Industry 1950: 469)
Oil, not elsewhere specified; Fish and other marine oils, cake, and meal; Oil, lubricating; Essential
oils; Oil, essential; Oil, cake, and meal, linseed; Oil, cottonseed and cake; Oil and cake, cottonseed;
Oil, resin; Oil, linseed; Oil, not elsewhere specified, composite; Linseed oil, cake, and meal; Oil,
castor; Oil, lard; Oils, not elsewhere classified; Oil, not elsewhere specified, vegetable, animal,
and mineral oils; Oil, cake, and meal, cottonseed; Lard, refined; Oils, essential; Soybean oil, cake,
and meal; Oil, vegetable, essential; Oil, not elsewhere specified, vegetable; Oil, cottonseed, cake;
Cottonseed oil, cake, meal, and linters; Oil, not elsewhere specified, except vegetable and composite;
Oil, illuminating, not including petroleum refining; Oil, not elsewhere specified, composite oils;
Vegetable and animal oils, not elsewhere classified


                                  Industry 62 (Industry 1950: 469)
Soap and candles; Soap; Candles; Soap and glycerin


                                  Industry 63 (Industry 1950: 477)
Turpentine and rosin; Wood naval stores; Tar and turpentine; Gum naval stores (processing but
not gathering or warehousing)


                                  Industry 64 (Industry 1950: 469)
Fertilizers


                                  Industry 65 (Industry 1950: 469)
Explosives; Gunpowder; High explosives


                                  Industry 66 (Industry 1950: 469)
Salt


                                  Industry 67 (Industry 1950: 469)
Bone black, carbon black, and lampblack; Bone, ivory, and lamp black; Bone, carbon, and lamp
black; Bone black, carbon black, and lamp black

                                                75
                                 Industry 68 (Industry 1950: 469)
Ink, printing; Ink, printing; Ink, writing; Printing ink; Ink, writing; Ink; Writing ink


                                 Industry 69 (Industry 1950: 469)
Firearms; Firearms and ammunition; Ammunition and related products; Ammunition


                                 Industry 70 (Industry 1950: 469)
Cleaning and polishing preparations, blackings, and dressings; Cleansing and polishing prepara-
tions; Blacking, stains, and dressings; Blacking; Cleansing and polishing preparations, except metal
polish and cleansing preparations; Blacking and cleansing and polishing preparations; Cleaning and
polishing preparations; Cleansing and polishing preparations, except metal polish; Cleansing and
polishing preparations, metal polish; Cleansing and polishing preparations, cleansing preparations;
Cleansing and polishing preparations, polishing preparations


                                 Industry 71 (Industry 1950: 469)
Glue, not elsewhere specified; Glue and gelatin; Glue


                                 Industry 72 (Industry 1950: 477)
Grease and tallow (except lubricating greases); Grease and tallow; Grease and tallow, not including
lubricating greases


                                 Industry 73 (Industry 1950: 476)
Petroleum, refining; Gas, illuminating and heating; Axle grease; Lubricating greases; Lubricating
oils and greases--not made in petroleum refineries; Petroleum refining; Lubricating oils and greases,
not made in petroleum refineries; Gas, manufactured, illuminating and heating


                                 Industry 74 (Industry 1950: 469)
Fireworks; Fire-works


                                 Industry 75 (Industry 1950: 469)
Bluing


                                 Industry 76 (Industry 1950: 469)
Mucilage, paste, and other adhesives, except glue and rubber cement; Mucilage and paste; Mucilage,
paste and other adhesives, not elsewhere specified



                                                76
                                 Industry 77 (Industry 1950: 477)
Coke; Coke, not including gas-house coke; Beehive coke; Oven coke and coke-oven byproducts


                                 Industry 78 (Industry 1950: 318)
Paving materials; Paving and paving materials; Paving materials: Asphalt, tar, crushed slag, and
mixtures; Paying blocks and paying mixtures: asphalt, creosoted wood, and composition


                                 Industry 79 (Industry 1950: 318)
Roofing materials; Roofing and roofing materials; Roofing, built-up and roll; asphalt shingles; roof
coating (except paint); Roofing, built-up and roll; asphalt shingles; roof coatings other than paint


                                 Industry 80 (Industry 1950: 477)
Fuel, artificial; Fuel Briquettes and boulets; Fuel briquets; Fuel, manufactured


                                 Industry 81 (Industry 1950: 478)
Rubber boots and shoes (including rubber-soled footwear with fabric uppers); Boots and shoes,
rubber


                                 Industry 82 (Industry 1950: 487)
Leather, tanned, curried, and finished; Leather: tanned, curried, and finished-regular factories
or jobbers engaging contractors; Leather: Tanned, curried, and finished; Leather: tanned, curried,
and finished--contract factories; Leather, patent and enameled; Leather, morocco; Leather, dressed
skins; Leather, tanned and curried


                                Industry 83 (Industry 1950: 4689)
Belting, leather; Belting and hose, leather; Industrial leather belting and packing leather; Packing
hose




                                               77
                                Industry 84 (Industry 1950: 488)
Boots and shoes, other than rubber; Boot and shoe cut stock; Boots and shoes; Boots and shoes,
factory product; Boot and shoe cut stock, not made in boot and shoe factories; Boot and shoe
findings; Boots and shoes, custom work and repairing; Boot and shoe findings, exclusive of those
produced in boot and shoe factories; Boot and shoe uppers; Boot and shoe cut stock, exclusive
of that produced in boot and shoe factories; Boots and shoes, not including rubber boots and
shoes; Boots and shoes, including cut stock and findings; Boots and shoes, other than rubber,
stitching and crimping; Boots and shoes, other than rubber, regular factory products; Boots and
shoes, stitching and crimping; Boots and shoes, regular factory products; Boots and shoes, other
than rubber, except regular factory products; Boot and shoe findings, not made in boot and shoe
factories; ; Boots and shoes, other than rubber, contract work; Footwear (except rubber); Boot and
shoe cut stock and findings; Boots and shoes, contract work


                                Industry 85 (Industry 1950: 316)
Glass; Tableware, pressed or blown glass, and glassware not elsewhere classified; Glass containers;
Flat glass


                                Industry 86 (Industry 1950: 316)
Glass, cutting, staining, and ornamenting; Mirrors; Mirrors, framed and unframed, not elsewhere
specified; Mirrors, framed and unframed; Glass products (except mirrors) made from purchased
glass; Mirrors and other glass products made of purchased glass; Glass, cutting, staining, and
ornamenting, decalcomania work on glass; Glass, cutting, staining, and ornamenting, except decal-
comania work on glass


                                Industry 87 (Industry 1950: 317)
Lime and cement; Cement; Lime




                                               78
                                Industry 88 (Industry 1950: 318, 319)
Pottery, including porcelain ware; Pottery, terra-cotta and fire-clay products; Masonry, brick and
stone; Pottery, terra cotta, and fire-clay products; Porcelain electrical supplies; Brick and tile, terra-
cotta, and fire-clay products, except building bricks and terra-cotta products; Artificial stone; Brick
and tile, terra-cotta, and fireclay products; Whiteware; Concrete products; Brick and tile, terra-
cotta, and fire-clay products, building brick; Brick and tile; Clay products (other than pottery)
and nonclay refractories; Brick and tile, terra-cotta, and fire-clay products, stove lining and terra-
cotta products; Artificial stone products; Crucibles; Clay refractories, including refractory cement
(clay); Roofing tile; Concrete products; Brick and hollow structural tile; Clay and pottery products;
Terra cotta; Clay products (except pottery) not elsewhere classified; Sand-lime brick, block and
tile; Nonclay refractories; Pottery products not elsewhere classified; Brick and tile, terra-cotta,
and fire-clay products, fire brick; Floor and wall tile (except quarry tile); Vitreous-china plumbing
fixtures; Pottery; Sand-lime brick; Sewer pipe and kindred products; Hotel china; Brick and tile,
terra-cotta, and fire-clay products, terra-cotta products


                                   Industry 89 (Industry 1950: 319)
China firing and decorating, not done in potteries; China decorating; China decorating, not includ-
ing that done in potteries; China firing and decorating (for the trade)


                                   Industry 90 (Industry 1950: 317)
Plastering and stuccowork; Wall plaster and composition flooring; Wallboard and wall plaster
(except gypsum), building insulation (except mineral wool), and floor composition; Wall plaster,
wall board, insulating board, and floor composition; Mineral wool; Statuary and art goods (except
stone and concrete)--factory production; Wall plaster; Gypsum products; Statuary and art goods,
factory product; Statuary and art goods
                                   Industry 91 (Industry 1950: 326)
Monuments and tombstones; Mantels, slate, marble, and marbleized; Monuments, tombstones, cut-
stone, and stone products not elsewhere classified; Marble and stone work; Marble and stone work,
monuments and tombstones; Marble, granite, slate, and other stone products, other marble and
stone work, except slated; Marble, granite, slate, and other stone products; Marble and stone work,
except monuments and tombstones
                                   Industry 92 (Industry 1950: 326)
Emery and other abrasive wheels; Emery wheels and other abrasive and polishing appliances;
Emery wheels; Sand and emery paper and cloth; Abrasive wheels, stones, paper, cloth, and related
products; Hones, whetstones, and similar products; Sand paper, emery paper, and other abrasive
paper and cloth


                                                  79
                                 Industry 93 (Industry 1950: 326)
Asbestos products (except steam packing and pipe and boiler covering); Asbestos products, not
including steam packing; Steam packing; Steam and other packing, pipe and boiler covering, and
gaskets, not elsewhere classified; Steam and other packing; pipe and boiler covering; Asbestos
products, other than steam packing or pipe and boiler covering


                                 Industry 94 (Industry 1950: 326)
Graphite, ground and refined; Graphite and graphite refining; Natural graphite, ground and refined;
Graphite ground and refined


                                 Industry 95 (Industry 1950: 326)
Minerals and earths, ground or otherwise treated; Kaolin and ground earths; Kaolin and other
earth grinding


                                 Industry 96 (Industry 1950: 326)
Iron and steel, steel works and rolling mills; Iron and steel: Steel works and rolling mills; Iron and
steel; Iron and steel, blast furnaces; Steel castings; Blast-furnace products; Tin and terne plate;
Iron and steel: Blast furnaces; Steel works and rolling mills; Iron and steel, tempering and welding;
Ferroalloys; Tin plate and terneplate




                                                80
                                 Industry 97 (Industry 1950: 346)
Gas machines and gas and water meters, gas meters and water meters; Ironwork, architectural and
ornamental; Gas machines and meters; Plumbers' supplies; Construction and similar machinery
(except mining and oil-field machinery and tools); Hardware, except locks and builder's hard-
ware; Vault lights and ventilators; Foundry and machine-shop products, machine shop and foundry
combined; Steam engines, turbines, and water wheels; Signs and advertising novelties, signs, elec-
tric and others; Signs, advertising displays, and advertising novelties; Foundry and machine shop
products; Foundry and machine-shop products, boiler shops; Hardware, locks; Bridges; Lightning
rods; Steam fittings, regardless of material; Pumps, not including steam pumps; Steam fittings
and heating apparatus; Foundry and machine-shop products, except machine shops; Steel barrels,
kegs, and drums; Registers, car fare; Hardware; Locomotives, not made by railroad companies;
Enameled-iron sanitary ware and other plumbers' supplies (not including pipe and vitreous and
semivitreous china sanitary ware); Signs and advertising novelties; Mining machinery and equip-
ment; Foundry and machine-shop products, except foundries; Vending, amusement, and other
coin-operated machines; Hardware, saddlery; Oil-field machinery and tools; Mechanical power-
transmission equipment; Plumbers supplies; Hardware not elsewhere classified; Pumps (hand and
power) and pumping equipment; Locomotives, not made in railroad repair shops; Steel barrels,
drums and tanks, portable; Engines, steam, gas, and water; Gray-iron and semisteel castings;
Blowers; exhaust and ventilating fans; Foundry and machine-shop products, not elsewhere classi-
fied; Hardware, vehicle hardware; Cast-iron pipe; Steam fittings and steam and hot-water heating
apparatus; Textile machinery and parts; Signs and advertising novelties, electric and other signs;
Iron and steel, processed; Steam fittings and steam and hot-water heating apparatus, radiators and
cast-iron heating boilers


                                 Industry 98 (Industry 1950: 338)
Gold and silver, reducing and refining, not from the ore; Tinsmithing, coppersmithing, and sheet-
iron working; Smelting and refining, not from the ore; Smelting and refining, lead; Secondary smelt-
ing and refining of nonferrous metals, not elsewhere classified; Sheet-metal work not specifically
classified; Copper, tin, and sheet-iron products; Tinware, not elsewhere specified; Zinc, smelting
and refining; Gold, silver, and platinum, reducing and refining, not from the ore; Smelting and
refining, metals other than gold, silver, or platinum, not from the ore; Smelting and refining, cop-
per; Lead, smelting and refining; Smelting and refining, zinc; Cooper, tin, and sheet-iron work;
Primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals; Silversmithing; Copper, smelting and refining;
Smelting and refining; Secondary smelting and refining, gold, silver, and platinum; Tin cans and
other tinware not elsewhere classified; Zinc; Tin cans and other tinware, not elsewhere classified;
Copper, tin, and sheet-iron work, including galvanized iron work, not elsewhere classified


                                               81
                                  Industry 99 (Industry 1950: 337)
Wire; Wire, drawn from purchased bars or rods; Wire drawn from purchased rods


                                 Industry 100 (Industry 1950: 337)
Iron and steel, nails and spikes, cut and wrought, including wire nails; Nails, spikes, etc. not made
in wire mills or in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, nails and spikes,
cut and wrought, including wire nails, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Nails, spikes, etc.,
not made in wire mills or in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron, steel, nails,
spikes, cut and wrought, including wire nails, not made in steel works or rolling mills


                                 Industry 101 (Industry 1950: 337)
Wirework, including wire rope and cable; Wirework, not elsewhere specified; Wirework not else-
where classified; Wirework, not elsewhere classified


                                 Industry 102 (Industry 1950: 337)
Cutlery (except aluminum, silver, and plated cutlery) and edge tools; Machine-tool and other
metalworking-machinery accessories, metal cutting and shaping tools, and machinists' precision
tools; Metal working machinery and equipment, not elsewhere classified; Tools, not elsewhere spec-
ified; Cutlery and edge tools; Machine tools; Tools, not elsewhere specified, except machinists';
Tools (except edge tools, machine tools, files, and saws); Cutlery and tools, not elsewhere specified;
Cutlery and edge tools, except razors; Cutlery (not including silver and plated cutlery) and edge
tools; Cutlery and edge tools, razors; Tools, not elsewhere specified, machinists'; Tools, not in-
cluding edge tools, machine tools, files, or saws; Machine-tool accessories and small metal-working
tools, not elsewhere classified; Tools, not elsewhere specified, shovels, spades, scoops, hoes, and
carpenters' tools, not elsewhere classified


                                 Industry 103 (Industry 1950: 346)
Files


                                 Industry 104 (Industry 1950: 346)
Saws




                                                82
                                 Industry 105 (Industry 1950: 346)
Stoves, ranges, water heaters, and hot-air furnaces (except electric); Gas and oil stoves; Gas stoves;
Heating and cooking apparatus, except electric, not elsewhere classified; Stoves, gas and oil; Stoves
and hot-air furnaces; Stoves and furnaces, including gas and oil stoves; Stoves and hot air furnaces,
stoves and ranges; Oil burners, domestic and industrial; Stoves and ranges (other than electric)
and warm-air furnaces; Stoves and hot air furnaces, hot-air furnaces


                                 Industry 106 (Industry 1950: 346)
Japanning; Enameling; Stamped ware; Enameling, japanning, and lacquering; Stamped and pressed
metal products (except automobile stampings); Automobile stampings; Enameling and enameled
goods; Enameling and japanning; Stamped and enameled ware, not elsewhere specified; Vitreous
enameled products, including kitchen, household, and hospital utensils; Stamped ware, enameled
ware, and metal stamping, enameling, japanning, and lacquering; Enameled goods


                                 Industry 107 (Industry 1950: 346)
Galvanizing; Galvanizing and other coating processes; Galvanizing and other coating--carried on
in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Galvanizing and other coating not done in
plants operated in connection with rolling mills


                                 Industry 108 (Industry 1950: 346)
Iron and steel, doors and shutters; Doors, shutters, and window sash and frames, metal; Doors,
window sash, frames, molding, and trim (made of metal)
                                 Industry 109 (Industry 1950: 346)
Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron
and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets; Bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets made in plants not
operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made
in rolling mills; Iron and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets, not made in steel works or rolling
mills


                                 Industry 110 (Industry 1950: 346)
Iron and steel, forgings; Horseshoes, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Forgings, iron and
steel--made in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel forgings; Iron
and steel forgings, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Forgings, iron and steel, not made in
plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Horseshoes, factory product; Horse-shoes




                                                83
                                Industry 111 (Industry 1950: 346)
Iron and steel, wrought pipe; Wrought pipe, welded and heavy riveted, not made in plants oper-
ated in connection with rolling mills; Iron and steel, pipe, wrought; Iron and steel pipe, wrought;
Wrought pipes, welded and heavy riveted--made in plants not operated in connection with rolling
mills


                                Industry 112 (Industry 1950: 346)
Springs, steel, except wire, not made in plants operated in connection with rolling mills; Springs,
steel, car and carriage, not made in steel works or rolling mills; Springs, steel (except wire)--made
in plants not operated in connection with rolling mills; Springs, steel, car and carriage


                                Industry 113 (Industry 1950: 346)
Screws; Screws, machine; Screw-machine products and wood screws; Screws, wood


                                Industry 114 (Industry 1950: 346)
Safes and vaults


                                Industry 115 (Industry 1950: 347)
Bronze castings; Nonferrous-metal products not elsewhere classified; Lead, bar, pipe, and sheet;
Brass castings and brass finishing; Alloying; and rolling and drawing of nonferrous metals, except
aluminum; Bells; Brass, bronze, and copper products; Lead, bar, pipe and sheet; Brass and bronze
products; Brass; Babbitt metal and solder; Brass castings; Nonferrous-metal foundries (except
aluminum); Brass and copper, rolled; Brassware; Brass, bronze and copper products, brass and
bronze products; Brass, bronze and copper products, copper and all other products; Nonferrous-
metal alloys and products, not including aluminum products


                                Industry 116 (Industry 1950: 388)
Watch and clock materials, except watchcases; Watches and watch movements; Clocks; Watch and
clock materials; Clocks and watches, including cases and materials; Watch and clock materials and
parts, except watchcases; Watches; Watchcases; Watch cases; Clocks, watches, and materials and
parts (except watchcases); Clocks, clock movements, time-recording devices, and time stamps


                                Industry 117 (Industry 1950: 399)
Costume jewelry and costume novelties (jewelry other than fine jewelry); Jewelry; Jewelers' findings
and materials; Jewelry (precious metals)




                                                84
                                   Industry 118 (Industry 1950: 399)
Lapidary work


                                   Industry 119 (Industry 1950: 346)
Silverware and plated ware; Silverware; Plated and britannia ware; Silversmithing and silverware;
Plated ware


                                   Industry 120 (Industry 1950: 346)
Electroplating, plating, and polishing; Electroplating


                                   Industry 121 (Industry 1950: 358)
Calcium lights; Lamps and reflectors; Gas and lamp fixtures; Gas and electric fixtures, lamps and
reflectors; Gas and electric fixtures; lamps, lanterns, and reflectors; Gas and electric fixtures; Gas
and electric fixtures, electric fixtures; Gas and electric fixtures, except electric fixtures; Lighting fix-
tures; Lamps and reflectors, all other lamps; Lamps and reflectors, reflectors; Lamps and reflectors,
automobile lamps


                                   Industry 122 (Industry 1950: 347)
Tin and other foils, not elsewhere specified; Collapsible tubes; tinfoil; Tin and other foils (except
gold and silver foil); Tin foil; Tin and other foils, not including gold foil; Tinfoil


                                   Industry 123 (Industry 1950: 347)
Gold and silver, leaf and foil; Gold leaf and foil; Gold and silver leaf and foil


                                   Industry 124 (Industry 1950: 367)
Electrical machinery, apparatus, and supplies; Phonographs and graphophones; Electric light and
power; Insulated wire and cable; Generating, distribution, and industrial apparatus, and appara-
tus for incorporation in manufactured products, not elsewhere classified; Electric lamps; Batteries,
storage and primary (dry and wet); Electrical apparatus and supplies; Electrical measuring in-
struments; Electrical products not elsewhere classified; Automotive electrical equipment; Electrical
appliances; Wiring devices and supplies; X-ray and therapeutic apparatus and electronic tubes; Ra-
dios, radio tubes, and phonographs; Communication equipment; Phonographs; Beauty-shop and
barber-shop equipment; Carbon products for the electrical industry, and manufactures of carbon
or artificial graphite




                                                   85
                               Industry 125 (Industry 1950: 357)
Agricultural implements; Agricultural machinery (except tractors); Windmills; Windmills and
windmill towers; Tractors


                               Industry 126 (Industry 1950: 357)
Typewriters and supplies; Typewriters and supplies, carbon paper; Office and store machines, not
elsewhere classified; Typewriters and supplies, typewriters and parts; Carbon paper and inked
ribbons; Typewriters and supplies, except typewriters and parts and carbon paper; Typewriters
and parts


                               Industry 127 (Industry 1950: 357)
Scales and balances


                               Industry 128 (Industry 1950: 358)
Washing machines and clothes wringers; Washing machines, clothes wringers; Washing machines,
wringers, driers, and ironing machines, for household use; Laundry equipment, domestic


                               Industry 129 (Industry 1950: 358)
Sewing machines and attachments; Sewing machines, domestic and industrial; Sewing machines,
cases, and attachments; Sewing-machine cases


                               Industry 130 (Industry 1950: 376)
Carriage and wagon materials; Carriages and wagons, including repairs; Wheelbarrows; Automo-
biles, including bodies and parts; Carriages, wagons, sleighs, and sleds; Carriages and wagons;
Automobile bodies and parts; Motor vehicles, not including motorcycles; Motor-vehicle bodies and
motor-vehicle parts; Carriages and wagons,including repairs, repair work only; Carriages and wag-
ons,including repairs, cars and wagons; Carriage, wagon, sleigh, and sled materials; Automobiles;
Carriages and wagons and materials; Automobile trailers (for attachment to passenger cars); Mo-
tor vehicles, motor-vehicle bodies, parts and accessories; Transportation equipment not elsewhere
classified




                                               86
                                 Industry 131 (Industry 1950: 379)
Cars and general shop construction and repairs by steam-railroad companies; Car and general con-
struction and repairs, steam-railroad repair shops; Cars, street-railroad, not including operations
of railroad companies; Cars, electric-railroad, not including operations of railroad companies; Cars,
railroad and street, and repairs, not including establishments operated by steam railroad companies;
Cars and general shop construction and repairs by steam railroad companies; Cars, electric and
steam railroad, not built in railroad repair shops; Cars and general shop construction and repairs
by street railroad companies; Cars and general shop construction and repairs by street-railroad
companies; Cars, street railroad, not including operations of railroad companies; Car and general
construction and repairs, electric-railroad repair shops; Cars, steam-railroad, not including opera-
tions of railroad companies; Cars, steam railroad, not including operations of railroad companies;
Cars and car equipments-railroad, street, and rapid-transit; Cars and general shop construction
and repairs by electric-railroad companies


                                 Industry 132 (Industry 1950: 377)
Bicycles and tricycles; Aeroplanes, seaplanes, and airships, and parts; Bicycles, motorcycles, and
parts; Motorcycles, bicycles and parts; Aircraft and parts, including aircraft engines; Motorcycles,
bicycles, and parts; Aircraft and parts


                                 Industry 133 (Industry 1950: 378)
Shipbuilding, including boat building; Shipbuilding; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building,
yards where work on new vessels was done; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, yards
engaged entirely on repair work; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, boats under 5 tons;
Boat building and boat repairing; Shipbuilding, iron and steel; Shipbuilding, steel, repair work only,
small boats, and masts, spars, oars, and rigging; Shipbuilding, steel, new vessels; Shipbuilding,
steel, new vessels, small boats, and masts, spars, oars, and rigging; Shipbuilding, steel; Ship and
boat building, steel and wooden, including repair work; Shipbuilding and ship repairing; Ship and
boat building, wooden; Shipbuilding, steel, repair work only; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat
building; Shipbuilding, wooden, including boat building, masts, spars, oars, and the rigging of
vessels




                                                87
                                Industry 134 (Industry 1950: 386)
Instruments, professional and scientific; Surgical appliances; Artificial limbs; Surgical and medi-
cal instruments; Surgical supplies and equipment not elsewhere classified; orthopedic appliances;
Instruments, professional and scientific, medical and surgical; Surgical and orthopedic appliances,
including artificial limbs; Surgical appliances and artificial limbs; Instruments, professional and
scientific, except medical and surgical; Professional and scientific instruments (except surgical and
dental)


                                Industry 135 (Industry 1950: 387)
Photographic materials, motion-picture films not exposed, and motion-picture projection films;
Photographic apparatus, except cameras and motion-picture machines; Photographic apparatus
and materials; Photographic materials; Photographic apparatus; Photographic apparatus and ma-
terials and projection equipment (except lenses); Photographic apparatus, cameras and motion-
picture machines; Photographic materials, except motion-picture films; Photographic materials,
motion-picture films; Photographic materials, except motion-picture films not exposed, and motion-
picture projection films


                                Industry 136 (Industry 1950: 386)
Optical goods; Optical instruments and lenses; Ophthalmic goods: lenses and fittings


                                Industry 137 (Industry 1950: 386)
Dentists' materials; Dental goods; Dental equipment and supplies; Dental goods and equipment


                                Industry 138 (Industry 1950: 399)
Musical instruments, piano and organ materials; Musical instruments, organs and materials; Mus-
cial instruments: Organs; Musical instruments: Pianos; Musical instruments and parts and materi-
als, not elsewhere classified; Musical instruments and materials, not specified; Musical instruments,
pianos; Musical instruments, pianos and organs and materials; Musical instruments, parts, and ma-
terials not elsewhere classified; Musical instruments, pianos and materials; Pianos; Organs; Musical
instruments, organs; Musical instrument parts and materials: Piano and organ; Piano and organ
parts and materials


                                Industry 139 (Industry 1950: 399)
Toys and games; Games and toys (except dolls and children's vehicles); Dolls (except rubber); Toys
(not including children's wheel goods or sleds), games, and playground equipment




                                                88
                                 Industry 140 (Industry 1950: 399)
Carriages and sleds, children's; Children's vehicles


                                 Industry 141 (Industry 1950: 399)
Sporting and athletic goods; Sporting goods; Sporting and athletic good not elsewhere classified;
Sporting and athletic goods, not including firearms or ammunition; Billiard tables and materi-
als; Billiard tables, bowling alleys, and accessories; Billiard and pool tables, bowling alleys, and
accessories


                                 Industry 142 (Industry 1950: 399)
Pens, steel; Pens, gold; Pencils (except mechanical) and crayons; Pens, fountain and stylographic;
Pens, fountain, stylographic and gold; Artists' materials; Pencils, lead; Pens, fountain and stylo-
graphic; pen points, gold, steel, and brass; Pens, mechanical pencils, and pen points; Pencils, lead
(including mechanical)


                                 Industry 143 (Industry 1950: 399)
Stencils and brands; Hand stamps, stencils and brands; Hand stamps; Hand stamps, stencils, and
brands; Hand stamps and stencils and brands


                                 Industry 144 (Industry 1950: 399)
Buttons


                                 Industry 145 (Industry 1950: 399)
Jewelry and instrument cases; Jewelry cases and instrument cases


                                 Industry 146 (Industry 1950: 399)
Feathers and plumes; Artificial feathers and flowers; Artificial flowers; Feathers, plumes, and manu-
factures thereof; Feathers, plumes, and artificial flowers; Artificial and preserved flowers and plants;
Artificial flowers, feathers and plumes


                                 Industry 147 (Industry 1950: 399)
Brooms and brushes; Brooms; Brushes; Brooms, from broom corn; Brushes, other than rubber;
Brushes, except toilet; Brushes, toilet; Brooms, except from broom corn; Brushes, other than toilet


                                 Industry 148 (Industry 1950: 399)
Furs, dressed; Furs, dressed and dyed


                                                 89
                                Industry 149 (Industry 1950: 399)
Umbrellas and canes; Umbrellas, parasols, and canes


                                Industry 150 (Industry 1950: 399)
Pipes (tobacco); Pipes, tobacco; Tobacco pipes and cigarette holders


                                Industry 151 (Industry 1950: 399)
Soda water apparatus; Soda fountains, beer dispensing equipment, and related products; Soda-
water apparatus


                                Industry 152 (Industry 1950: 399)
Models and patterns; Models and patterns (except paper patterns); Models and patterns, not
including paper patterns


                                Industry 153 (Industry 1950: 399)
Hair work; Hairwork


                                Industry 154 (Industry 1950: 399)
Needles, pins, hooks and eyes, and snap fasteners; Needles and pins; Hooks and eyes; Needles, pins,
hooks and eyes, and slide and snap fasteners; Needles, pins, hooks and eyes; Needles, pins, and
hooks and eyes


                                Industry 155 (Industry 1950: 399)
Fire extinguishers, chemical




                                               90
                                Industry 156 (Industry 1950: 399)
Ivory and bone work; Combs; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, paper
and wood novelties; Fancy articles, not elsewhere specified; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified; Theatrical scenery and stage equipment; Ivory, shell, and bone work, not in-
cluding combs and hairpins; Fancy articles, not else where specified; Ivory, shell, and bone work,
not including buttons, combs, or hairpins; Miscellaneous fabricated products not elsewhere clas-
sified; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except beadwork, celluloid and
metal novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, metal novelties; Fancy
and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except metal and paper novelties; Theatrical
scenery; Combs and hairpins, not made from metal or rubber; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified, except beadwork, celluloid, metal and paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous
articles, not elsewhere classified, metal and wood novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not
elsewhere classified, beadwork and celluloid novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not else-
where classified, paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, metal
and paper novelties; Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, wood novelties;
Fancy and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except paper and wood novelties; Fancy
and miscellaneous articles, not elsewhere classified, except metal and wood novelties; Combs and
hairpins, except those made from metal or rubber; Lamp shades




                                               91
