                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INTERNAL DEADLINES, DRUG APPROVALS, AND SAFETY PROBLEMS

                                            Lauren Cohen
                                             Umit Gurun
                                             Danielle Li

                                        Working Paper 28071
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28071


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2020




We would like thank Daniel Carpenter, Sabrina Howell, Aaron Kesselheim, Christopher Malloy, and
seminar participants at Harvard University and the 2020 American Economic Association meetings
for helpful comments and suggestions. Copyright American Economic Association; reproduced with
permission. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, and Danielle Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Internal Deadlines, Drug Approvals, and Safety Problems
Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, and Danielle Li
NBER Working Paper No. 28071
November 2020
JEL No. I18,K32,O38,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Absent explicit quotas, incentives, reporting, or fiscal year-end motives, drug approvals around the
world surge in December, at month-ends, and before respective major national holidays. Drugs approved
before these informal deadlines are associated with significantly more adverse effects, including more
hospitalizations, life-threatening incidents, and deaths ­ particularly, drugs most rushed through the
approval process. These patterns are consistent with a model in which regulators rush to meet internal
production benchmarks associated with salient calendar periods: this "desk-clearing" behavior results
in more lax review, leading both to increased output and increased safety issues at particular--and
predictable--periodicities over the year.


Lauren Cohen                                      Danielle Li
Harvard Business School                           MIT Sloan School of Management
Baker Library 273                                 100 Main St, E62-484
Soldiers Field                                    Cambridge, MA 02142
Boston, MA 02163                                  and NBER
and NBER                                          danielle.li@mit.edu
lcohen@hbs.edu

Umit Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
    In this paper we document a global surge in drug approvals preceding informal
deadlines. These include spikes in the month of December, at the end of each calendar
month, and just before important national holidays in respective countries. The magnitude
of these eects is striking: for instance, across a dataset spanning drug approvals in the
United States, European Union, Japan, China, and South Korea, 18.64% of all approved
drugs are approved in the month of December--more than double the average in any other
month. Moreover, we examine the safety ramifications of these approval surges. Holding
constant disease type, year, and various other controls, drugs approved just before informal
deadlines are associated with significantly more adverse eects, including more
hospitalizations, life-threatening incidents, and deaths.1
    The approval patterns we observe exist at periodicities consistent with regulators rushing
to meet internally imposed benchmarks associated with calendar events such as year-ends,
month-ends, and holidays. In particular, while Carpenter, Zucker and Avorn (2008) have
shown that drug regulators rush to meet formal deadlines in the United States, we identify
a distinct behavioral phenomenon that persists across dierent formal regulatory regimes in
many countries. For example, drug regulators are not formally evaluated on their year-end
output in any country that we are aware of; rather, they are typically given target times for
processing applicants, and evaluated in part based on the percentage of applications that
receive a timely review. These specific targets dier across regulators in dierent countries
(within 300 days in the US versus 210 days in the EU, for instance). Rushing to comply with
these formal policies would not generate the pattern of year-end, month-end, and holiday
surges that we document.
    We argue, instead, that these patterns are more consistent with an interpretation in
which regulators use salient calendar-time periods to clear their workloads so that they can
start with a "clean" desk in the next period. Consistent with this interpretation, we show
that regulators approve an especially large number of drugs in December in years when they
have approved relatively few drugs in the first part of the year. Moreover, December drugs
approved during these especially busy months are associated with even more adverse eects.
This suggests either that regulators engage in hastier desk-clearing when their workload
is high (e.g., when there are more drug candidates left to be decided upon in December)
   1
     We observe adverse eects data for the US and the EU; disaggregated data on serious adverse eects
are available from the US sample only.




                                                 1
or when they feel greater informal pressure to increase output (e.g., when their approval
numbers look low leading into December).2
    We provide evidence that our findings are not driven by a number of alternative
explanations. First, it is possible that regulatory bodies may evaluate dierent types of
drugs in December or at the end of each month. Regulators may, for instance, collect their
most complex cases throughout the year or month to be considered at the end of that
period. In this case, the higher adverse eects that we see for drugs approved during these
periods would reflect the nature of the drugs themselves rather than the quality of the
decision-making process that led to their approval. To explore this possibility, we examine
whether there are ex ante dierences among drugs approved during output surges that may
explain their ex post dierences in adverse eects. We show that controlling for a battery
of drug characteristics--the disease meant to be treated, market size, and the drug's
priority review status--does not alter our findings, suggesting that our results are not
driven by dierences on these dimensions. We further show that drugs approved in
December do not appear to be more complicated or di cult to review, as explicitly
measured by their chemical or functional novelty.
    It is also possible that firms time application submissions in the hopes of receiving a
lax December review. Using information on application dates available for a subset of US
drugs, we find no evidence that the December eect is generated by strategic timing, which
would generate a surge of applications in February (for regular review) or a surge in June
(for priority review).
    If regulators make rushed decisions to meet internal deadlines, a natural question is why
they seem to err on the side of approval rather than rejection. We believe this may be
the result of informal performance benchmarks that focus on the quantity of drugs that are
approved rather than the quality of those decisions. The number of drugs that are approved
is immediately visible and is likely to be much more salient than an approved drug's adverse
eects, which may may take years to be realized. Indeed, in the public discourse, drug
regulators across the world are evaluated and compared on the basis of their drug output.
This, combined with the fact that industry and patient groups typically advocate for the
approval rather than rejection of new drugs, may bias regulators toward approval.
   Finally we consider the policy implications of our findings. First, we note that the
the welfare implications of our findings are unclear. One possibility, of course, is that a
   2
     Distinguishing between these possibilities requires knowing the date on which rejected drug candidates
are rejected. Unfortunately this is unobserved.



                                                    2
rushed review process decreases public welfare by increasing the likelihood that dangerous
drugs enter the market. However, if regulators were generally too conservative in new drug
approvals, then rushed review may actually be welfare-improving--even given an increase in
adverse eects--because it moves the review standard closer to first best. Because we cannot
observe the benefits that accrue to patients administered these drugs, our analysis cannot
distinguish between these two possibilities. That said, we do perform a back-of-the-envelope
estimation to get a sense of the magnitude at least of the costs associated with this pattern
of rushed review. Our calculation suggests that between 1,400 and 9,000 lives are lost per
year to rushed review; given a low-end estimate of the value of a statistical life ($885K per
life), this works out to roughly $1.2 to $8 billion implied loss per year over our sample period.
    That said, even if a drug approval agency were broadly too conservative in its approval
decisions across all drugs, an optimal policy response would not be to apply more lax
screening only to those drugs nearing approval at the end of the year or month.3 We
outline two potential policy responses, one based on a mandated smoothing of approvals
over time, and another based on using a "holding-tank" mechanism in which some drugs
approved during high-volume periods are slated for re-review prior to receiving a final
go-ahead.
   Situating our work in the literature, production targets--both formal and informal--are
ubiquitous across the economy, and similar spikes in output have been documented in settings
ranging from sales (Larkin (2014), Oyer (1998)) to patent o ce approvals (Blatt and Huang
(2018)) to judicial decisions (Gelbach and Marcus (2017)), to spending at federal agencies
(Liebman and Mahoney (2017)).
    Moreover, trading o costs and benefits in intertemporal choice, and models surrounding
seeming behavioral irregularities in this decision-making, go back to Strotz (1955) and Phelps
and Pollak (1968); continuing through the hyperbolic discounting models of Laibson (1997),
O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999a), and O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999b). The experimental and
empirical literature has further established a strong behavioral tendency of procrastination;
to which "deadlines" have been proposed as solutions. More specifically, O'Donoghue and
Rabin (1999b) show how incentive schemes with "deadlines" may be a useful screening device
to distinguish e cient delay from ine cient procrastination.
   Our work is most closely related to Carpenter, Zucker and Avorn (2008) and Carpenter
et al. (2012), both of which study the impact of formal deadlines imposed by the U.S.
  3
    As we see no spikes in "days under consideration" for drugs in December, it is not that agencies are
saving their most di cult cases for year- or month-end (or before holidays). Nor do we see any strategic
timing in terms of submissions on the side of drug-makers in terms of their submission timing of drugs.


                                                   3
Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 on drug approvals; they find that more drugs are
approved prior to their review deadlines, and that drugs approved during these periods
are more likely to face post-marketing safety problems.4 In addition, Carpenter (2010)
documents an elevated share of drug approvals occurring in December, but does not explore
the causes or safety consequences of this.
   Our work makes three key contributions relative to this body of existing literature. First,
we show that regulators across the globe appear to strongly respond to common informal
deadlines based on psychological benchmarks that are independent of externally imposed
administrative deadlines. Second, we find that drugs approved during these output surges
have substantially more adverse health eects relative to drugs approved at other times.
These results provide evidence that informal deadlines can distort drug approvals just as
much as formal deadlines.5
   Finally, we show that--precisely because they are not generated by any specific
administrative policy--these behavioral responses to informal deadlines are a robust
world-wide phenomenon. Such patterns highlight the importance of developing policy
responses to address non-policy-induced ine ciencies in behavior.


1       Background on Drug Approvals
    Drugs cannot be widely marketed without regulatory approval from country- or
region-level agencies. The decisions of these agencies determine what treatments are
available to patients and who profits as a result.
   Seeking agency approval is the final step in a drug development process that is lengthy,
expensive, and uncertain. Firms typically test thousands of compounds to find one with
enough therapeutic potential to be tested in humans. Human clinical trials, further, involve
thousands of patients and typically last for five to ten years. On average, 90% of drug
    4
     See also Nardinelli, Lanthier and Temple (2008) and Schick et al. (2017), however, for evidence that
challenges the robustness of these original findings. More generally, also see Darrow, Avorn and Kesselheim
(2017) for a review of the interplay between incentives, user fees, and the timeliness and safety of FDA
approvals, and Darrow and Kesselheim (2014) for a list of important legislative and regulatory events related
to the FDA's new drug approval process, along with Kesselheim and Darrow (2015) for recent trends in
expedited approval program use.
   5
     See Carpenter and Grimmer (2009) and Balasubramanian, Lee and Sivadasan (2017) for theories of
how formal deadlines and deadline-related time pressures can impact work quality. Also see Brunnermeier,
Papakonstantinou and Parker (2008) and Buehler, Gri n and Ross (1994) for theory and evidence on the
planning fallacy and the imposition of self-imposed deadlines.




                                                     4
candidates that enter human trials do not make it through approval (DiMasi, Hansen and
Grabowski (2003)).
    Drug approval decisions can impact the safety of drugs in two main ways. First, drugs
vary in their inherent risks and regulators select which drugs to approve. If regulators
approve more inherently dangerous drugs, this would increase the safety issues we see in
the data. Second, the regulator does not make a simple approve-or-not binary decision.
Rather, regulators look through clinical trial data and approve drugs in specific doses for
specific indications with specific contraindications. If regulators rush their review, they
may approve a drug at an unsafe dosage or fail to highlight a potentially dangerous drug
interaction.
    The specifics of drug approval processes vary across agencies but generally follow the
same overall process. A firm submits a drug approval application to the regulatory agency
responsible for their targeted market. The application typically describes the drug's
intended use (labeling); includes a detailed description of the drug's chemical formulation,
pharmacodynamics (how it aects the body) and pharmacokinetics (how the body aects
it); provides a compilation of all results from prior pre-clinical and clinical trials; and
describes the drug manufacturing methods that will be used. The application's length can
reach upwards of 100,000 pages of material (Van Norman (2016)). In the United States,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) receives between 100 and 150 new drug
applications (NDAs) per year and approves approximately 60% of them (DiMasi, Hansen
and Grabowski (2003)).
    Regulatory agencies are subject to dierent formal policies, which focus primarily on
timeliness of review. Reviewers at the FDA are evaluated by the proportion of applications
that are resolved on time: within 300 days for regular review and within 180 days for
priority review. At the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the EU, these targets are
210 and 150 days; at the Japanese Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PDMA),
meanwhile, they are 360 and 270 days. To the best of our knowledge, there are no formal rules
regarding how many drugs a country's regulatory agency needs to approve within a given
year, although, informally, the agencies often publicize their output. In the US, for example,
the FDA often emphasizes the number of drugs it has been able to approve when seeking
its annual Congressional budget appropriation (see Appendix Exhibit 1). The FDA reports
its drug approval output by fiscal year, which ends in September. Therefore, if regulators
perceived a quota associated with approvals output, we would expect to see output surges
at the end of September rather than at the end of December.


                                              5
   We provide more information on the drug approval processes in the EU, China, Japan,
South Korea, and US in Appendix A. Appendix B provides a theoretical model of drug
approvals in which regulators tradeo acquiring better information against facing costly
delays.


2         Data
   We conduct our analysis in three parts. First, we use a broad international sample to
look at output surges in drug approvals by calendar date. For this analysis, our data come
from the US, EU, UK, Japan, China, and South Korea. Second, we examine adverse eects
associated with drugs approved during output surges. For this analysis, we use data on
adverse events reported from the US and EU. Finally, we provide supporting evidence on
mechanism and robustness; for this analysis, we use data on application dates and more
detailed adverse eects from the US.

Drug Approvals

    Our sample contains drug application information for the following country or regional
regulatory agencies: the US, EU, UK, Japan, China, and South Korea. For the US data,
we use data provided by the FDA (FDA (2017)). We focus on new drug applications
(NDAs and biological license applications, or BLAs) between January 1980 and September
2016.6     For each approved NDA, we collect the drug's approval date, its review
classification (standard versus priority review), and its disease indication as measured by
the International Classification of Diseases codes (ICD-9).7 Our sample includes 3,312
unique NDAs, of which 636 have a priority review designation. For NDAs that have
multiple approval dates, we use the first approval date indicated in the database.
Additionally, we hand-collect application dates for 1,890 NDAs using dates found in NDA
approval letters (available after 1998).
   Remaining drug approvals data come from the Clarivate Analytics Cortellis
Investigational Drugs database between January 1980 and June 2014 (Cortellis (2017)). In
our analysis, we focus on 4,871 drug approvals from the countries in our data that have the
highest number of drug approvals. This includes approvals from the central EU authority
(the European Medicines Agency), as well as several country-level authorities within the
    6
        We use the abbreviation "NDA" throughout to refer to both NDAs and BLAs.
    7
        A drug is often matched to more than one ICD-9. We include all drug­ICD-9 matches.


                                                     6
EU: Germany, France, Spain, and Portugal), as well as the UK, Japan, China, and South
Korea. We code a drug's approval date within a given country as the first date on which it
is listed as registered or launched in that country.

Adverse Events

   Adverse eects can be reported by the manufacturer of the drug, physicians, and
consumers, and can provide a fine-grained measure of safety across drugs. Adverse events
data are available only from the US and the EU.
   In the US, we record adverse drug reactions (ADR) from the FDA Adverse Event
Reporting System (FAERS) database (2012­2016), and its predecessor, the Legacy Adverse
Event Reporting System (AERS) (2004­2012) (FEARS (2017), AERS (2017)). Each ADR
event contains information about the seriousness of the adverse eect: whether it involved
death, life-threatening injury, hospitalization, disability or permanent damage, or a
congenital anomaly/birth defect. In cases where an adverse reaction report is linked to
multiple drugs, we link the event to the drug listed as the "primary suspect."
    We use adverse eects data for EU countries, as measured in EudraVigilance, the
EMA's database of suspected adverse drug reaction reports (EudraVigilance (2017)). The
EudraVigilance system captures adverse drug reports from across the EU; our EU adverse
eects data include reports from all of its member states. In EudraVigilance, a typical
record contains the number of adverse eect events across all countries in the European
Economic Area. We are unable to see the details of reported cases from the EU; for that
reason, our main adverse eects analyses compare total adverse eects in both the US and
the EU. In supplementary analyses, we will use additional information about the
seriousness of the adverse event found in the US data.
    There are several limitations to the use of adverse events data as a measure of safety. As
Burke, Stratton and Baciu (2007) note, adverse events data may suer from underreporting
bias or recall bias, and may exclude cases in which there is poor case documentation. More
critically, popular drugs are likely to have more reported adverse events simply because more
people are using them. In our appendix, we report results from the US that include controls
for direct measures of the popularity and usage of the drug employing data from the US
Medicare Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS (2017)).




                                              7
3     Main Results

3.1    Analysis of Number of Approvals
   Panels A and B of Figure 1 illustrate our first key finding: across the world, more drugs
are approved in December than in any other month. Panel A illustrates results from the
US and plots the total number of drug approvals in our sample period, by month and,
within a month, by whether they are approved in the first, middle, or last 10 days of the
month. We find that December approvals account for over 15.07% of all approvals, or about
7.35% (t =5.26) more than the average in other months. Similarly, Panel B presents results
from our international sample, which includes the EU, UK, Japan, China, and South Korea.
December approvals account for 21.06% of all approvals in this sample, or 13.89% (t =7.41)
more than the average in other months.
    Panels A and B of Figure 1 also show that there are more approvals during another
natural desk-clearing window: month-ends. In the US, 45.50% more drugs are approved
on days that fall in the last 10 days of a month than in any other given period (t =9.36).
In our international sample, this ratio is 50.50% (t =6.17). Appendix Table A1 presents
the accompanying regression results, which show that these output surges are statistically
significant and robust to inclusion of a variety of controls.
    If our results are driven by the idea that such dates serve as natural psychological markers
of production period-ends, then we may expect to see similar behavior associated with holiday
breaks. In the US, Thanksgiving is the most celebrated holiday outside of Christmas and is
associated with a long travel weekend. Panel C of Figure 1 confirms this fact: on average,
more drugs are approved the week before Thanksgiving than in any other (non-December)
week in the US. This pattern, however, does not hold outside the US, where the week before
Thanksgiving has, if anything, slightly fewer approvals than other non-December weeks.
Similarly, Panel D shows that the same idea holds for Lunar New Year, which is widely
celebrated in China, Japan, and South Korea, but not in the US or EU. Here, we see a spike
in approvals the week before Lunar New Year only in Asian countries, and not in the US or
EU. Appendix Table A2 presents the accompanying regression results.


3.2    Adverse Eects
    Collectively, our results thus far show that there are consistently more drugs approved
at regular calendar benchmarks. If this is the result of rushed review, then we might expect


                                               8
drugs approved during these periods to have more safety issues. To test this hypothesis, we
estimate the following set of regressions:

                 Adverse Eectsik = a0 + a1 Approved Periodi + Xik +               k   + eik .           (1)

Each observation is a drug (i)­disease indication (k ). The coe cient of interest is a1 , which
asks whether drugs approved in certain periods have more safety issues. Our standard errors
are clustered at the disease level.
   In Panel A of Table 1, we show that drugs approved during December output surges
are associated with more adverse eects, in both the US and EU. Focusing on Columns 2
and 4, which include year of approval by disease (ICD-9) fixed eects as well as country
by year controls, we find that drugs approved in December have about 20% more reported
adverse eects. In Panel B, we show that a similarly sized correlation holds for end-of-month
approvals. Appendix Table A3 shows that these results are robust to a levels and Poisson
functional form assumption.
   In Table 2, we show that a similar pattern holds for holidays: we see elevated adverse
eects associated with drugs approved the week before Thanksgiving in the US, but not in
the EU. Similarly, we see no evidence of elevated adverse eects for drugs approved the week
before Lunar New Year in either the US or the EU 8 .
    As noted earlier, a key concern with interpreting adverse events data is that it does
not take into account the proportion of use-cases that do not generate adverse events. A
safe and popular drug may generate more adverse eects than a dangerous drug simply
because it is used by more people. If drugs approved in December were simply more popular,
then we may mistakenly conclude that December drugs are more dangerous. In Appendix
Table A4, we show that controlling for measures of market size in the US does not impact
our findings: we still see elevated adverse eects in December, at the end of the month,
before Thanksgiving, and not before Lunar New Year. Finally, Appendix Table A5 shows
that our results hold when we consider serious adverse eects only: those associated with
hospitalizations, disability, and, especially, with deaths. Because disaggregated data on
adverse eects are only available in our US sample, Appendix Table A5 is restricted to the
US and also includes controls for the market size variables used in Appendix Table A4.
    Our results so far are consistent with the idea of some kind of behavioral "desk-clearing"
in advance of natural calendar year benchmarks. If this were the case, then we might expect
   8
     Ideally, we would test the main eect on adverse events in Asia, as well, but as previously mentioned we
do not have adverse events data reported from Asia.


                                                     9
more pronounced eects when regulators face a larger end-of-year workload. In particular,
when regulators have been less "productive" in terms of approving drugs earlier in the year,
they may feel more pressure to rush decisions in December. To test this, we use the share
of drugs approved in December for a given year as a proxy for regulators' workloads during
December and then examine the relationship between December workloads and adverse
eects associated with December approvals. Table 3 shows that when a greater share of
drugs are approved in December, the average number of adverse events associated with each
December drug increases. Column 2 reports, for example, that a one standard deviation (9
percentage point) increase in the share of all drugs approved in December is associated with a
10 percent increase in reported adverse eects in the US. Column 4 finds similar magnitudes
in the EU. Although we do not observe the total number and timing of drug applications,
this provides suggestive evidence that when regulators' workloads are relatively high, drugs
that go on to generate more safety problems are more likely to be approved.


3.3    Alternative Interpretations
    Our results are consistent with regulators engaging in lax review in a rush to meet
internal production benchmarks. However, there are several other possible interpretations
for our results.

Strategic Timing of Review

    One possibility is that regulators collect their most complex cases throughout the year
to be considered at the end of the month or the end of the year. In this case, the increased
incidence of safety issues that we document may reflect the nature of the drugs themselves,
rather than the quality of the decision-making process that led to their approval.
    To address this, we first note that our results in Appendix Table A4 on the US sample
show that the phenomenon we document cannot be explained by potential dierences in
disease indication, market size, or priority status between drugs approved at the end of the
year or end of the month, compared with those approved at other times. If December or
end-of-month drugs are indeed dierent on some dimension, that dimension does not appear
to be correlated with disease type, market size, or US priority review status. In Appendix
Table A6, we further examine whether December and end-of-month drugs dier in their
novelty. If novel drugs are riskier or more di cult to assess, then it is possible that they may
independently have more safety problems. We consider two measures of novelty. Following


                                              10
Krieger, Li and Papanikolaou (2018), we define a chemically "novel" drug as one that is
molecularly distinct from drug candidates that have previously entered development. We
also define a drug as novel if it is the first to focus on a particular biological target (e.g., the
first to bind to a particular protein). Appendix Table A6 shows that neither December nor
end-of-month drugs dier in their novelty.

Strategic Timing of Applications

    Another possibility is that the approval patterns we see are driven by an antecedent surge
in applications. If firms believe that their application is more likely to receive a lax review
in a backed-up year-end docket, they may be more likely to time their submissions so that
their most dangerous drugs are expected to be evaluated in December. The US Prescription
Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) of 1992 instituted targets for timely review. As a result,
FDA regulators were evaluated on the percentage of priority and regular applications that
were reviewed within six and 10 months, respectively. Carpenter et al. (2012) documented
that these deadlines did in fact lead to spikes in the number of drugs approved at six and
10 months exactly. If firms wished to time their applications so that they are "due" in
December, then they would want to submit regular review applications in February and
priority review applications in June.
    To test this, we collect data on application dates for approved drugs, which are available
for US approvals after 1998. We then generate a "synthetic" cohort of drugs that would
be approved in each month, assuming that applications are evaluated on time. In Table 4,
we show that approved drugs submitted so that their expected approval date is December
do not appear to generate more adverse eects; if anything, drugs submitted with expected
December review dates have point estimates indicating they may be marginally safer (though
insignificantly so). These results suggest that the increase in adverse events associated with
actual December drugs cannot be attributed to the characteristics of drugs with expected
December review dates.


4     Discussion and Welfare
    The results of our analysis suggest that regulators approve more drugs at the end of the
year and before month-ends and holidays, and that drugs approved during these time periods
are associated with a significantly higher rate of follow-on adverse eects. These results may
be surprising because the stated goal of regulatory agencies across the globe is to adjudicate

                                                11
the safety and e cacy of drug candidates, not to simply generate more approvals. This raises
the natural question of why regulators appear to respond to natural behavioral deadlines by
quickly approving more drugs, instead of quickly rejecting them.
    We believe that there are several reasons why the behavior of drug reviewers may not be
symmetric when it comes to approvals and rejections. First, even though regulators are not
formally incentivized on the basis of approval counts, they are often informally evaluated
on this metric. For example, Panel A of Exhibit 2 in the Appendix links to a report by
the former FDA Commissioner, Scott Gottlieb, highlighting the productivity of the FDA as
measured by number of approvals. Similarly, Panel B links to how public discourse related
to the FDA's productivity is also often based on comparing approval output.
    Relatedly, while it is easy to point to a drug approval as evidence of productivity, it is
much harder to take credit for the decision to reject a drug because policy-makers never
observe the counterfactual adverse eects that this drug may have generated. Further,
because safety withdrawals and high-profile black-box warnings are relatively rare and
generally take place years after a drug goes on the market, the downside realizations of
drug approval tend to only be revealed with a lag. For similar reasons, rejection decisions
are likely to be met with immediate resistance from firms, and possibly from patients as
well, but fewer parties are as likely to be invested in opposing approvals because the costs
of unsafe approvals are not immediately salient. Further, despite low success rates in drug
development overall, the majority (around 60%) of NDAs are approved (conditional on
successful Phase III trials). This may shift the default stance of regulators from rejection
to approval.
    Lastly, we consider the welfare implications of these documented approval surges. Our
results imply substantial costs associated with rushed approvals--in the form of increased
safety issues. However, a welfare analysis also needs to take into account the potential
benefits of a more lax review--such as the patients helped by the approved drug (who
do not suer from adverse events) and the potential follow-on medications that might be
developed as a result--which we are unable to fully account for in our tests.
    That said, we can use our data on adverse eects to perform a back-of-the-envelop
calculation regarding the dollar costs associated with the adverse eects arising from the
"desk-clearing" behavior we document. This can be thought of as a lower bound to what
the benefits of rushed review must be in order to make up for the elevated incidence of
adverse safety eects.




                                             12
    To estimate this, we take the increased adverse eects we estimate, translate them into a
QALY measure, and then assign a dollar value to these. This requires that we make several
assumptions regarding the relevant counterfactual, the QALYs associated with an adverse
eect, and the value of a statistical life. We attempt to take a conservative estimate on all
of these dimensions:

   1. We assume that all "extra" drugs that are approved in December would have still been
      approved, but that their review would have been more rigorous (e.g. more careful drug
      labeling and dosage recommendations) so that they would have the average number of
      adverse eects associated with drugs approved at other times of the year. This means
      that we only consider the marginal excess adverse eects associated with December
      drugs (rather than assuming that these drugs would not have been approved at all, in
      which case we would include all their associated adverse events into our count of excess
      adverse events).

   2. We only associate an adverse eect with a drug if that drug is the "primary suspect"
      for that eect.

   3. Because it is di cult to specify what a "disability" or "hospitalization" means in QALY
      terms, we assume that the only adverse events of consequence are deaths.

   4. We use a relatively conservative VSL measure. This measure, $885K in 2020 dollars,
      comes from actual payouts.9

To calculate this figure, we begin with the fact that December drugs are associated with,
on average, approximately 20% (Table 1, Column 2) more adverse eects than comparable
drugs approved at other times. Further, we have that, on average, 77 drugs are approved in
December each year in the US and EU and the average number of adverse eects associated
with non-December approvals is approximately 1,200 per drug. A twenty percent increase
would therefore translate into approximately 18,500 excess adverse eects. To translate
this adverse eects figure into QALYs, we note that, in the US (where we data on types
of adverse eects), roughly 7.6% of adverse eects are deaths. Applying this figure implies
   9
     Although the estimated value of a life in the literature has ranged significantly based on study and
context--getting upwards of $10 million per life--we focus on values used in federal payout programs. We
take the low-end of this range, using the value established during the Nixon Administration ($885,000 in
2020 dollars), with one of the most recent by the 9/11 Commission of roughly $975,000 yielding similar
results (Appelbaum (2020)).



                                                   13
approximately 1,400 lives lost per year due to rushed review in the US and EU; multiplying
by the VSL of $885K per life gives a total loss estimate of roughly $1.2 billion per year.
    In Appendix Table A7, we consider a range of additional plausible scenarios.
    These imply between 1,400 and 9,000 lives lost per year, or total losses of up to $8
billion per year over our sample period due to rushed review.




5     Conclusion and Policy Considerations
    Stepping back, given the global surge in drug approvals ahead of informal deadlines, and
the incremental adverse eects and costs associated with these drugs, we face the question
of what types of policies could address this seeming desk-clearing behavior. As we mention
above, while there are potential benefits of more lax review as a broad policy, it is unlikely
that an optimal policy response would be a targeted loosening of review solely at a given
calendar date (e.g., just before Thanksgiving). Instead, drug regulators could adopt a broader
loosening of criteria or constraints (Isakov, Lo and Montazerhodjat 2019). Such a policy
would not produce the approval surges at specific calendar dates across all drugs (irrespective
of disease class, market size, etc.) that we see in the data.
   In fact, we view one of the key aspects of the paper as encouraging researchers and
policy-makers to think about how to design policies to deal with non-policy-induced
ine ciencies; being true even if we cannot oer a perfectly optimal policy "solution."
    Past literature has suggested ways to address bunching before formal deadlines--such
as Liebman and Mahoney (2017) and Oyer (1998). These proposed solutions include using
deliberately scheduled audit-timing and deadline grace-periods, which could potentially
help attenuate formal deadlines' impact on behavior. Although they do not perfectly fit
our setting, this literature suggests two potential ways to address the safety issues we
document. First, policy makers could impose a smoothing function over time. For example,
regulators could require that the number of drugs approved in a given month cannot be
more than twice the average of the preceding 11 months. Another approach would be to
create a "holding-tank," for approvals made at year-end, month-end, or just prior to long
holiday breaks. Instead of being immediately cleared for marketing approval, drugs
approved during these periods would undergo one final re-evaluation subsequent to the
salient informal deadline (say, early January). While these may not be perfect solutions to
the internally-motivated deadlines we document, they suggest a way of potentially


                                              14
unwinding aspects of the behavior we document, in ways that are relatively low-cost and
simple to implement. While imperfect, these policies have the potential to unwind aspects
of the desk-clearing behavior we document, and they do so in ways that are relatively
low-cost and simple to implement.




                                           15
References
AERS. 2017. "FDA AERS Adverse Event Reporting System Data." URL:
 http://data.nber.org/data/fda-adverse-event-reporting-system-faers-data.html, Accessed:
 2017-2-20.

Appelbaum, Binyamin. 2020. "The Economist's Hour: False Prophets, Free Markets, and
 the Fracture of Society."

Balasubramanian, Natarajan, Jeongsik Lee, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. 2017.
 "Deadlines, Workflows, Task Sorting, and Work Quality." Management Science,
 64(4): 1804­1824.

Blatt, Eric, and Lian Huang. 2018. "Heightened Quality Incentives Improve the Quality
  of Patentability Decisions?: An Analysis of Trend Divergences During the Signatory
  Authority Review Program." AIPLA Quarterly Journal, 46: 2.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, Filippos Papakonstantinou, and Jonathan A Parker.
 2008. "An Economic Model of the Planning Fallacy." National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Buehler, Roger, Dale Gri n, and Michael Ross. 1994. "Exploring the "Planning
 Fallacy": Why People Underestimate Their Task Completion Times." Journal of
 Personality and Social Psychology, 67(3): 366.

Burke, Sheila P, Kathleen Stratton, and Alina Baciu. 2007. The Future of Drug
 Safety: Promoting and Protecting the Health of the Public. National Academies Press.

Carpenter, Daniel, and Justin Grimmer. 2009. "The Downside of Deadlines." Robert
 Wood Johnson Scholars in Health Policy Working Paper, 35.

Carpenter, Daniel, Evan James Zucker, and Jerry Avorn. 2008. "Drug Review
 Deadlines and Safety Problems." New England Journal of Medicine, 358(13): 1354­1361.

Carpenter, Daniel, Jacqueline Chattopadhyay, Susan Mo tt, and Clayton Nall.
 2012. "The Complications of Controlling Agency Time Discretion: FDA Review Deadlines
 and Postmarket Drug Safety." American Journal of Political Science, 56(1): 98­114.

Cortellis. 2017. "Clarivate Analytics Cortellis Investigational Drugs database." URL:
 https://clarivate.com/cortellis/, Accessed: 2017-7-17.

                                          16
Darrow, Jonathan J, and Aaron S Kesselheim. 2014. "Drug Development and FDA
 Approval, 1938­2013." New England Journal of Medicine, 370(26): e39.

Darrow, Jonathan J, Jerry Avorn, and Aaron S Kesselheim. 2017. "Speed, Safety,
 and Industry Funding ­ From PDUFA I to PDUFA VI." New England Journal of Medicine,
 377(23): 2278­2286.

DiMasi, Joseph A, Ronald W Hansen, and Henry G Grabowski. 2003. "The Price
 of Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs." Journal of health economics,
 22(2): 151­185.

EudraVigilance. 2017. "European database of suspected adverse drug reaction reports."
 URL: http://www.adrreports.eu/en/, Last accessed: 2018-2-20.

FDA.      2017.      "Drugs@FDA:         FDA-        Approved       Drugs."         URL:
 https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/, Accessed: 2017-2-20.

FEARS. 2017. "FDA FEARS Adverse Event Reporting System Data." URL:
 http://data.nber.org/data/fda-adverse-event-reporting-system-faers-data.html, Accessed:
 2017-2-20.

Gelbach, Jonah B, and David Marcus. 2017. "Rethinking Judicial Review of High
 Volume Agency Adjudication." Tex. L. Rev., 96: 1097.

Isakov, Leah, Andrew W. Lo, and Vahid Montazerhodjat. 2019. "Is the FDA Too
  Conservative or Too Aggressive?: A Bayesian Decision Analysis of Clinical Trial Design."
  Journal of Econometrics, 211(1): 117 ­ 136. Annals Issue in Honor of Jerry A. Hausman.

Kesselheim, Aaron S, Bo Wang Jessica Franklin, and Jonathan Darrow. 2015.
 "Trends in Utilization of FDA Expedited Drug Development and Approval Programs,
 1987-2014: Cohort Study." BmJ, 351(26): h4633.

Krieger, Joshua L, Danielle Li, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. 2018. "Missing novelty
 in drug development." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 112(2): 443­478.

Larkin, Ian. 2014. "The Cost of High-Powered Incentives: Employee Gaming in Enterprise
  Software Sales." Journal of Labor Economics, 32(2): 199­227.

                                           17
Liebman, Jerey B., and Neale Mahoney. 2017. "Do Expiring Budgets Lead to
  Wasteful Year-End Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement." American Economic
  Review, 107(11): 3510­49.

MEPS. 2017. "Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, Agency for Healthcare Research
 Quality." URL: https://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/, Accessed: 2017-7-17.

Nardinelli, Clark, Michael Lanthier, and Robert Temple. 2008. "Drug Review
 Deadlines and Safety Problems." The New England Journal of Medicine, 359(1): 95.

O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999a. "Doing it now or later." American
 economic review, 89(1): 103­124.

O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999b. "Incentives for procrastinators." The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 769­816.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. "Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The eect on
 business seasonality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 149­185.

Phelps, Edmund S, and Robert A Pollak. 1968. "On second-best national saving and
 game-equilibrium growth." The Review of Economic Studies, 35(2): 185­199.

Schick, Andreas, Kathleen L Miller, Michael Lanthier, Gerald Dal Pan, and
  Clark Nardinelli. 2017. "Evaluation of Pre-marketing Factors to Predict Post-marketing
  Boxed Warnings and Safety Withdrawals." Drug safety, 40(6): 497­503.

Strotz, Robert Henry. 1955. "Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization."
  The review of economic studies, 23(3): 165­180.

Van Norman, Gail. 2016. "Drugs, Devices, and the FDA: Part 1: An Overview of Approval
 Processes for Drugs." JACC: Basic to Translational Science, 1(3): 170­179.




                                          18
                                              Figure 1: Number of Drug Approvals


                                                          December and End of Month

                                         A. US                                                                           B. International
        500




                                                                                                     1,000
        400




                                                                                                     800
        300




                                                                                                     600
        200




                                                                                                     400
        100




                                                                                                     200
        0




                                                                                                     0
              Jan   Feb   Mar    Apr    May   Jun      Jul    Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov       Dec                Jan   Feb   Mar    Apr    May   Jun      Jul    Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov       Dec

                          Days (1,10)               Days (11,20)           Days (21,31)                                  Days (1,10)               Days (11,20)           Days (21,31)




                                                                                          Holidays

                          C. Thanksgiving                                                                          D. Lunar New Year




Notes: In Panel A, we plot the total number of drugs approved in each month by 10-day bin, for drugs
approved in the US between January 1980 and September 2016. In Panel B, we plot the total number of
drugs approved internationally (that is, in the EU, UK, Japan, China, and South Korea) in each month by
10-day bin, between January 1980 and June 2014. In the first two bars of Panel C, we compare the number of
approvals in the US during the week before Thanksgiving with average approvals in other weeks of the year
in the US, excluding December. In the last two bars, we report the average number of approvals during the
same periods in non-US countries. Similarly, the first two bars of Panel D compare the number of approvals
in the week before Lunar New Year in Asian countries (China, Japan, and South Korea) with the average
number of weekly approvals in other weeks of the year in these countries, excluding December. The last two
bars of Figure D show this same comparison in non-Asian countries (the US, EU, UK). In both Panels C
and D, approvals are scaled to a value of 100 in the control (non-holiday) sample.


                                                                                                19
         Table 1: Adverse Effects, December and End-of-Month Drugs
                                       (A) December
                                  (1)         (2)                      (3)               (4)
                              Log(1+Adv.) Log(1+Adv.)              Log(1+Adv.)       Log(1+Adv.)
     VARIABLES                    US          US                       EU                EU

     December                    0.249***           0.207*            0.0600*           0.168***
                                 (0.0832)           (0.106)           (0.0318)          (0.0573)

     Observations                  9,389             7,189             16,051            15,298
     R-squared                     0.246             0.454              0.533            0.724
     ICD-9 x Year FE                                 YES                                  YES
     Country x Year FE                                                                    YES
                              Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                      (B) End of Month
                                  (1)          (2)        (3)                            (4)
                              Log(1+Adv.) Log(1+Adv.) Log(1+Adv.)                    Log(1+Adv.)
     VARIABLES                    US           US         EU                             EU

     Last 10 Days                0.188***          0.214***          0.0461**           0.0789*
                                 (0.0563)          (0.0708)          (0.0206)           (0.0413)

     Observations                  9,389             7,189             16,051            15,298
     R-squared                     0.246             0.454              0.534            0.724
     ICD-9 x Year FE                                 YES                                  YES
     Country x Year FE                                                                    YES
                              Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with end-of-year and end-of-month drugs.
In Columns 1 and 2 of both panels, observations are at the drug-disease level (disease measured using ICD-9
codes) within the US, with sample counts taking into eect dropped singleton observations. A drug can be
linked to multiple ICD-9s. In Columns 3 and 4 of both panels, observations are at the country-drug-ICD-9
level for all EU countries. US and EU adverse eects are described in Section 2 of the text. Standard errors
are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                    20
                            Table 2: Holiday Adverse Effects
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)
                                           Log(1+Adv.)     Log(1+Adv.)     Log(1+Adv.)
              VARIABLES                        US              EU             Pooled

              Week bf. Thanksgiving          0.890***         -0.317*
                                              (0.291)         (0.171)
              Week bf. Lunar New Year                                         0.0146
                                                                              (0.187)

              Observations                  7,189          15,298             23,868
              R-squared                     0.459           0.729             0.553
              ICD-9 x Year FE               YES             YES                YES
              Country x Year FE                             YES                YES
                              Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with drugs approved before holidays. In
Column 1, observations are at the drug-disease level (disease measured using ICD-9 codes) within the US,
with sample counts taking into eect dropped singleton observations. A drug can be linked to multiple
ICD-9s. In Column 2, observations are at the country-drug-ICD-9 level for all EU countries. In Column
3, observations are at the country-drug-ICD-9 level for all EU countries plus the US. US and EU adverse
eects are described in Section 2 of the text. Lunar New Year occurs on a dierent calendar date in each
year; we capture this and examine approvals in the seven days before each year specific Lunar New Year
date. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                  21
                Table 3: Adverse Effects, by December Workload

                                     (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                 Log(1+Adv.)      Log(1+Adv.)      Log(1+Adv.)      Log(1+Adv.)
VARIABLES                            US               US               EU               EU

Dec. Workload                       2.293*           -0.256**          1.292          -0.396**
                                    (1.209)           (0.110)         (1.551)          (0.164)
Dec. Workload X Dec. Drug                            1.186**                          1.250**
                                                      (0.553)                          (0.514)

Observations                         545           4,856           259                  2,073
R-squared                           0.057          0.001          0.061                 0.005
ICD-9 x Cohort Year FE              YES             YES           YES                   YES
Total Approvals                     YES             YES           YES                   YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with December drugs, interacted
with the amount of work regulators likely had in that year. The level of analysis is a drug-disease
observation (a drug can be linked to multiple ICD-9s). US and EU adverse eects are described in
Section 2 of the text. In Columns 1 and 3, observations are limited to drugs approved in December
only. In Columns 2 and 4, we expand to include all drugs, with an indicator for December drugs.
December Workload refers to the share of a calendar year's drug approvals that are approved in
December. Total Approvals refer to fixed eects for each decile of total drug approvals for that
calendar year. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                22
        Table 4: Strategic Timing of Application Submission: US Sample

                                  (1)                    (2)                  (3)                (4)
  VARIABLES                  Exp. Approvals         Exp. Approvals        Log(1+Adv.)        Log(1+Adv.)

  Synthetic December                0.002                 0.002               -0.106              -0.130
                                   (0.007)               (0.007)             (0.144)             (0.205)

  Observations                     44,323          44,323            5,197                        4,012
  R-squared                         0.176           0.359            0.252                        0.439
  ICD-9 x Year FE                                   YES                                           YES
                                Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine whether a surge in December approvals is driven by the timing of applicant's
decisions to submit NDAs. The level of analysis in Columns 1 and 2 is a year-month-disease observation,
and the sample is restricted to US approvals after 1998. Synthetic December refers to a drug's application
plus 10 months if it is a regular review application or its application date plus six months if it is a priority
review application. Synthetic Approvals refers to the number of approvals in a given year-month-disease
category, if all applications were approved at their deadline (six months from submission in the case of
priority applications and 10 months from submission in the case of regular applications.) In Columns 3 and
4, observations are at the drug-disease level. Synthetic adverse eects refers to adverse eects associated
to drugs, with synthetic approval dates, calculated based on their application dates. Standard errors are
clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                      23
     Internal Deadlines, Drug Approvals,
                 and Safety Problems
                  Online Appendix



Lauren Cohen            Umit G. Gurun              Danielle Li
Harvard & NBER     University of Texas at Dallas   MIT & NBER



                       August 14, 2020
                                      Appendix Exhibit 1




The FDA must appear before Congress each year to request a budget for the upcoming year. For instance,
this is taken from the 2015 Congressional Budget Justification Document that they used in this request.
They mention the number of drugs approved in the "FDA Delivers Results" section on page 1.




                                                  2
                                       Appendix Exhibit 2
2018 Statement from FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb

Panel A. Above is a link to a report by the then-Commissioner of the FDA (Scott Gottlieb) in December
2018 touting the record number of new drug approvals.




FDA Touts Strong Drug Approval Performance in 2014

Panel B. Above is a link to a media report reflecting on then-Commissioner of the FDA (Margaret Hamburg)'s
blog posting on new drug approvals in 2014.




                                                    3
Appendix Figure 3: Time in Review, Approved drugs

                                 A. Priority Drugs




              50
              40
              30
    Percent
              20
              10
              0




                   0       10         20                30   40   50
                                      Months in FDA Review



                                B. Non-Priority Drugs


                                        Non Priority
              30
              20
    Percent
              10
              0




                       0   10          20               30   40   50
                                      Months in FDA Review




                                            4
                Table A1: Approvals in December and End of Month

                                       (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
                                     Approvals      Approvals      Approvals      Approvals
              VARIABLES                US             Int'l          US             Int'l

              December                2.317***       1.339***      0.0853***       0.161***
                                       (0.441)        (0.181)       (0.0290)       (0.0330)
              Last 10 Days            1.371***       0.606***       0.0273**      0.0285***
                                       (0.146)       (0.0982)       (0.0105)       (0.0105)

              Observations        1,323       6,210       4,938                     8,200
              R-squared           0.206       0.144       0.306                     0.276
              Year FE             YES         YES
              Country FE                      YES                                    YES
              ICD-9 x Year FE                              YES                       YES
                           Robust standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the number of approvals associated with December and end-of-month
drugs. Column 1 focuses on US approvals, with observations at the year-"month-bin" level (each month
is divided into three bins: days 1­10, 11­20, and 21­end of month). Column 3 focuses on US approvals
as well, but controlling for disease by time eects, as proxied by ICD-9 codes. To do this, we expand
the level of observation to be at the ICD-9-year-month bin level (a drug can be associated with multiple
ICD-9s). Columns 2 and 4 repeat this exercise for an international sample comprising of approvals in the EU,
UK, Japan, China, and South Korea. Observations in Column 2 are at the country-year-month bin level;
Column 4 adds controls for disease trends so that observations are at the country-year-month bin-disease
level. December is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the drug is approved in December, and
zero otherwise. Last 10 Days is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the drug is approved is the
last bin of any month. Standard errors in Columns 1 and 2 are clustered at the year level; standard errors
in Columns 3 and 4 are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                      5
                           Table A2: Approvals before Holidays

                                             (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)
                                           Approvals      Approvals     Approvals      Approvals
         VARIABLES                           US             Int'l         Asia         non-Asia

         Week bf. Thanksgiving              0.781***      -0.180***
                                             (0.287)       (0.0409)
         Week bf. Lunar New Year                                          0.337*        -0.270**
                                                                          (0.177)       (0.0997)

         Observations                         1,738    9,114       4,087                  4,843
         R-squared                            0.098    0.136       0.098                  0.211
         Year FE                              YES      YES         YES                    YES
         Country FE                                    YES         YES                    YES
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the number of approvals associated with holiday periods. The unit of
observation is calendar-week. Week bf. Thanksgiving is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the
drug is approved in the seven-day period before Thanksgiving Day in the US. Week bf. Lunar New Year is
an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the drug is approved in the seven-day period before Lunar
New Year. The sample covers all non-December approvals between January 1980 and September 2016 in
the US, and between January 1980 and June 2014 in other countries (i.e., EU, UK, China, Japan and South
Korea). Standard errors are clustered the year level.




                                                      6
       Table A3: Adverse Effects, December and End-of-Month Drugs
                                        (A) December
                                         (1)     (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                       Adverse Adverse           Adverse Poisson     Adverse Poisson
VARIABLES                                US     EU                     US                 EU

December                               2,642***     63.32***        0.726***               0.149
                                        (747.8)      (18.24)        (0.0798)              (0.0938)

Observations                      7,189     15,298          9,389                          16,051
R-squared                         0.362      0.444
ICD-9 x Cohort Year FE             YES       YES
ICD-9, Cohort Year, Country FE                              YES                             YES
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       (B) End-of-Month
                                          (1)     (2)         (3)                          (4)
                                        Adverse Adverse Adverse Poisson              Adverse Poisson
VARIABLES                                 US      EU          US                          EU

Last 10 Days                           1,433***        21.88**      0.371***               0.101
                                        (417.5)        (10.45)      (0.0634)             (0.0626)

Observations                      7,189    15,298         9,389                           16,051
R-squared                         0.360     0.443
ICD-9 x Cohort Year FE            YES       YES
ICD-9, Cohort Year, Country FE                             YES                             YES
                        Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with end-of-year and end-of-month drugs.
The level of analysis is a drug-disease observation (a drug can be linked to multiple ICD-9s). US and EU
adverse eects are described in Section 2 of the text. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                   7
      Table A4: Adverse Effects with Market Size Controls, US sample

                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
  VARIABLES                          Log(1+Adv)        Log(1+Adv)        Log(1+Adv)        Log(1+Adv)

  December                             0.345***
                                       (0.0805)
  Last 10 Days                                            0.173***
                                                          (0.0559)
  Week bf. Thanksgiving                                                     1.172***
                                                                             (0.145)
  Week bf. Lunar New Year                                                                       0.290
                                                                                               (0.247)

  Observations                  9,224          9,224           9,224                            9,224
  R-squared                     0.364          0.364           0.367                            0.363
  Full Drug Level Controls       YES            YES            YES                              YES
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with end-of-year and end-of-month drugs.
The level of analysis is a drug-disease observation (a drug can be linked to multiple ICD-9s). Full controls
include controls for: fixed eects for ICD-9 and drug cohort (based on a drug's year of approval), an indicator
for a drug's priority status, fixed eects for a drug's decile in terms of market size as measured by its number
of prescriptions in the MEPS data, and fixed eects for the decile of the number of generic applications that
we also approved in that month (to capture the FDA's workload for non-NDA approvals). For drugs for
which we are unable to match this information, we include an indicator for missing information and set the
values of these figures to zero. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9 level.




                                                      8
                   Table A5: Disaggregated Adverse Effects with Market Size Controls, US sample
                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
VARIABLES                  Log(1+Death)   Log(1+Death)   Log(1+Death)    Log(1+Death)    Log(1+Serious)   Log(1+Serious)   Log(1+Serious)   Log(1+Serious)

December                     0.216***                                                        0.256***
                             (0.0737)                                                        (0.0806)
Last 10 Days                                0.0897*                                                          0.148***
                                            (0.0502)                                                         (0.0548)
Wk bf. Thanksgiving                                         1.183***                                                          1.159***
                                                             (0.142)                                                           (0.140)
Wk bf. Lunar New Year                                                       0.511**                                                            0.504**
                                                                            (0.214)                                                            (0.225)

Observations                  9,224          9,224           9,224           9,224             9,224          9,224            9,224            9,224
R-squared                     0.376          0.375           0.380           0.376             0.371          0.370            0.374            0.370
Full Drug Level Controls      YES            YES             YES              YES              YES            YES              YES              YES
                                                           Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




9
      Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with end-of-year and end-of-month drugs. The level of analysis is a drug-disease
      observation (a drug can be linked to multiple ICD-9s). Full controls include controls for: fixed eects for ICD-9 and drug cohort (based on a
      drug's year of approval), an indicator for a drug's priority status, fixed eects for a drug's decile in terms of market size as measured by its
      number of prescriptions in the MEPS data, and fixed eects for the decile of the number of generic applications that we also approved in that
      month (to capture the FDA's workload for non-NDA approvals). For drugs for which we are unable to match this information, we include an
      indicator for missing information and set the values of these figures to zero. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9 level.
                Table A6: Are December Drugs Harder to Examine?
                                          (A) December
                                          (1)       (2)                  (3)              (4)
                                       Nov. Drug Nov. Drug            New Target      New Target
      VARIABLES                           US       Int'l                 US              Int'l

      December                          -0.00500         -0.00321       -0.00570         0.0298
                                        (0.0212)         (0.0402)       (0.0214)        (0.0352)

      Observations               5,772       15,374        3,918                         12,078
      R-squared                  0.423        0.797        0.543                          0.814
      Cohort Year X ICD-9 FE     YES          YES           YES                           YES
                        Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                        (B) End of Month
                                          (1)       (2)                  (3)              (4)
                                       Nov. Drug Nov. Drug            New Target      New Target
      VARIABLES                           US       Int'l                 US              Int'l

      Last 10 Days                      0.0252*           0.0305        -0.00658         0.0204
                                        (0.0151)         (0.0244)       (0.0137)        (0.0263)

      Observations               5,772       15,374        3,918                         12,078
      R-squared                  0.424        0.797        0.543                          0.814
      Cohort Year X ICD-9 FE     YES          YES           YES                           YES
                        Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: In this table, we examine the adverse eects associated with end-of-year and end-of-month drugs.
The level of analysis is a drug-disease observation (a drug can be linked to multiple ICD-9s). Novel Drug
is a measure of drug novelty (see Krieger, Li and Papanikolaou [5]) that is based on the chemical similarity
between the new drug and existing drugs; the measure is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the
drug's molecular similarity to existing drugs is less than 33%. New Target refers to whether a drug is the
first drug in its ATC seven-digit class. Standard errors are clustered at the ICD-9.




                                                    10
             Table A7: Cost of Rushed Review: Magnitude Estimates




Notes: This table shows a range of scenarios for the magnitude estimate of the cost of rushed review. In
this table, we use December Drugs (December Drugs) in the US and EU, as these are the only two regions
in which we can obtain adverse eect data. While the estimated value of a life in the literature has ranged
considerably based on study and context - reaching upwards of $10 million per life - we focus on values
actually utilized in federal payout programs. We take the low-end of this range, using the value established
during the Nixon Administration ($885,000), with one   11
                                                        of the most recent by the 9-11 Commission of roughly
($975,000) yielding similar results. In the panels below, we show estimates of the additional Adverse Eects,
Deaths, and Costs according to the scenario assumptions described in each Panel heading.
A     Approvals Process
    In this section, we provide some details about the drugs approvals processes in each
of our sample country or regional regulatory agencies. In most cases, review agencies are
responsible for carrying out four key functions: a) regulating clinical trials and setting rules
for data admissibility; b) performing reviews of marketing authorizations for pharmaceuticals
and medical devices; and c) collecting, analyzing, and disseminating information regarding
the post-marketing safety (Ng [6]).
    In recent years, most agencies also have a dual-track approvals process in which there is
a priority track and a regular review track. Agencies typically set targets for how quickly
reviews are done. We have found no evidence that there are any quotas based on
calendar-year volume of drug approvals.


A.1     US
   Before a new prescription drug can be marketed in the US, it must receive approval
from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). To receive approval, a firm must submit
a new drug application (NDA) to the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
(CDER). When an NDA is filed, it is assigned to an internal review committee that is usually
composed of medical o cers who review all clinical trial results, pharmacology specialists
who review toxicity and drug functioning, statisticians who review the quality of the drug's
study protocols, chemists or biologists who focus on the manufacturing process, and a project
manager who coordinates and oversees these various review activities [3].
    Regulators can influence the speed of review in several ways: they can choose when to
schedule meetings with review team members, decide how detailed site visits need to be,
and, in some cases, also decide whether or not to convene advisory panels to seek additional
input. Carpenter et al. [1], in detailing the possible mechanisms by which review deadlines
could stimulate approval surges before these deadlines, argue that "drugs approved in the
window just before the deadline may be less likely to receive su cient time and expertise
applied to their reviews (Huber and Kunz [4]), perhaps through curtailed advisory committee
consultations or rushed drug labeling decisions, which typically occur at the end of the review
process." We argue that these same mechanisms also allow regulators to rush review to meet
internal benchmarks.
   Since 1992, FDA review teams have also been subject to the following (non-binding)
deadlines: regular NDAs should attempt to receive a decision within 10 months of


                                              12
application, and a priority NDA should receive a response within six months. There are no
formal rules regarding how many drugs the FDA needs to approve, although, informally,
the FDA does publicize its ability to "bring more new products to market faster than ever
before" [3], particularly when seeking its annual Congressional budget appropriation (see
Appendix Exhibit 1). The FDA reports its drug approval output by fiscal year, which ends
in September. If regulators perceived a quota associated with approvals output, we would
expect to see output surges at the end of September rather than at the end of December.


A.2     EU
    The European Union recognizes three dierent paths to drug approval: a centralized
review in which a drug is evaluated by a centralized authority--the European Medicines
Agency (EMA)--for approval in all EU jurisdictions; application(s) in the drug o ces of
individual member countries for approval in that country only; or an application to the EMA
after approval in any given member state for "mutual recognition" in other EU countries [7].
For our analysis, we focus on drugs that go through the centralized EMA review, for which
we have more reliable approval dates data.
   To receive approval via the centralized approach, drug makers first submit a Marketing
Authorisation Application (MAA), which is generally evaluated by the Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), with the input of several other committees.
Much like its analogue NDA in the United States, an MAA contains information on a
drug's trial protocols and results to date, as well as information on its pharmacological
properties and proposed manufacturing process. Once received, an MAA is assigned to two
"rapporteurs," who manage the scientific team members who perform the assessment [2].
    The formal timeline for EMA review is as follows: the committee has 120 days to perform
an initial review and to ask any clarifying questions of the drug maker. The clock on review
time is stopped as the EMA awaits a response from the drug maker, who generally has up
to three months to reply. Following the drug maker's reply, the assessment committee has
90 days to come to a decision for regular applications and 30 days for priority applications.
During this period, rapporteurs, like their counterparts at the US FDA, manage a team of
medical, statistical, and pharmacological experts, and can also consult with external advisory
councils.
   As in the United States, the EMA does not have formal quotas related to calendar year
output. Informally, the FDA, EMA, and other agencies are often compared against each
other in terms of both drug approvals output and review times.

                                             13
A.3        UK
    Drug approval decisions in the United Kingdom are made by the Medicines and
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Like the FDA and EMA, the MHRA is
responsible for setting clinical trial regulations, reviewing drug and device applications for
safety and e cacy, and monitoring post-market safety. Prior to the UK's exit from the EU,
there were three tracks for drug approval: a centralized procedure in which applications
were submitted to the EMA for Europe-wide marketing approval (this was the more
common path), a national procedure to obtain approval in the UK only, or a mutual
recognition procedure in which the UK decides whether to accept the approval decision
from another EU member state (known as the "Reference Member State (RMS)"). Under
the nationalized procedure, UK regulators aim to review applications within 210 days,
whereas under the mutual recognition procedure regulators have 90 days to review
acceptance materials from the RMS member state.


A.4        Japan
   Drug approvals in Japan are handled by the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency
(PMDA). The review process in Japan is broken down into two periods. When a new drug
application (NDA) is submitted, it is first reviewed by a team of regulators within the
PDMA, who compile an initial set of questions. This is followed by a face-to-face "Mendan"
meeting between regulators and representatives of the pharmaceutical firm to discuss these
questions. The Mendan meeting typically takes place two to three months after initial
submission. Following this, the next period of review is the Good Clinical Practice (GCP)
compliance check, during which PDMA inspectors evaluate the key clinical trial study sites
underlying the drug application, checking their raw data. Based on these meetings, the
PDMA prepares a report recommending an action to the Ministry of Health, Labor, and
Welfare, which makes the o cial approval decision.
    As in the US and EU, the PMDA oers a dual-track approvals process, one for priority
review drugs and one for standard review drugs. The agency is evaluated based on the
percentage of applications that are reviewed on time--that is, within 360 days for standard
review and 270 days for priority review.1
  1
      See https://www.pmda.go.jp/files/000207615.pdf for additional details.




                                                     14
A.5     China
    The National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) is in charge of all new drug
registration approvals in China. Ng [6] reports that the Chinese drug approvals process
is similar to that in other countries: the NMPA evaluates the completeness of the firm's
application materials and, upon making this determination, forwards it to the Center for
Drug Evaluation (CDE), where it is assigned to a review team that evaluates its safety and
clinical claims. During this process, reviewers may interact both with the drug developer
as well as with external experts. The final approval decision is based on an assessment of a
drug's risk-versus-reward profile.
    As is the case in other agencies, the NMPA also has a standard and priority track
application process, implemented starting in 2015. Deadlines are based on time between
stages of the review process (e.g., time to respond to the initial application with a first set
of questions, etc.) rather than on final review time; in practice, since these reforms have
taken place, priority drugs are typically reviewed within six months and non-priority drugs
within 12 months.2


A.6     South Korea
    In South Korea, applications for new drug approvals are made to the Ministry of Food and
Drug Safety (MFDS), the main regulatory body for drug registration and approval. Upon
receiving an application, the Drug Review Management Division (DRMD) conducts an initial
pre-review, and, if accepted, the application is then subject to a more thorough review of
its clinical trials, procedures and findings, as well as its compliance with manufacturing
process rules and on-site inspections. Drugs for orphan or priority diseases are subject to
an expedited review. As in China, review deadlines are based on time between stages of the
review process; a recent study finds that, on average priority drugs are typically reviewed
within 190 days and non-priority drugs within 360 days.3
  2
   See https://www.europeanpharmaceuticalreview.com/article/98200/china-and-the-evolving-regulatory-landscape/.
  3
   See http://www.koreabiomed.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=6609#:~ :text=Orphan%20drugs%20totaled
%2053%20in,approval%20time%20of%20361.5%20days.




                                                 15
B      Drug Approvals with Costly Delays
     In this section, we present a simple model of the drug approvals process. Consider
a single regulatory body that receives applications for drug approvals. There are infinite
periods: t = 1, 2, 3, . . . . In each period, the regulator receives one new drug for potential
approval. Drugs have an unobserved type, , which is equal to H if a drug is safe and L
if it is unsafe. For each drug, the regulator observes the probability p 2 [0, 1] that a drug is
safe.
    Now, consider a drug that arrives in period t = s. The regulator can choose whether
to approve or reject it based on its observed likelihood of being safe, p, or it can choose to
delay and acquire more information. If the regulator chooses to acquire more information, it
pays a cost of delay, d, and learns with certainty whether or not the drug is safe during the
next period, s + 1. Given full information, the regulator then decides whether to approve or
reject. This means that the set of drugs evaluated during period s includes the drug that
arrives in period s and, possibly, the drug that arrived in period s 1, if its approval decision
had been delayed. The regulator receives a payo, R, for every drug that is approved, minus
C if the drug turns out to be unsafe. We assume R < C so that a regulator only wants to
approve safe drugs. The payo is zero if a drug is rejected.
   In this model, one can think of year-ends, month-ends, and holiday breaks as representing
times when the costs of delay are particularly high. That is, we assume that there are periods,
t = S , where the cost of delay is exogenously higher, D > d, corresponding to deadlines,
formal or informal.
   This model makes the following predictions about decisions made in high versus low
delay-cost periods:

Proposition B.1 For drugs that arrive in any period t, we have the following decision rule:
                                   8
                                   >
                                   > Approve if p > 1        d
                                                                ,
                                   >
                                   <                        c R

                         Decision = Delay if Rd                 d
                                                <p<1               ,
                                   >
                                   >                           c R
                                   >
                                   :Reject if p < d .
                                                      R


    1. The expected quantity of drugs approved in period t = S is higher than that approved
       in other periods t = s.

    2. The expected quality of drugs approved in period t = S is lower than that approved in
       other periods t = s.

                                              16
Proof Consider a drug with observed likelihood of success p. If we approve it now, we get
a payo of R from approving the drug and there is a 1 p chance that it will be a failure,
so our expected return from approval is R (1 p)C . If we delay the drug, we pay d, but
then we know next period whether or not it's going to be a success for sure, so we get pR d
since there's a p chance that the drug is great, and we only approve in that case so we never
risk paying C . If we reject the drug, we get 0.
Regulator approves if
                                       R    (1    p)C > pR        d.

Regulator rejects if
                                                0 < pR   d.

So we have the following rule:
                                       8
                                       >
                                       > Approve if p > 1               d
                                                                           ,
                                       >
                                       <                               c R

                             Decision = Delay if Rd                       d
                                                    <p<1                     ,
                                       >
                                       >                                 c R
                                       >
                                       :Reject if p < d .
                                                              R


   In a given period, the set of drugs coming up for consideration are (possibly) the drug
that arrived last period and the drug that arrives this period. The expected likelihood of
success of drugs approved is given as follows
                  d
                                         d
                                                     d                      d
                                                                                         d           d
   E p| p > 1    c R
                          · Pr p > 1    c R
                                                + E p| R <p<1             c R
                                                                                  · Pr   R
                                                                                             <p<1   c R
                              d
                                         d                  
             Pr p > 1        c R
                                   +E    p| R   < p < 1 c dR · Pr          d
                                                                           R
                                                                              <   p<1         d
                                                                                             c R

                                  
The first term E p|p > 1 c dR is the average likelihood of success for drugs that are
immediately approved, times Pr p > 1 c dR , the likelihood that the arriving drug falls
into this range. The next term gives the likelihood of success of drugs approved that period
that were delayed from s 1. This is just 1 because delay allows more information to be
                                                                      d
revealed, so that only successful drugs are approved. The term Pr R     < p < 1 c dR gives
the likelihood that a drug would have been delayed from last period. Only a proportion of
these drugs will actually turn out to be successful; this proportion is given by
   d                  
E p| R  < p < 1 c dR . Finally, this is normalized by the proportion of drugs that are
approved.




                                                    17
   Similarly, the average number of drugs approved during period s is given by
                                                                                                              
                          d                d                    d                 d                   d
       Pr p > 1                      + E p| < p < 1                     · Pr        <p<1
                      c       R            R                c       R             R               c       R

   Now, consider a period S in which the cost of delay is higher (assume that the cost of
delay in S 1 is still d, not D). The average quality of approved drugs is now given by
                 D
                                            D
                                                        d                    d
                                                                                            d                  d
   E p| p > 1   c R
                          · Pr p > 1       c R
                                                   + E p| R <p<1           c R
                                                                                     · Pr   R
                                                                                                <p<1          c R
                               D
                                            d                  
             Pr p > 1         c R
                                      +E    p| R   < p < 1 c dR · Pr        d
                                                                            R
                                                                               <     p<1         d
                                                                                                c R


where the higher delay cost is incorporated into the drugs that arrive in S .
   The cost of delay decreases the threshold at which drugs are immediately approved: this
leads to a simultaneous increase in quantity, as well as a decrease in quality. The quality
and quantity of drugs delayed from S 1 is the same in period S as it was in period s.

   This model predicts that, in high delay-cost periods, the regulator lowers the quality
threshold necessary for approval. This both increases the number of drugs that are approved
and decreases their average quality. Importantly, this model predicts that the quality of
drugs approved in high delay-cost periods can be lower even though the quality of drug
candidates considered during this period is the same (because the arrival rate of the new
drugs, as well as potential holdovers from the prior period, is the same for high and low
delay-cost periods). In essence, the quality of approved drugs is lower because the regulator
rushes to meet a more salient deadline.
   Relative to a world where the cost of delay is d in all periods, the presence of high
delay-cost periods leads regulators to make more decisions immediately without acquiring
additional information. This means that there is a mass of drugs of intermediate quality
that are immediately approved when t = S , that would have been delayed had they arrived
in period t = s. Because not all delayed drugs turn out to be safe, this means that there
are dangerous drugs approved in high-cost periods that would have been more thoroughly
investigated--and ultimately rejected--had delay costs been lower.
   In the remainder of the paper, we provide empirical evidence consistent with the idea
that natural calendar year benchmarks correspond to high delay-cost periods during which
drug approval decisions appear to be rushed.




                                                       18
References
[1] Carpenter, Daniel, Jacqueline Chattopadhyay, Susan Mo tt, and Clayton
    Nall. 2012. "The Complications of Controlling Agency Time Discretion: FDA Review
    Deadlines and Postmarket Drug Safety." American Journal of Political Science,
    56(1): 98­114.

[2] EuropeanSMedicinesSAgency. 2018. "EMA Drug Approval Process." Accessed:
    2018-12-20.

[3] FoodSandSDrugSAdministration. 2018. "FDA Drug Approval Process." Accessed:
    2018-12-20.

[4] Huber, Oswald, and Urs Kunz. 2007. "Time Pressure in Risky Decision-making:
    Eect on Risk Defusing." Psychology Science, 49(4): 415.

[5] Krieger, Joshua, Danielle Li, and Dimitris Papanikolaou. 2017. "Missing
    Novelty in Drug Development."

[6] Ng, Rick. 2017. Drugs: From Discovery to Approval. Wiley-Blackwell.

[7] Norman, Gail A. Van. 2016. "Drugs and Devices: Comparison of European and U.S.
    Approval Processes." JACC: Basic to Translational Science, 1(5): 399 ­ 412.




                                        19
