                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SUDDEN STOPS AND OPTIMAL FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTION

                                       J. Scott Davis
                                    Michael B. Devereux
                                       Changhua Yu

                                     Working Paper 28079
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28079


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




The views presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by J. Scott Davis, Michael B. Devereux, and Changhua Yu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sudden Stops and Optimal Foreign Exchange Intervention
J. Scott Davis, Michael B. Devereux, and Changhua Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 28079
November 2020
JEL No. E30,E50,F40

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that foreign exchange intervention can be used to avoid a sudden stop in capital
flows in a small open emerging market economy. The model is based around the concept of an
under-borrowing equilibrium defined by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020). With a low elasticity
of substitution between traded and non-traded goods, real exchange rate depreciation may
generate a precipitous drop in aggregate demand and a tightening of borrowing constraints,
leading to an equilibrium with an inefficiently low level of borrowing. The central bank can
preempt this deleveraging cycle through foreign exchange intervention. Intervention is effective
due to frictions in private international financial intermediation. Reserve accumulation has ex ante
benefits by reducing the risk of a sudden stop, while intervention has ex-post benefits by limiting
inefficient deleveraging. But intervention itself faces constraints. When the central bank's stock
of reserves is low, even foreign exchange intervention cannot prevent a sudden stop.


J. Scott Davis                                   Changhua Yu
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas                   National School of Development
Research Department                              Peking University
2200 North Pearl Street                          5 Yiheyuan Rd, Haidian,Beijing, 100871
Dallas, TX 75201                                 China
Scott.Davis@dal.frb.org                          changhuayu@nsd.pku.edu.cn

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1       Introduction

    Emerging economies are prone to 'sudden stops'. As described by Calvo et al. (2008),
Bianchi and Mendoza (2020) and others, in a sudden stop there is a sharp forced reversal in
net capital inflows, leading to a fall in net external debt, a fall in imports, and a depreciation
in the real exchange rate. The typical experience of sudden stops involves a tightening of
borrowing constraints, leading to a fall in the real exchange rate which further constrains
borrowing, generating a downward spiral in net external debt, consumption and a large fall
in welfare.
    Neumeyer and Perri (2005) argue that changes in external borrowing costs are one of the
main factors driving emerging market business cycles. They argue that increases in interest
rates cause a fall in GDP and lead to net capital outflows (the current account) that are
strongly counter-cyclical. Uribe and Yue (2006) expand on this and argue that an increase
in the U.S. interest rate has both a direct effect on emerging market business cycles as well
as an indirect effect by widening the spread between a country's borrowing cost and the U.S.
interest rate. In the wake of the financial crisis in 2008 and the subsequent recovery a new
literature has emerged focusing on the "Global Financial Cycle". In this view, global push
factors, including advanced economy monetary policy and global risk aversion, drive swings
in capital inflows and outflows into many emerging markets (see for instance Bruno and Shin,
2015b and Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020).1
    This paper presents a framework to study how central bank foreign exchange intervention
can be used to prevent a sudden stop in a small open economy that is subject to exogenous
shocks in its cost of borrowing. The paper follows the model of an underborrowing equilibrium
from Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020). Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe show how under certain
parameterizations, and when external debt passes a high enough threshold, multiple equilibria
are possible in the standard small open economy model of Bianchi (2011). In one equilibrium,
consumption and external debt remains high, sustaining a high value of the real exchange

    1
      See Forbes and Warnock (2012), Fratzscher (2012), Rey (2015), Ghosh et al. (2014), Bruno and Shin
(2015a), Rey (2016), Eichengreen and Gupta (2016), Fratzscher et al. (2018), Rogers et al. (2018), Jorda
et al. (2019), Davis et al. (2020b).

                                                   2
rate, and this ensures that value of collateral is high enough so that the borrowing constraint is
slack. But in other equilibria, a low consumption level (equivalently a reduction in borrowing)
leads to a real depreciation, a falling value of collateral, and a binding borrowing constraint.
   While Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020) show how borrowing constraints that depend on
the real exchange rate can give rise to multiple welfare ranked equilibria in an emerging
economy, there is an additional message of their paper that emphasizes the instability in
the current account of such economies. Even if agents beliefs coalesce around the `best'
equilibrium, the presence of pecuniary externalities and non-linearity in the tightness of
borrowing constraints can lead to sharp collapses in borrowing capacity in response to small
external shocks to the economy. In our paper, we show that the `best' stable competitive
equilibrium may be associated with precipitous falls in consumption, borrowing and the real
exchange rate in response to very minor increases in external borrowing costs. Our paper
highlights this instability, and shows how foreign exchange intervention can be used to avoid
such collapses.
   The mechanics of a sudden stop in our model are similar to those in Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2020), but the role for policy is not based on an equilibrium selection motive,
but rather due to the interaction of the Fisherian `debt-deflation' process as described by
Mendoza (2002), and the role of pecuniary externalities. When the economy has an external
debt level that puts it in the range where multiple equilibria are possible, a small rise in
the world real interest rate can eliminate the high borrowing/ high consumption equilibrium.
In that case, since agents don't internalize the impact of their deleveraging on the price of
collateral, the economy enters a vicious spiral and the only stable equilibrium involves a large
drop in consumption and the real exchange rate.
   This pecuniary externality gives a role for policy. The policy maker internalizes the effect
of deleveraging on the price of collateral. When the constraint is not binding this externality
doesn't matter. But at the point where further deleveraging would cause the borrowing
constraint to bind, the policy maker will act to prevent further deleveraging and thus keep
the price of collateral high. As in Devereux et al. (2019) and others, the policy maker could



                                                3
achieve this through the use of capital controls. To prevent a sudden stop a policy maker
can raise capital outflow taxes and thus increase domestic consumption and the price of
collateral. However, Eichengreen and Rose (2014) and Fernandez et al. (2015) show that
capital controls in the data are acyclical and are typically not deployed in response to booms
and busts in capital flows. On the other hand, as we describe below, there is ample evidence
of countries using foreign exchange intervention as a cyclical policy instrument. Moreover,
Davis et al. (2020a) show that under certain conditions the equilibrium from optimal central
bank foreign exchange intervention is identical to the equilibrium from an optimal tax on
capital flows.
   An optimal policy response in our model can be achieved through sterilized foreign ex-
change intervention, which involves selling some of the central bank's stock of foreign bonds,
and buying domestic bonds from the private sector with the proceeds. If the borrowing con-
straint was slack, and the central bank and private sector had equal access to international
capital markets, this intervention policy would have no real effects, since, by Ricardian equiv-
alence, the private sector would fully offset the central bank intervention by a one-for-one
purchase of foreign bonds. But a central part of our paper is the presence of intermediary
frictions in private capital markets, which we model as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), that
prevent the private sector from fully offsetting a central bank foreign exchange intervention.
When the economy is near the critical region where a sudden stop is precipitated, the private
sector begins to delever by reducing its debt position through the financial intermediaries.
But the central bank can more than offset this by selling some of their stock of foreign bonds,
thus increasing domestic absorption and the price of collateral and keeping the economy in
the region where the borrowing constraint does not bind. Thus at a time when the private
sector wishes to delever and increase their net asset position, the central bank can prevent
an underborrowing equilibrium by doing the opposite and selling foreign assets.
   By selling foreign exchange reserves the central bank is reducing the economy's total
external assets, in effect it is shifting consumption from period t + 1 to period t. If there were
no constraints on central bank foreign exchange intervention, then the central bank could



                                                4
ex-post always sell enough reserves to move enough consumption forward from period t + 1
to period t to prevent a crisis. But there is a natural limit to central bank foreign exchange
intervention, central bank foreign exchange reserves cannot fall below zero. If the initial stock
of reserves is low then the central bank may not have the reserves necessary to sell to keep
domestic absorption and the price of collateral high. At some point, reserves may fall to zero
and the central bank no longer has the ability to prevent the sudden stop equilibrium. This
non-negativity constraint to foreign exchange reserves gives the central bank an incentive
to accumulate reserves ex-ante. By buying reserves in the current period the central bank
is shifting consumption from the current period to the next period, under the expectation
that the extra consumption in the next period might be useful for supporting the value of
collateral and thus preventing a crisis. The marginal benefit of acquiring an extra unit of
reserves and thus shifting a marginal unit of consumption from the current period to the
next period is simply the welfare loss of a sudden stop multiplied by the reduction in the
probability of a sudden stop gained by holding that extra unit of reserves.
    But the same intermediary friction which gives foreign exchange intervention traction
during a crisis makes the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves distortionary before a
crisis. Just as the central bank sale of foreign exchange reserves would lead the economy
to consume and borrow more, the central bank purchase of foreign exchange reserves would
force the economy to consume less and save more. This distortion of consumer's optimal
spending plans represents the marginal cost to acquiring reserves. This, together with the
marginal benefit of reserves will pinpoint the optimal stock of central bank foreign exchange
reserves.2
    This paper contributes to a growing literature on foreign exchange intervention. We
review some of the recent empirical and theoretical work in this literature in Section 2. The
model is presented in Section 3. The determination of net external assets in the model is
presented in Section 4, where we discuss both the properties of the steady state as well

   2
     Rodrik (2006) uses the spread between domestic interest rates in emerging market economies and the
yield on U.S. treasuries to quantify the cost of holding reserves. He concludes that the cost of holding the
observed stock of central bank reserves amounted to about 1% of GDP. But he concludes that compared to
the cost of a sudden stop, this "insurance premium" is not excessively high.

                                                     5
as the short-run instability in net external assets due to the endogeneity of the borrowing
constraint. Section 5 discusses the mechanics of a sudden stop following a shock to the world
interest rate and the optimal policy response. Numerical results from a global solution of the
model and a numerical solution for optimal policy is presented in Section 6. Finally Section
7 concludes.



2     Empirical and theoretical literature on foreign ex-

      change intervention

    Our paper is motivated by the recent empirical literature on central bank foreign exchange
intervention and contributes to the theoretical literature in this area. In the empirical liter-
ature two major themes stand out: one has to do with evidence on the effectiveness of using
reserves, either to prevent a crisis or to prevent depreciation in the exchange rate, the second
relates to the precautionary accumulation of reserves ex-ante as insurance against a crisis.
    With respect to the first theme, Fratzscher et al. (2019), using daily data on sterilized
foreign exchange intervention, test to see if intervention has the desired effect on the exchange
rate (they ask whether daily intervention moved the exchange rate in the desired direction or
if the exchange rate intervention successfully stabilized the exchange rate). They find it does,
and thus FXI is an effective tool to use for exchange rate stabilization. Forbes and Klein
(2015) argue that foreign exchange intervention is an effective policy tool to prevent currency
depreciation in the face of shocks to the foreign interest rate. Ghosh et al. (2016) estimate
a policy reaction function for central bank foreign exchange accumulation and find that
emerging market central banks engage in foreign exchange intervention to smooth fluctuations
in the real exchange rate, selling foreign reserves to prevent depreciation and buying reserves
to prevent appreciation. Obstfeld et al. (2009) show that countries with a larger stock of
reserves in 2007 had less exchange rate depreciation during the crisis of 2008.
    Closely related to the fact that the central bank can use foreign exchange intervention to
stabilize the exchange rate is the fact that the central bank can use intervention to prevent a


                                               6
crisis. Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) run logit regressions of crisis incidence on a number
of variables including the stock of reserves. They find that the stock of reserves is highly
negatively associated with increased probability of a crisis. Ahmed et al. (2017) show that
emerging market countries with stronger fundamentals, including a higher stock of central
bank reserves to GDP and a lower ratio of short-term external debt to reserves, outperformed
their emerging market peers on a number of financial indicators during the "taper tantrum"
episode of 2013, including having less currency depreciation, lower stock market losses, and
a smaller increase in EMBI or CDS spreads. These findings are related to a number of other
papers documenting the early warning signs of an emerging market crisis, including Bussiere
and Fratzscher (2006), Rose and Spiegel (2011), Frankel and Saravelos (2012).
   Obstfeld et al. (2010) regress reserve stocks on financial openness, and find that countries
hold more reserves when they become more financially open and thus more vulnerable to
external crises. Arce et al. (2019) have similar findings, and show that in many emerging
market countries central bank reserve accumulation is positively correlated with private ex-
ternal liability accumulation. Jeanne and Sandri (2020) report how in early stages of financial
integration central banks increase their holdings of foreign exchange reserves as foreign liabil-
ities increase, but as a country develops and the private sector begins to hold more external
assets, these begin to replace central bank reserves as the main component of the external
asset portfolio. Aizenman and Hutchison (2012) and Aizenman and Sun (2012) discuss the
"fear of losing international reserves" where during the crisis of 2008-2009 many emerging
market countries chose to allow their exchange rate to depreciate instead of having to sell
reserves.
   In the recent theoretical literature on foreign exchange intervention, Jeanne and Ranciere
(2011) model reserves as an insurance contract to prevent sudden stops. Durdu et al. (2009)
also model reserve accumulation as insurance against a sudden stop resulting from domestic
shocks. Chang et al. (2015) and Cavallino (2019) look at optimal foreign exchange inter-
vention in a linear-quadratic New Keynesian model. In these models foreign exchange inter-
vention is an additional tool that helps to stabilize the economy in the presence of portfolio



                                               7
shocks. Fanelli and Straub (2016) model optimal foreign exchange intervention in a setting
where the central bank tries to manipulate the terms-of-trade for distributional considera-
tions. Hur and Kondo (2016) and Bianchi et al. (2018) both consider the use of reserves to
mitigate the rollover risk, which is characterized by a sudden stop in foreign capital inflows
precipitated by foreign investors refusing to rollover existing debts. Amador et al. (2020)
study foreign exchange intervention as a policy intervention when the nominal interest rate
is at the zero lower bound. They use this to explain how central bank foreign exchange in-
tervention at the zero bound was responsible for the deviations from Covered Interest Parity
observed during the global financial crisis.
   In a stylized three-period model, Cespedes et al. (2017) and Bocola and Lorenzoni (2020)
develop models with multiple equilibria ex-post. The central bank could eliminate bad equi-
libria by implementing a lending of last resort policy if the central bank has accumulated a
sufficient stock of reserves. Jeanne and Sandri (2020) explore the accumulation for foreign
exchange reserves in a model where the private sector can also acquire liquid foreign assets.
Both private and central bank foreign assets can serve as insurance against a sudden stop in
foreign liabilities, but private agents do not internalize the insurance role of their stock of
foreign assets, and thus the central bank, which does internalize the insurance role of their
stock of foreign assets, will acquire reserves and as a result the economy will have a higher
level of liquid external assets than in the laissez-faire equilibrium. In Cespedes and Chang
(2020), the central bank acquires reserves ex-ante to lend to banks following a shock to banks'
collateral constraint.
   In Arce et al. (2019) the fact that private agents don't internalize the effect of their own
external borrowing on the likelihood of a sudden stop crisis represents a pecuniary externality
that leads the private sector to borrow more than is efficient. By acquiring foreign exchange
reserves the central bank can force the economy as a whole to save more and thus lead to
the efficient level of borrowing. While Arce et al. (2019) model foreign exchange intervention
in a different way than in our paper, there are some similarities. We also find that the
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves leads to reduced borrowing for the economy as



                                               8
a whole, and we discuss how this is one benefit of the accumulation of reserves. But we
focus on the role of reserves as insurance against the risk of a sudden stop caused by a spike
in external interest rates, and the way in which the central bank can use foreign exchange
intervention to respond to this shock.



3     Model

    We construct a small open economy model with an infinite horizon. The country consists
of a representative household, a financial sector, and a central bank. Households derive
utility from the consumption of a tradable good x and a non-tradable good y in period t.
Households begin each period with an initial stock of debt. They face a borrowing constraint
limiting debt to a fraction of the market value of their endowment in a given period. In
line with the empirical literature on the global financial cycle, the only source of exogenous
variation in the model is a shock to the country's external borrowing cost.


3.1    Households

    Households maximize utility, described as follows:

                                                      
                                         U = Et             t u (ct )                      (1)
                                                     t=0

                c1-
where u (c) =   1-
                    .

                                                                             
                                               -1                       -1   -1
                               ct =  (ct,X )        + (1 - ) (ct,Y )                       (2)

where ct,X denotes the amount of traded good and ct,Y for the amount of non-traded good.
The budget constraint for households is written as follows:


                        ct,X + pt ct,Y + Bt = x + pt y + Rt-1 Bt-1 + Tt-1 + t-1            (3)




                                                      9
where Bt represents the household's holdings of domestic bonds (which are held by house-
holds, the financial sector, and the central bank) and Rt is the interest rate on domestic
bonds. x and y denote the endowment of traded and nontraded goods, respectively. The
central bank earns a net return Tt-1 on their bond portfolio which is rebated lump-sum to
savers (more on this later). The financial sector also earns net interest income on their bond
portfolio which is rebated to households in lump sum t-1 .
   Combining the first order conditions for traded and non-traded goods gives you the price
of non-traded goods pt :

                                                           1
                                         1-       ct,X     
                                    pt =                                                   (4)
                                                  ct,Y

   Due to limited enforcement of debt contracts, home country borrowers face a borrowing
constraint given by:


                                     - Bt   (x + pt y )                                    (5)

   The multiplier on the borrowing constraint is µt .
   The first order condition with respect to Bt is:


                                    t - µt = Et t+1 Rt                                     (6)

   Where t is the marginal utility of traded goods consumption:

                                             1-
                                                     
                                                      -1
                                       t = ct     ct,X                                     (7)


3.2    Financial Intermediaries

   A key feature of the model is the presence of frictions in international financial markets.
Empirical evidence strongly supports the fact that private households in emerging markets do
not have access to international financial markets on the same terms as banks, central banks,
or governments. To capture this feature, we assume that private households in our model do


                                             10
not directly hold foreign bonds, but must trade with financial intermediaries who can borrow
and lend on international financial markets subject to enforcement costs. The financial sector
is made up of a continuum of identical atomistic financiers, indexed i  [0, 1]. When private
household issue domestic bonds, financiers issue bonds on the international market, and use
the proceeds to buy home bonds from domestic households. Financiers begin each period with
zero net worth. They then issue Ftf s (i) international bonds and purchase Bt
                                                                            fs
                                                                               (i) domestic
bonds. By intermediating the borrowing from domestic households, financiers thus take a
                      fs
positive position in Bt  and a negative position in Ftf s , where Bt
                                                                   fs
                                                                      (i) + Ftf s (i) = 0. After
aggregating across all atomistic financiers the balance sheet for the financial sector is given
by:


                                                fs
                                               Bt  + Ftf s = 0                                   (8)

                  1                             1
where Ftf s =    0
                      Ftf s (i) di and Bt
                                        fs
                                           =   0
                                                     fs
                                                    Bt  (i) di.
      Note that both international bonds and domestic bonds are denominated in units of the
traded good. Thus, unanticipated movements in real exchange rates have no impact on
financier's balance sheets through currency mismatches. But, as we establish below, since
financiers act as an intermediary between households and international financial markets,
this drives a wedge between the domestic interest rate, Rt , and the exogenous world interest
      W
rate Rt . Both returns are denominated in traded goods.
      The net interest income from the financier's domestic and international bond portfolio is:


                                               W fs           fs
                                      t (i) = Rt Ft (i) + Rt Bt  (i)                             (9)

                       1               W fs       fs
      where t =       0
                           t (i) di = Rt Ft + Rt Bt  , is remunerated lump-sum to households.
      Each atomistic financier is in operation for a single period, and their objective is to
maximize the discounted net interest income from bonds purchased in period t:


                                 W fs           fs
                       t (i) =  Rt Ft (i) + Rt Bt          W
                                                   (i) =  Rt - Rt Ftf s (i)                     (10)



                                                         11
   Financiers do not operate without constraints however. As in Gabaix and Maggiori
(2015) we assume that financiers have an incentive to divert the funds they receive from
issuing foreign bonds. After taking the position Ftf s (i) < 0, the financier can divert a
share  Ftf s (i) of their credit position Ftf s (i) , where  is a non-negative constant. If
the financier diverts the funds their firm is unwound and the proceeds are returned to the
creditor. Since creditors correctly anticipate the ability and motivation of the financier to
divert funds, financiers are subject to the following incentive compatibility constraint:


                                                                          2
                          t (i)   Ftf s (i) × Ftf s (i) =  Ftf s (i)                            (11)

   The financiers maximization problem is to choose Ftf s (i) to maximize t (i) subject to
this incentive compatibility constraint. Since the value of the financier's firm, t (i), is linear
in Ftf s (i) and the right hand side of this constraint is convex in Ftf s (i), the constraint always
binds. Thus:


                                       W
                                      Rt - Rt = Ftf s (i)                                       (12)

   And thus the stock of foreign bonds held by the financial sector is:


                                                 1
                                       Ftf s =        w
                                                    (Rt - Rt )                                  (13)
                                                 

which can also be written as:


                                              W          fs
                                        Rt = Rt -       F                                       (14)
                                                         t

   If  = 0 then the financial sector is simply a veil and the equilibrium condition for foreign
                      W
bond holding is Rt = Rt , exactly as it would be if households could borrow directly from
foreigners and faced no frictions. But when  > 0, and Ftf s < 0, the domestic interest rate
will be higher than the foreign interest rate, inducing households to save more and consume
less. Note that this equilibrium condition in the market for foreign bonds can also be derived
in a reduced form by adding a quadratic adjustment cost to holding foreign bonds in the

                                                   12
household budget constraint, as in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003). This reduced form
approach was the preferred way of adding intermediary frictions in models with central bank
foreign exchange intervention in Chang et al. (2015) and Davis et al. (2020a)


3.3       Central Bank and Market Clearing

   The central bank also holds a stock of domestic and international bonds. It can vary the
composition of that bond portfolio.


                                         cb
                                        Bt  + Ftcb = 0                                     (15)

   By the fact that they participate in both the domestic and international bond markets,
the central bank is similar to the financial sector. But the central bank does not face the in-
termediation friction . This assumption is realistic. The central banks of emerging countries
are long-lived institutions which must maintain their reputations on international financial
markets. Nevertheless, we impose the constraint that central banks must maintain a non-
negative stock of international reserves. This is also a realistic assumption. As witnessed
in many episodes of sudden stops in emerging economies, central banks have no recourse to
international debt markets when reserves are depleted.
   Note that by equation (15), any central bank foreign exchange intervention, the buying
or selling of Ftcb , is sterilized foreign exchange intervention. This is where the central bank
buys or sells foreign bonds while at the same time selling or buying an equal quantity of
domestic bonds in order to keep the total size of their asset portfolio constant. If the central
bank were to buy or sell foreign bonds without an off-setting sale or purchase of domestic
bonds, that would be an unsterilized foreign exchange intervention.
   The central bank earns a net return Tt-1 on that portfolio which is rebated lump-sum to
savers.


                                         W      cb         cb
                                 Tt-1 = Rt -1 Ft-1 + Rt-1 Bt-1                             (16)



                                              13
   Domestic bonds B are held by three agents, households, the financial sector, and the
central bank. The domestic bond market clearing condition is given by:


                                          fs    cb
                                    Bt + Bt  + Bt  =0                                     (17)

                             W
   The world interest rate, Rt , is taken as given in this small open economy model (and
hence there is no market clearing condition for foreign bonds).
   Finally, market clearing conditions in the market for non-traded goods are given by:


                                          ct,Y = y                                        (18)


3.4    Balance of payments identity

   If we substitute the financial sector and central bank net interest income in equations
(9) and (16), the financial sector and central bank balance sheets in equations (8) and (15),
and the domestic bond market clearing and non-traded goods market clearing conditions in
equations (17) and (18), into the household's budget constraint in (3), we are left with the
economy-wide budget constraint:


                        ct,X = x - Ftf s + Rt
                                            W      fs     cb  W     cb
                                              -1 Ft-1 - Ft + Rt-1 Ft-1                    (19)

   This condition can be rearranged into the familiar balance of payments identity where
the current account is equal to the capital account plus the change in central bank foreign
exchange reserves:


                                    CAt = Ftf s + Ftcb                                    (20)

   where


                                                        fs
                     CAt = x - ct,X + Ftcb  W               W
                                        -1 Rt-1 - 1 + Ft-1 Rt-1 - 1                       (21)




                                             14
   The current account, CAt , is equal to net exports: x - ct,X plus interest income from
                                                          fs
international bonds purchased in t - 1: Ftcb  W               W
                                          -1 Rt-1 - 1 + Ft-1 Rt-1 - 1 . The capital and

financial account , Ftf s , is equal to net international bond purchases by financiers, Ftf s -
Ftf s                            cb
  -1 . The change in reserves, Ft , is equal to net international bond purchases by the

central bank, Ftcb - Ftcb
                       -1 .

   Thus in this model, net borrowing from abroad, a current account deficit CAt < 0, can
be financed either by net private capital inflows, a negative capital and financial account
Ftf s < 0, or the sale of central bank foreign exchange reserves Ftcb < 0. The two types
of financing, public and private, are not equal, since private financiers face an intermediary
friction  > 0. As in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) this friction allows the central bank to
use the purchase or sale of foreign exchange reserves as an instrument to adjust the current
account and thus the economy's total external debt. A central bank sale of foreign exchange
reserves reduces the current account, while a purchase of foreign reserves has the opposite
effect. A formal proof is presented in the appendix, but the intuition is as follows.
   Suppose the central bank increases their holding of foreign exchange reserves, Ftcb > 0.
                                           cb
Through the central bank's balance sheet, Bt  < 0, as the central bank finances this
purchase by issuing domestic bonds. This puts upward pressure on the domestic interest
rate and creates an arbitrage opportunity for the financial sector to buy domestic bonds and
                                        fs
finance this by selling foreign bonds, Bt  > 0 and Ftf s < 0.
   If the intermediary friction  = 0 then private financiers can fully exploit this arbitrage
opportunity and the increase in domestic bond sales by the central bank is exactly offset
                                                                     cb     fs
by the increase in domestic bond purchases by the financial sector, Bt  = -Bt  and
the increase in the central banks holdings of foreign bonds is offset by the reduction in the
financial sector's holdings, so that Ftf s = -Ftcb . The total stock of debt in the economy
is unaffected and the equilibrium condition in the market for foreign bonds ensures that
      W
Rt = Rt . The financial sector is a veil and central bank foreign exchange intervention has
no effect on aggregate macroeconomic variables, as in Obstfeld (1981), Backus and Kehoe
(1989), Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), and Davis et al. (2020a).



                                              15
    But if the intermediary friction  > 0 then when the central bank purchases foreign
bonds, Ftcb > 0, creating an arbitrage opportunity between foreign and domestic bonds,
the intermediary friction means that this opportunity is not fully exploited by financiers.
As financiers sell foreign bonds to take advantage of the arbitrage opportunity provides by
the central banks purchase of foreign bonds, the intermediary friction tends to push up the
domestic interest rate above the world interest rate, reducing the private sector's incentive to
sell domestic bonds in the same volume as their purchase of bonds from the central bank. As
a result, from the domestic bond market clearing condition, household holdings of domestic
bonds must increase, Bt > 0, i.e. the central bank purchase of foreign bonds led to increased
saving and decreased consumption for the economy as a whole. This entire sequence can be
run in the opposite direction to show why the central bank sale of foreign bonds will decrease
savings and increase consumption.



4     Determination of net external assets

    Here we examine the determination of the economy's net external debt in the model.
Define a country's net external assets as Ft = Ftf s + Ftcb , and thus -Ft represents net
external debt. In the next section we'll derive optimal policy for central bank foreign exchange
intervention, so until then, we set Ftcb = 0. We begin with a discussion of the steady state
level of external debt, we then move to the determination of the equilibrium level of external
debt in the short run.


4.1    Steady State

    A steady state of the model is defined by constant values of consumption, domestic and
foreign bond holdings, and domestic interest rates. We can describe a steady state assuming
a constant value of the world gross interest rate RW . Here, and for the rest of the paper, we
assume that in a steady state RW < 1. So domestic agents are more impatient than the
rest of the world.



                                              16
   Using (4) -(7) and (14) we can describe a steady state of the model by the conditions


                                                                µ
                                           1 = RW - (F ) +                                      (22)
                                                                
                                               1-                        1
                         -F  x+                   x + RW - 1 F           
                                                                                                (23)
                                                

                                           cX = x + (RW - 1)F                                   (24)

                                             t -µt
where the domestic interest rate Rt =        Et t+1
                                                    .   Later when presenting the numerical solution
to the model, the global solution will of course incorporate the fact that the stochastic
steady state value of Et (t+1 ) is greater than the steady state value of t . But for now
in this analytical exposition, we make the simplification that the steady state value of the
                             1       µ
domestic interest rate R =   
                                 -   
                                       .
   Equations (22)-(24) describe steady state values of µ, F and cX . The steady state can be
of two types, depending on whether the borrowing constraint is binding or not. The steady
state borrowing constraint can be plotted in a chart with total external debt along both the
horizontal and vertical axis in Figures 1 and 2. In these figures the right hand side of the
inequality in equation (23) is represented by the blue downward sloping line.
   Any equilibrium must lie along the 45 degree line. The steady state equilibrium level of
external debt is determined by the parameters in the model. If the parameters of the model
imply that the steady state level of external debt is less than the steady state borrowing
constraint then this is a steady state with a non-binding constraint. Graphically this is
represented by a point along the 45 degree line to the left of the point where the blue
borrowing constraint crosses the 45 degree line. If instead the parameters of the model and
equation (22) imply a steady state level of external debt that is higher than the steady state
borrowing constraint in (23), then the equilibrium level of external debt is determined by
the point of equality in the borrowing constraint in (23) and the household's Euler equation
in (22) determines the multiplier µ > 0. We denote this maximum level of external debt by
 ¯ . Graphically this is represented by the intersection of the blue line and the 45 degree
-F




                                                    17
line.3
      Note that if financial intermediation is costless, so that  = 0, then if a steady state
                                                                             ¯ . Intuitively,
exists, the borrowing constraint will always bind in a steady state, and F = F
if impatient agents could borrow at a world interest rate that was less than their subjective
discount factor, agents will always borrow up to the limit implied by the borrowing constraint,
so that the steady state external debt is again defined by (23), while (22) determines µ.
However, if intermediation isn't costless,  > 0, then that intermediation friction creates a
spread between the steady state domestic interest rate and the steady state world interest
rate. If the parameters of the model determine that the steady state level of external debt
              ¯ , then µ = 0 and R = 1. So while domestic agents are more impatient than
is less than -F
the rest of the world and RW < 1, the spread between the domestic and world interest rates
created by the financial intermediation friction can still lead to a non-binding steady state
equilibrium where R = 1.


4.2       Short-run

      In this subsection, following Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020) we illustrate the possibility
of multiple non-steady state equilibria borrowing levels in the economy constrained by the
borrowing constraint (5). Recall that in the steady state the borrowing constraint in terms
of the economy's total external debt is given by (23). But while this represents the long-run
borrowing constraint when F = Ft = Ft-1 , in the short-run this borrowing constraint is given
by:


                                             1-      W
                                                                           1
                           - Ft   x +           x + Rt -1 Ft-1 - Ft
                                                                           
                                                                                                     (25)
                                              

      The right hand side of this short-term borrowing constraint in equation (25) is increasing
in the choice of debt in period t, -Ft . This is due to the fact that given Ft-1 , increased


      3
     Note, if  = 0 and there were no borrowing constraints, then there would be no steady state level of
debt or consumption, since with RW < 1 agents would borrow as much as is consistent with their long run
budget constraint in the first period, and consumption would be declining and debt rising over time to its
natural limit.

                                                   18
borrowing in period t raises the price of the non-traded good and thus the value of collateral.
The slope of this borrowing constraint with respect to -Ft is

                                  1-1      W
                                                               1
                                                                 -1
                                      x + Rt -1 Ft-1 - Ft                                        (26)
                                                               

                                    

   If the elasticity of substitution between traded and non-traded goods  < 1 and we assume
                                                       W
that the consumption of traded goods is positive, x + Rt -1 Ft-1 - Ft > 0, then this slope is

positive and increasing in -Ft . This short term borrowing constraint is given by the red
upward sloping convex line in Figures 1 and 2. The difference between the two figures is that
the initial debt -Ft-1 is higher in the second figure. As we can see the short term borrowing
constraint in the right hand side of equation (25) is shifted down and to the right as debt
carried over from the last period -Ft-1 increases.
   Starting from a steady state, this initial level of debt is represented by the point where the
steady state and short-term borrowing constraints cross, denoted point A in both figures. As
long as the parameters in the model imply a non-binding steady state, then the equilibrium
level of external debt at point A, -F A , is given by the Euler equation in (22) where µ = 0.
   Notice that the short-term borrowing constraint for a low initial stock of debt does not
intersect with the 45 degree line. But for a higher level of initial debt the short-term borrowing
                                                                         ~ , which separates
constraint does intersect the 45 degree line. The initial level of debt -F
the low and high levels of initial debt is represented by the point where the short-term
borrowing constraint is tangent to the 45 degree line. At this point, the slope of the short-
term borrowing constraint is unity, and the short-term borrowing constraint is binding, so
                                  1-                                                     1
                                                                                         
that a)  1- 1        ~ - Ft
              x + RW F                 = 1 and b) -Ft =  x +      1-          ~ - Ft
                                                                       x + RW F              .
                                                                   

   A little algebra shows that these two conditions are satisfied when:


                         ~=     1                    (1 - ) -
                        -F             x(1 + ) + (         ) 1 ( - 1)
                               RW                      

   When starting from the steady state where Ft = Ft-1 = F , we can see from the two
figures, as -Ft-1 increases the convex short-term borrowing constraint shifts to the right,


                                               19
as shown in Figure 2. As long as -F is less than the maximum steady state debt limit
there will still be a non-binding steady state equilibrium as shown by point A in the figure
                                               ~ , the short-term borrowing constraint
where -Ft = -Ft-1 = -F A . However, if -F A > -F
intersects the 45 degree line twice. At this point there are three equilibria. The non-binding
equilibria, and two where the short-term constraint is binding in period t, -Ft = -F B and
-Ft = -F C , where -F C < -F B < -F A and:

                                     1-                               1
                       -F B =  x +      x + RW F A - F B              

                                      
                                     1-                               1
                       -F C    =  x+    x + RW F A - F C              

                                      

   Figure 2 is constructed using the benchmark parameter values in the model, so obviously
from the figure the short-term borrowing constraint crosses the 45 degree line twice and there
are three equilibria under our benchmark parameterization. In the appendix we present a
formal proof to derive under that conditions the short-term borrowing constraint crosses the
45 degree line twice and thus under what conditions will the model have three equilibria.
   As we show in the appendix, the key to the existence of multiple equilibria is that the
slope of the borrowing constraint in equation (26) is greater than one when the economy
is in a non-binding steady state equilibrium with -Ft = -F A . When the slope is greater
than one, each additional unit of debt will have a direct effect of tightening the borrowing
constraint by one unit but an indirect effect of loosening the borrowing constraint by more
than one unit since additional debt leads to additional traded goods consumption and thus
a higher relative price of non-traded goods. A large part of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020)
is devoted to showing under what combinations of parameters this will hold. In our model
we adopt the same parameterization, but later when discussing the parameters we use in the
numerical model we will highlight the key parameters for this result.
   Each equilibrium can be sustained by self-confirming beliefs. Notice however that equilib-
rium B is unstable in a traditional sense, since if debt is just below (above) the level indicated
by point B, the borrowing constraint would be violated (slack), and debt would be forced to



                                               20
fall (would be increasing) over time.
   Which equilibrium will prevail? For this, we need an equilibrium selection rule. In the
equilibrium selection rule we use, if the non-binding equilibrium is possible, agents' beliefs will
always coalesce around this non-binding equilibrium. But if the non-binding equilibrium is
not possible then the only possible equilibrium is the stable binding equilibrium, point C. Note
that this selection rule eliminates the possibility of self-fulfilling deleveraging. Movement from
a "good" non-binding equilibrium to a "bad" binding equilibrium is driven by fundamental
shocks, which in this model are shocks to the country's cost of external borrowing, the world
               W
interest rate Rt .
   Maintaining this assumption on equilibrium selection, the rest of the paper will analyze
the impact of shocks to the world interest rate which leads to sudden stops in capital flows.
We will show that this economy faces a risk of highly unstable capital flows, not as a result
of multiple equilibrium and self-fulfilling beliefs in themselves, but due to the fact that the
pecuniary externality associated with the effect of the real exchange rate on the value of
collateral allows for sudden discrete collapses in borrowing capacity for the economy. The
main objective of the rest of the paper is to explore how foreign exchange intervention can
be used to offset these externalities and to prevent the occurrence of sudden stops in capital
flows.




                                                21
     Figure 1: Single Non-binding equilibrium for a low level of debt.




                         -F
                                                                  A
Period T External Debt




                              45o
                                                             -F
                                    Period T External Debt




                                        22
                               Figure 2: Multiple equilibria for a higher level of debt.




                         -F
                                                                                        A
                         -F'
                                                                                   B
Period T External Debt




                         -F"
                                                            C




                                45o
                                                      -F"                      -F' -F
                                                   Period T External Debt




                                                            23
5     Sudden stops with and without policy intervention

5.1     Competitive equilibrium without intervention

    Following on the discussion of the previous section, we can describe how the competitive
equilibrium without policy intervention evolves. Assume first that Ftcb = 0. Assume also
that the steady state debt level is -F A , so that the borrowing constraint is non-binding in
the steady state. In this case, the first order condition with respect to external debt is


                                      t         W  
                                             = Rt - (Ft )                                     (27)
                                   Et (t+1 )       

    As in the last section this steady state is represented graphically by point A in Figure
2. Assume that the initial debt level is at F A , which means that the point where the
short-term borrowing constraint crosses the long-run borrowing constraint represents the
(non-binding) steady state debt level F A . Following a shock to Rt
                                                                  W
                                                                    , agents will adjust their
desired debt levels according to the first order condition above. Specifically, for a given
                                                                     W    
sequence of current and expected future world interest rates        Rt    t=1
                                                                                agent's will pick a
sequence of external borrowing - {Ft }t=1 to satisfy the first-order condition with respect to

external debt in equation (27), subject to the economy wide budget constraint in (19) and the
borrowing constraint in (5), taking as given the prices {pt , Rt }t=0 that clear the corresponding

nontradable good market and domestic bond market.
                                   W
    Following a positive shock to Rt , agents' desired level of external borrowing -Ft will
fall from (27). This can be represented as a movement left along the 45-degree line in Figure
                                W
2. After the initial shock, if Rt is stationary then external borrowing -Ft will gradually
converge back to the steady state at point A.
                               W
    A small positive shock to Rt will lead agents to delever to a point on the 45-degree line
to the left of point A and then gradually return to the steady state. For a small shock, the
desired delevering leads to a debt level to the right of point B, and so there still exists an
                                                                                            W
equilibrium where the borrowing constraint does not bind. But there is a critical value of Rt
where the equilibrium condition in equation (27) is satisfied at -Ft = -F and the borrowing


                                               24
constraint is just on the margin of binding, so µt = 0. This is the debt level indicated at point
                                            W
B. Past this, for any further increases in Rt                           ^ where -F
                                              , agents will delever to -F        ^ < -F B .
      ^ is in the region where the short-term borrowing constraint lies below the 45 degree
Thus -F
line:

                                                                     1
                           ^ >  x + 1 -  x + RW F A - F
                          -F                          ^              
                                              t-1
                                      

    But this point is not an equilibrium, since it violates the borrowing constraint. Agents
                                                                            1
                                                                            
                                  ^ =  x+
are forced to delever further to -F                  1-        W     A  ^
                                                      
                                                          x + Rt -1 F - F       . But this delever-
aging causes further fall in the price of collateral and agents are again forced to delever
                                                                         ^ , where -F
if the short-term borrowing constraint lies below the 45 degree line at -F          ^ >
                               1
 x+     1-        W
             x + Rt        
                    -1 F - F
                               
                                   . It is easy to see that this process will continue until agents
         

delever to the point -F C where the short run borrowing constraint crosses the 45 degree
line, point C in the figure.
                  W
    The shock to Rt thus causes agents to delever, but they do not internalize the fact that
deleveraging leads to a fall in the price of the non-traded good. Past point B in the figure,
the constraint becomes binding and the dynamics lead to a forced deleveraging multiplier
with falling collateral values reinforcing the deleveraging pressure.
           ¯ w as the level of the foreign interest rate where agents delever to -Ft = -F B
    Define R t

in period t before gradually moving back to the original steady state. This is represented
graphically by point B in Figure 2. Starting from the steady state point A, where external
                                          ¯t
debt is equal to -F A , this cutoff value R w
                                              is found from the equilibrium condition in equation
(27):


                                   ¯W =     Bt      B
                                   Rt          B +  F                                         (28)
                                          Et t+1   

where B     B
      t and t+1 are the marginal utilities of current and next period's consumption when

cB          W    A    B     B            W B      B
 X,t = x + Rt-1 F - Ft and cX,t+1 = x + Rt Ft - Ft+1 . Therefore, if the world interest

                             ¯ W , the country experiences a sudden stop which leads external
rate shock exceeds the value R t




                                                25
debt to fall to -F C in the Figure.
    Note while the description of the deleveraging here suggests a sequential adjustment
downwards in debt, consumption, and the real exchange rate, in effect the adjustment takes
place instantaneously. Thus, the sudden stop in capital flows is discrete and precipitous.
While our analysis does not involve a self-fulfilling sudden stop driven collapse in beliefs, the
process has all the hallmarks of such a process. This is because beginning at a value of the
                               ¯ W , a very small increase in R
world interest rate just above R                              ¯ W which pushes debt downwards
                                 t                              t

by a marginal amount can precipitate a large collapse in capital flows, driven by a classic
debt deflation process similar to that in Mendoza and others.4


5.2      Equilibrium with Policy Intervention

    We now allow Ftcb to be the instrument of a benevolent policy maker. The policy maker
can either buy or sell reserves, subject to a non-negativity constraint on reserves. Recall
from section 3 that, starting from a position where the borrowing constraint is not binding,
if the central bank sells foreign exchange reserves, this leads to an increase in the economy's
total external debt, while if the central bank were to buy foreign exchange reserves, that will
decrease the economy's total external debt. By buying one unit of foreign bonds, the central
                                                                        fs
bank is increasing the economy's total foreign assets by 1+ F
                                                            F cb
                                                                 units, where the intermediary
                                 F f s
friction  > 0 ensures that       F cb
                                         > -1. Thus by buying one unit of foreign bonds the central
                                                    F f s
bank reduces period t consumption by 1 +            F cb
                                                            but increases next period's consumption by
       F f s    W
 1+    F cb
               Rt . Likewise selling foreign exchange reserves (or at least buying fewer bonds
than originally planned) is a way to increase current consumption at the expense of next
period's consumption.
    Formally, the central bank chooses Ftcb to maximize welfare in equation (1) subject
to the economy wide budget constraint in equation (19), financier's incentive compatibil-
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                            1-     ct,X   
ity condition in (14), and the borrowing constraint in (5), where pt =                               y
                                                                                                              =

   4
     In Mendoza (2010) and Bianchi (2011), there is a unique equilibrium, and while the presence of pecuniary
externalities generates a debt deflation multiplier, there is no equivalent threshold whereby very small shocks
given rise to large discrete collapse in capital inflows.

                                                      26
                                                 1
            W F cb -F cb +RW F f s -F f s        
1-     xt +Rt -1 t-1 t     t-1 t-1   t
                       y
                                                     . The central bank is subject to the additional con-
straint that its holdings of foreign exchange reserves can't be negative. The planner's problem
becomes:

                                                                                               
                                           1         -1             -1                         -1
                                                                                                  (1- )
                                            t
                   max U = Et                 (ct,X )  + (1 - ) (y ) 
                                   t=0
                                          1-

     subject to:


                                         W      cb     cb  W     fs     fs
                             ct,X = x + Rt -1 Ft-1 - Ft + Rt-1 Ft-1 - Ft




                                                 t          
                                                         W
                                                        Rt - Ftf s
                                                Et t+1      

                                                                                    1
                                                         1-                 ct,X    
                               -Ftcb -      Ftf s     x+                                y
                                                                              y



                                                          Ftcb  0

     The central bank's optimality condition is given by:



                                                                 1                                                 1
                                                                   -1                                                -1
                      W             1-1                   ct,X   
                                                                             W                1-1         ct+1,X   
Et {t+1 } (Rt -      Rt )    = -µt                                      +   Rt Et       µt+1 
                                                           y                                                 y
                                                      1     t              W                 t+1     t+1
                                  +t 1 -                                + Rt Et                                     (29)
                                                     Et t+1 ct,X                            Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X

where t is the multiplier on the non-negativity constraint for reserves, and µt captures the
social shadow price of the binding credit constraint. The full derivation of this condition is
presented in the appendix.
                                                            W
     The left hand side of this expression, Et (t+1 ) Rt - Rt represents the marginal cost
of acquiring one extra unit of reserves. When households sell bonds to financiers, Rt will
        W
exceed Rt . Then, buying reserves involves the central bank borrowing at rate Rt and lending

                                                            27
at a lower rate. Equivalently, buying reserves distorts agents' optimal consumption paths.
Buying reserves in period t reduces the economy's total external debt, thus forcing agents
to save more than they otherwise would have. If agents have a discount factor  where
RW < 1, then by acquiring foreign exchange reserves, the central bank is forcing relatively
impatient agents to save at a low world interest rate.5 The marginal cost of acquiring one unit
of reserves is the discounted value of next period's marginal utility of consumption multiplied
         W
by Rt - Rt , the spread between the domestic interest rate and the world interest rate.
    First consider ex-post foreign exchange intervention. This is foreign exchange intervention
in response to a crisis in the current period, where µt > 0 and Et (µt+1 ) = 0.                      The first
                                                                                 -1
                                                                        ct,X      
term on the right hand side of this expression, -µt  1-
                                                       
                                                        1
                                                                          y
                                                                                      , captures the impact on
households welfare of the central bank buying reserves at time t, through its effect on the
price of non-traded goods, when the current collateral constraint is binding. While private
agents take the price of non-traded goods as given when making their borrowing decisions,
the central bank internalizes the effect of its intervention on the non-traded goods price and
its effect on the borrowing constraint. When the current collateral constraint binds, the
central bank will wish to sell foreign reserves in order to raise the price of non-traded goods
and relax the collateral constraint.
    Therefore, the ex-post benefit of selling enough reserves to increase total external debt
and thus current consumption by one unit is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint in
                                                                         1
                                                                           -1
                                                                 ct,X    
the case of a sudden stop, µt , multiplied by  1-
                                                 
                                                  1
                                                                   y
                                                                                , the change in the value of
collateral when there is a change in the economy's total external debt in period t. Notice
that this is simply the slope of the borrowing constraint given in the red convex curve in
Figure 2.
    First imagine that the central bank did not face a non-negativity constraint on reserves.
Then (29) indicates that when the collateral constraint is currently binding, but is not ex-
pected to bind in the future, the central bank would wish to sell reserves to a sufficient


   5
     As a practical example, when a developing country central bank acquires a large stock of foreign exchange
reserves, they are forcing domestic savings to be channeled into relatively low yielding assets like T-bonds
instead of investing in higher yielding domestic investments.

                                                     28
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                          ct,X   
extent that the benefit of relaxing the collateral constraint, which is µt  1-
                                                                              
                                                                               1
                                                                                            y
                                                                                                     , is just
                                                                                  W
equal to the cost of selling reserves, which is given in this case by Et {t+1 } (Rt - Rt ), so
the domestic interest rate would be less than the world interest rate. In other words, the
central bank would have negative reserves (or borrow) enough to drive down the domestic
interest rate below the world rate, which implies that it is borrowing at a higher rate than it
               6
is lending.
   However, with a non-negativity constraint on reserves, the central bank cannot do this.
The most it can do is to sell all its current reserves and drive reserve holdings to zero, so
that t > 0. If reserves are at their lower bound in time t then the shadow value of relaxing
that constraint is equal to:



                                                                 1
                                                                   -1
                    1     t                    1-1        ct,X   
                                                                                          W
        t       1-                       = µt                           + Et (t+1 ) Rt - Rt +
                   Et t+1 ct,X                              y


                                      W              1    t+1
                                     Rt Et -                     t+1                                     (30)
                                                 Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X
        t
where   ct,X
                   < 0. At the lower bound on reserves, one more unit of external assets in this
period could be used to increase consumption in this period, and thus has a net benefit of
                      1
                        -1
              ct,X    
µt  1-
      
       1
                y
                                               W
                             + Et (t+1 ) Rt - Rt , or can be saved as reserves and increase external
                           W
assets in period t + 1 by Rt units. At their lower bound of zero, the shadow value of reserves
is equal to the weighted average of these two benefits, the benefit from using them this period
versus the benefit from holding them until next period, where the weighting depends on the
inverse of the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution.
   Next consider ex-ante foreign exchange intervention, assuming that the borrowing con-
straint does not currently bind but is expected to bind in the future. In order to relax the
future constraint the central bank will wish to acquire reserves now, reducing net foreign
borrowing so as to increase consumption and the price of non-traded goods in period t + 1.


   6
     In this case, the central purchase of bonds from private households would be so large that households
respond by holding a positive net bond position with financiers.

                                                     29
   If the central bank acquires a positive stock of reserves in response to the possibility
of a crisis next period, µt = 0 and Et (µt+1 ) > 0 then the optimal quantity of reserves is
determined by the condition:



                                                                  1
                                                                    -1
                     W          W            1-1        ct+1,X                t+1     t+1
 Et {t+1 } (Rt -    Rt )   =   Rt Et   µt+1                              +                          (31)
                                                           y                 Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X

   Increasing reserves and raising external assets by one unit this period results in an extra
 W
Rt units of external assets next period. That marginal increase in next period's consumption
                                                        1
                                                          -1
                                               ct+1,X   
                         W
has a social benefit of Rt Et µt+1  1-
                                      
                                       1
                                                  y
                                                               . In addition however, using those
extra external assets for consumption instead of holding them as reserves imposes a cost if the
                                                                                 t+1     t+1
non-negativity constraint on reserves is expected to bind next period,          Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X
                                                                                                  < 0.
   To build intuition consider the case where the non-negativity constraint is not expected to
bind next period, Et (t+1 ) = 0 . In this simplified case, equation (31) represents a trade-off
                                                                                        W
between the distortion caused by an extra unit of reserves this period Et {t+1 } (Rt - Rt ),
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                          ct+1,X   
                                                                          W
and the expectation of the ex-post benefit of those reserves next period Rt Et µt+1  1-
                                                                                       
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                          .
The distortion, the spread between the home and foreign interest rate, is positive and in-
creasing in Ftcb since Ftf s is decreasing in Ftcb . The expectation of the ex-post benefits side is
positive but decreasing in Ftcb , since with each additional unit of reserves that the central bank
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                     -1
                                                                             µt+1 1- 1   ct+1,X    
holds at the end of period t, the probability of a crisis, and thus Et       t+1
                                                                                            y

falls. If the probability of a crisis in period t + 1 is a continuously declining function of Ftcb ,
then as long as  > 0, when the central bank is holding the optimal stock of reserves the
probability of a crisis next period is positive. Conceptually it is easy to see why this is true.
Once the probability of a crisis is zero the marginal benefit of an additional unit of reserves
falls to zero. In this case it would never be optimal to incur a cost by holding reserves.
As we will see when discussing numerical results, the optimal stock of reserves reduces the
probability of a crisis, but is never large enough to reduce the probability of a crisis to zero.
   Finally consider the case where there is not a crisis this period or any probability of a crisis
next period, µt = Et (µt+1 ) = 0. In this case the central bank's sole focus is on eliminating

                                                30
the spread between the domestic and foreign interest rates. If there was no non-negativity
constraint for reserves then the central bank would hold a negative stock of reserves that is
exactly equal to the economy's total external debt and completely supplant private borrowing.
If the central bank did face a non-negativity constraint for reserves then the central bank
would hold zero reserves and the shadow value of reserves would be proportional to the
positive spread between the home and foreign interest rates.



6     Numerical results for the optimal stock of reserves

    In this section we present the numerical results from the infinite-horizon dynamic model
to show the mechanisms and the optimal stock of central bank foreign exchange reserves. We
focus on the optimal policy under discretion.


6.1    Parameters and Calibration

    The top panel of Table 1 presents the parameter values that we use to calculate the
numerical results. Following Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020),  = 0.31,  = 0.5,  = 0.91,
RW = 1.04, and  = 2. One of the key parameters for the existence of multiple equilibria is
the elasticity of substitution between traded and non-traded goods. If this elasticity is too
high, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020) show that there are no multiple equilibria. Bianchi
(2011) uses  = 0.83, and at this level there are not multiple equilibria. Benigno et al. (2013)
follow the empirical estimate from Ostry and Reinhart (1992) of  = 0.76. Stockman and
Tesar (1995) use  = 0.44. Akinci (2017) surveys the empirical literature estimating this
elasticity and finds that estimates of this elasticity vary between 0.43 and 1.50 depending
on the estimation methodology and the countries sampled. Akinci argues that empirical
estimates tend to be lower for the emerging markets, and estimates using a few different
methodologies put the elasticity around 0.5 in emerging market countries like Argentina and
Uruguay.
    We make one adjustment to the calibration in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2020) in order to



                                              31
                                   Table 1: Parameter values
   Parameter             Value           Description
                                     Structural Parameters
   RW                    1.04            Annual gross world interest rate
                         2               Inverse of intertemporal elasticity of consumption
                         0.27Rw          Parameter in borrowing constraint
                         0.91            Subjective discount factor
   x                     1               endowment of traded goods
   y                     1               endowment of non-traded goods
                         0.31            Weight on traded goods in CES aggregator
                         0.5             Elasticity of substitution between traded/non-
                                         traded goods
                         0.05            Financial intermediation friction
                                  Discretization of State Space
        RW         W
    ln Rmin
         W  ln R max
                RW
                         [-0.071, 0.071]   Range for the world interest rate
   [-Fmin - Fmax ]       [0.2, 1.0]        Range for total external debt
      cb    cb
    Fmin   Fmax          [0, 0.5]          Range for foreign exchange reserves
                                                                        RW
   nRw                   11                number of grid points for ln Rt W , equally spaced

   nF                    300               number of grid points for -Ft , equally spaced
   nF cb                 300               number of grid points for Ftcb , equally spaced


ensure that a sudden stop crisis happens with sufficient frequency. While Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2020) focus on endowment shocks, our model is driven by shocks to the world interest
rate. With the different shock process the probability of a crisis is different, and in order to
ensure that the probability of a crisis is around 5% in the competitive equilibrium without
policy intervention, we lower the coefficient in the borrowing constraint from  = 0.32RW in
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe to  = 0.27RW .
   We have no prior for the value of the financial intermediation friction , and thus  is
calibrated to match a certain value for the steady state level of private external borrowing:


                                                 
                                           = RW - F f s
                                      E ()       
          
where   E ()
               < 1 depends on the amount of uncertainty in the economy (we will discuss shocks
shortly). If the value of  is too low then the steady state level of external debt is above
the maximum limit and thus the borrowing constraint binds in the steady state. If it is too
high then starting from the steady state equilibrium level of -F f s the short-term borrowing


                                                 32
constraint does not cross the 45 degree line, and thus sudden stops are very rare and only
                                              W
occur after a sequence of negative shocks to Rt which raise the economy's external debt
                                                     W
which is then followed by a large positive shock to Rt , triggering a sudden stop. But in
order to have a meaningful probability of a sudden stop, we set  = 0.05, which makes the
steady state level of external debt high enough to make a sudden stop possible following a
sufficiently large shock when starting from a steady state and low enough that the constraint
is not binding in the steady state.
                                                                         W
   Exogenous shocks to the model are shocks to the world interest rate, Rt . These shocks
follow an AR(1) process with persistence coefficient 0.572 and standard deviation 0.02. To
approximate the equilibrium, we use a time iteration procedure over a discretized state space,
and the bottom panel of Table 1 provides information for the discretization of the state space.
We discretize the interest rate shock into 11 grid points, the endogenous state -Ft into 300
grid points and central bank reserves Ftcb into 300 grid points. For ease of exposition, we
denote the median RW as the `steady state RW '.
   The way that the model is written, there is only one endogenous state variable in the
model, the total external debt -Ft-1 . It is important to note that for a given value of the
endogenous state in period t - 1, -Ft-1 , the policy variable Ftcb is a choice variable with the
constraint that Ftcb  0. The choice of Ftcb will then affect the endogenous state variable in
period t, -Ft , but in period t + 1, it is the state variable -Ft that matters.
   Note that foreign reserves in themselves are not a state variable in the model, but represent
a control variable at the discretion of the central bank (see the functional problem in appendix
E). Since reserves cannot be negative, central banks must choose in advance the reserves that
would be used to offset a sudden stop in the event of a crisis. This implies that the central
bank must hold a stock of reserves in periods when there is a probability of a crisis, and this
stock must be accumulated in periods when a future crisis becomes more likely.
   As discussed in section 5 above, while the model admits multiple expectational equilib-
rium, we maintain a particular equilibrium selection criterion, and focus on the role of shocks
                                                                W
to fundamentals to generate sudden stops. Following a shock to Rt , if agents' first-order



                                              33
conditions and the other equilibrium conditions in the model are satisfied at a level of exter-
          ^ where the borrowing constraint is not binding (to the right of point B in Figure
nal debt -F
2), we pick this as the equilibrium. If on the other hand agents' first-order conditions and the
                                                                                     ^ where
other equilibrium conditions in the model are satisfied at a level of external debt -F
the borrowing constraint is binding (to the left of point B), the equilibrium at the lower level
of external debt (point C).


6.2    Numerical results

   The policy function for the optimal choice of Ftcb as a function of the endogenous state,-Ft-1 ,
                          W
and the exogenous state, Rt , is presented in Figure 3. The blue solid line shows the central
bank's optimal choice of Ftcb , and the red dashed line plots the multiplier on the borrow-
ing constraint, which changes from 0 to a positive number when the sudden stop occurs. All
quantity variables like total external debt and the stock of central bank reserves are presented
as a percent of GDP.
   The optimal choice of Ftcb is based on the marginal benefit of holding reserves, the reduc-
tion of the probability of a crisis in period t + 1, and the marginal cost of holding reserves,
is captured by the reduction in the economy's total external debt in period t, forcing the
economy as a whole to save more than it otherwise would.
   Begin with the middle panel in the figure, this panel plots the optimal choice of Ftcb as a
                        W
function of -Ft-1 when Rt is equal to its steady state value. The figure shows that as long
as the initial stock of external debt is less than 28.5 percent of GDP, a crisis does not occur in
period t. This means that the equilibrium -Ft along the 45 degree line in Figure 2 remains
to the right of point B when the initial stock of external debt is less than 28.5% of GDP. The
policy function for Ftcb for a low stock of initial external debt, say external debt less than
28% shows that when debt is this low, the probability of a sudden stop in period t + 1 is zero
and thus the central bank sees no need to distort the economy today by buying reserves as
insurance against a possible crisis tomorrow. But the figure shows that for an external debt
limit greater than 28% but less than 28.5% the central bank will start acquiring reserves Ftcb


                                               34
as precaution against a large positive shock to the world interest rate in period t + 1. As the
initial stock of external debt increases the probability of a sudden stop increases, and thus
the marginal benefit of Ftcb increases. The central bank's optimal Ftcb increases right up to
the point where the level of external debt is high enough that a sudden stop crisis would have
happened in period t. At the highest point, central bank reserves are about 10% of GDP.
                                                                    W
   The top panel of the figure shows the same policy function when Rt is below its steady
                                                                  W
state, and the bottom panel shows the same policy functions when Rt is above its steady
                                W
state. First, notice that when Rt is below its steady state value a crisis in period t occurs
                                                        W
at a higher level of initial external debt, while when Rt is above its steady state value the
crisis occurs starting at a lower level of initial external debt. This is not surprising since a
               W
high value of Rt simply means that agents will delever to a point further to the left along
the 45 degree line in Figure 2 and thus there is a greater chance that agents will delever to
the left of point B. What is more interesting is the policy function for Ftcb is much higher
when the current shock is low than when it is high. Recall that the exogenous world interest
      W                                              W
rate Rt follows an AR(1) process. So a low value of Rt today implies that is is likely to
                                                   W
go higher in the next period, and a high value of Rt implies that it is likely to be lower in
the next period. When the shock is currently low an initial level of external debt in excess of
29% may not lead to a crisis in period t, but it may in the future when the interest rate mean
reverts. Thus the central bank will seek to reduce the probability of a crisis next period by
                                             W
acquiring reserves, and at its height, when Rt is low, the central bank will buy reserves Ftcb
up to 13% of GDP. Likewise when the current world interest rate is high, if the initial level of
external debt is low enough that a crisis was not triggered in period t even when the interest
rate was high, the probability of a crisis next period as the interest rate mean reverts is low,
and as a consequence the policy function for Ftcb remains close to zero.
   In Figure 3 we focus on the benefits of the central bank holding Ftcb , where the policy
function for Ftcb would increase in the region of the state space where the probability of a
crisis next period was higher. In Figure 4 we instead focus on the costs of holding Ftcb . In this
figure we simulate the model over T = 106 periods and plot the density of the distribution



                                               35
of total external debt, -Ft , over these simulations. The blue solid line plots the density
when the central bank does not engage in foreign exchange intervention and F cb = 0, the
red dashed line plots the density when the central bank engages in optimal foreign exchange
intervention, described by the policy functions in Figure 3.
    Focus initially on the blue solid line. When the central bank does not engage in foreign
exchange intervention the density of -Ft has a large mass around 28.5 percent of GDP
and a long left tail. With no policy intervention the economy, after a long string of shock
realizations of zero, the economy would settle to a `steady state' level of external debt a little
                                   W
less than 29%. Negative shocks to Rt would lead agents to hold more debt and positive
           W
shocks to Rt would lead agents to hold a little less debt. But as the density figure shows,
at a point around an external debt level of 28% the density drops. This is where the sudden
stop occurs at point B in Figure 2.7 If the shock is large enough to trigger a sudden stop
then the economy's total external debt falls to less than 18 percent of GDP and then begins
a slow process of releveraging as the economy returns to the steady state.
    The density of external debt under optimal foreign exchange intervention shows that
optimal policy nearly eliminates the probability of a sudden stop. While it is difficult to see
the scale on this graph, but there is a small weight in the left tail in the optimal FXI density,
but the weight is very close to zero. As discussed earlier, this probability is never zero, but
as we will show in a later table, in these simulations the probability is small.
    But the density plots in Figure 4 show that the density in the non-binding region, where
the economy is not in a sudden stop, is shifted to the left under optimal FXI. As discussed
earlier, optimal foreign exchange accumulation is insurance against a crisis, but the cost is
that it forces the economy to save more than it otherwise would. In the absence of sudden
stops, this would clearly be welfare reducing, since households are less patient than the rest of
the world (as reflected in RW ), and desire to front load consumption. But the optimal policy
ensures that the benefits of foreign exchange intervention in response to foreign interest rate

    7
      The convex curve in Figure 2 is drawn when the initial level of external debt (and thus how far the
convex curve shifts to the right) is at its steady state level. In this density, the economy is not always starting
                                                                                                  W
from the steady state level of initial external debt, and so the past history of shocks to Rt        will affect the
initial level of external debt and thus the exact level of external debt that triggers a sudden stop.

                                                        36
shocks more than offsets the costs of reduced external debt, so that expected utility is higher
than would be the case under a competitive equilibrium.
   We now turn to event analysis to examine the dynamics of a typical financial crisis in the
model to see how foreign exchange intervention reduces the probability of a sudden stop. We
construct an event analysis as follows. In a simulation path with length T = 106 , a crisis is
defined as a binding credit constraint µt > 0 in period t = 0 in the competitive equilibrium
with no foreign exchange intervention, and an event is a window of 11 periods from t = -5
to t = 5. We average all such events along the simulated path above. Figure 5 presents
the path of the world interest rate, total external debt, the central bank's stock of foreign
exchange reserves, tradable consumption, the price of non-tradables, the current account, the
domestic interest rate, the multiplier on the borrowing constraint, and the spread between
the domestic interest rate and the world interest rate during the average of these events. The
solid blue line in the figure plots the event in economy with no foreign exchange intervention,
and the dashed red line presents the responses of the same variables to the same path of the
exogenous world interest rate and conditional on identical external debt in the first period
of the event in the economy with optimal foreign exchange intervention.
   The exogenous shock that triggers a crisis event is an increase in the world interest rate.
The figure shows that the average crisis is triggered by an increase in the world interest rate
from 3% to 7%. It is interesting to note that in the period before the crisis the world interest
rate was slightly less than the steady state world interest rate of 4%. This indicates that
at least some of the crisis episodes occur following a period of low interest rates which lead
to a build-up external debt (shown in the middle figure in the top tow). This period of low
borrowing costs is also reflected in the domestic interest rate panel of the figure. This shock
to the world interest rate is enough to cause agents to de-lever to a point to the left of point
B in Figure 2, triggering a sudden stop and leading to a rapid deleveraging to a much lower
level of external debt. This deleveraging implies a sharp fall in traded goods consumption a
large depreciation of the real exchange rate, and a sharp improvement in the current account.
   These events, a rapid deleveraging and a sharp fall in traded goods consumption, a fall



                                              37
in the price of non-tradables, and an increase in the current account, describe the typical
sudden stop in an emerging market economy.
   The red dashed line plots the same variables in the same events (the window of ±5 periods
around a crisis in the economy without foreign exchange intervention), but now allowing the
central bank to implement the optimal foreign exchange intervention, as show in the policy
functions in Figure 3. Under optimal foreign exchange intervention, external debt is lower
in the periods leading up to the crisis. The same size foreign interest rate shock now causes
some deleveraging, but not enough to trigger a crisis. Thus there is some fall in traded goods
consumption and the real exchange rate depreciation, but it is substantially ameliorated
relative to the outcome without policy intervention.
   The response of the domestic interest rate and the spread over the world interest rate
provides an interesting insight into the optimal FXI response. Prior to the crisis there is
a spread between the domestic interest rate and the world interest rate of about 4.5% in
the economy without FXI and 6% in the economy with FXI. The central bank's holdings of
foreign exchange reserves keeps domestic interest rates higher than in the equilibrium without
policy intervention. The interest rate spread is higher due to the fact that financier's issue
of foreign bonds -F f s is larger than in the case without policy intervention, but despite
that, external net debt is lower. When the economy is hit by the interest rate shock, in the
case without intervention, the domestic interest rate rises, but by less than the world rate,
as the large deleveraging reduces the spread over the world rate. But contrast, with foreign
exchange intervention, the private deleveraging is substantially mitigated (the fall in -F f s
is much less), and the domestic interest spread is relatively unchanged.
   Finally, the graph of the central bank's optimal stock of reserves in the bottom right
hand corner shows that in the periods leading up to the crisis the central bank adds to the
stock of reserves as a precautionary measure in the face of low world interest rates. Then
in the period of the high interest rate shock the central bank sells some of their stock of
reserves. Although it is interesting to note that the central bank does not need to sell a large
part of their stock to prevent a crisis. Much of the work of preventing the sudden stop is



                                              38
done ex-ante and by holding a stock of reserves the central bank reduces the economy's total
external debt, and thus makes a crisis less likely.
    In the discussion above we explained why it was not optimal for the central bank to use
foreign reserve accumulation and intervention to completely eliminate the possibility of a
sudden stop. We show below that while optimal FXI dramatically reduces the probability
of a sudden stop, the probability does not go to zero. Figure 6 illustrates the characteris-
tics of a sudden stop event under optimal central bank foreign exchange intervention. The
construction of the average event is similar as before.
    The first point to notice from the figure is that the size of the average shock that precip-
itates a crisis event in the economy with FXI is much larger than the corresponding shock
size in the economy without policy intervention. With optimal FXI, the crisis is triggered
after a rise in the world interest rate from 2% to 10%, whereas without policy intervention,
a crisis occurred after an increase in the interest rate from 3% to 7%. The bottom right
hand graph in the figure is the central bank's stock of foreign exchange reserves. Prior to the
shock, the optimal stock of central bank reserves is right around 8% of GDP, but immedi-
ately following the interest rate shock the central bank reduces its stock of reserves to zero.
But as we can see from the behavior of the multiplier on the borrowing constraint and the
other variables like total external debt, tradable goods consumption, and the relative price
of non-tradeables, this sale of central bank reserves was not enough to prevent a crisis, and
despite optimal central bank reserve holding, the central bank ran out of reserves to sell and
the economy fell into a sudden stop.
    Table 2 calculates the probability of a crisis, the `steady state' level of external debt,
and the mean level of external debt as a percent of GDP in the model with and without
FXI calculated from the same simulation over T = 106 periods.8 As discussed earlier, the
coefficient in the borrowing constraint  is calibrated to ensure that in the model without
policy intervention the probability of a crisis is around 5%. Then using the same parameters
   8
     The dynamic models have a stationary distribution of external debts. To facilitate comparison with the
deterministic steady state without shocks, we still use the term `steady state' to describe the situation in
which the economy stays when world interest rate is at its middle level for a long time given policy functions
obtained in a dynamic model. This situation is sometimes called `risky steady state' (Coeurdacier et al.
(2011)).

                                                     39
Table 2: Crisis probability, mean, and steady state levels of external debt in the model with
and without optimal foreign exchange intervention.
                                             No FXI Optimal FXI
                        Crisis Probability    0.0481        0.0003
                        `Steady State' -Ft     28.6          28.4
                        Mean -Ft               26.9          28.4
                        Notes: This table reports the probability of a
                        crisis and mean and median levels of external
                        debt under the competitive equilibrium with no
                        policy intervention and under optimal foreign
                        exchange intervention. The simulation period
                        is T = 106 .


and the same shock process the probability of a crisis falls to 0.03% when the central bank
engages in optimal foreign exchange intervention. The `steady state' level of external debt
is lower under optimal FXI than it is under the competitive equilibrium without policy
intervention, indicating that by holding the optimal stock of foreign exchange reserves, the
central bank forces `steady state' excess savings. However, the mean level of external debt is
lower in the model without policy intervention due to the strong left skew on the distribution
of external debt in this case. Put differently, the economy's external debt in normal times is
reduced as a result of the optimal foreign exchange policy, but by avoiding crises which involve
large episodes of de-leveraging, the unconditional average level of external debt is actually
higher due to the optimal policy. This offers another sense in which optimal intervention
policy avoids an underborrowing outcome in the small economy.



7     Summary and Conclusion

    This paper presents a simple model where a sudden stop can arise in a small open econ-
omy. There is a pecuniary externality in that agents do not internalize the effect of their
deleveraging on the price of collateral, and because of this, the economy call fall into a
self-fulfilling sudden stop equilibrium. A policy maker that does internalize the effect of
deleveraging on the price of collateral will set policy to keep the economy out of this sudden
stop equilibrium.


                                              40
   When the tools available to the policy maker are the central bank purchases and sales of
foreign bonds, foreign exchange intervention, some interesting questions arise. The central
bank's holdings of foreign bonds can't be negative, so in order to sell bonds to prevent a
sudden stop during a crisis, the central bank must buy a stock of bonds before the crisis. This
central bank purchase of foreign bonds is distortionary since it forces economy wide savings
to be higher than it otherwise would be. This paper attempts to provide a framework for
assessing the marginal costs and marginal benefits of holding a stock of reserves in order to
pinpoint the optimal stock of foreign bonds held by the central bank to safeguard against a
sudden stop.




References
Ahmed, S., Coulibaly, B., Zlate, A., 2017. International financial spillovers to emerging
 market economies: How important are economic fundamentals? Journal of International
 Money and Finance 76, 133­152.

Aizenman, J., Hutchison, M. M., 2012. Exchange market pressure and absorption by inter-
  national reserves: Emerging markets and fear of reserve loss during the 2008­2009 crisis.
  Journal of International Money and Finance 31 (5), 1076­1091.

Aizenman, J., Sun, Y., 2012. The financial crisis and sizable international reserves depletion:
  From 'fear of floating' to the 'fear of losing international reserves' ? International Review
  of Economics & Finance 24, 250­269.

Akinci, O., 2017. A note on the estimation of the atemporal elasticity of substitution between
 tradable and nontradable goods. mimeo.

Amador, M., Bianchi, J., Bocola, L., Perri, F., 2020. Exchange rate policies at the zero lower
 bound. The Review of Economic Studies 87 (4), 1605­1645.

Arce, F., Bengui, J., Bianchi, J., 2019. A macroprudential theory of foreign reserve accumu-
  lation. NBER Working Paper No. 26236.

Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J., 1989. On the denomination of government debt: a critique of
  the portfolio balance approach. Journal of Monetary Economics 23 (3), 359­376.

Benigno, G., Chen, H., Otrok, C., Rebucci, A., Young, E. R., 2013. Financial crises and
  macro-prudential policies. Journal of International Economics 89, 453­470.

Bianchi, J., 2011. Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle. American
  Economic Review 101 (7), 3400­3426.


                                              41
Bianchi, J., Hatchondo, J. C., Martinez, L., 2018. International reserves and rollover risk.
  American Economic Review 108 (9), 2629­70.

Bianchi, J., Mendoza, E. G., 2020. A fisherian approach to financial crises: Lessons from the
  sudden stops literature. Review of Economic Dynamics 37 (S1), S254­S283.

Bocola, L., Lorenzoni, G., August 2020. Financial Crises, Dollarization, and Lending of Last
  Resort in Open Economies. American Economic Review 110 (8), 2524­2557.

Bruno, V., Shin, H. S., 2015a. Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119­132.

Bruno, V., Shin, H. S., 2015b. Cross-border banking and global liquidity. The Review of
  Economic Studies 82 (2), 535­564.

Bussiere, M., Fratzscher, M., 2006. Towards a new early warning system of financial crises.
  journal of International Money and Finance 25 (6), 953­973.

Calvo, G. A., Izquierdo, A., Mejia, L.-F., 2008. Systemic sudden stops: The relevance of
  balance sheet effects and financial integration. Tech. Rep. NBER Working Paper no. 14026,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Cavallino, P., 2019. Capital flows and foreign exchange intervention. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2), 127­70.

Cespedes, L. F., Chang, R., October 2020. Optimal foreign reserves and central bank policy
  under financial stress. Working Paper 27923, National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w27923

Cespedes, L. F., Chang, R., Velasco, A., 2017. Financial intermediation, real exchange
  rates, and unconventional policies in an open economy. Journal of International Economics
  108 (S1), 76­86.

Chang, C., Liu, Z., Spiegel, M. M., 2015. Capital controls and optimal chinese monetary
 policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 74, 1­15.

Coeurdacier, N., Rey, H., Winant, P., May 2011. The Risky Steady State. American Economic
  Review 101 (3), 398­401.

Davis, J. S., Fujiwara, I., Huang, K. X., Wang, J., 2020a. Foreign exchange reserves as a tool
  of capital account management. forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics.

Davis, J. S., Valente, G., Van Wincoop, E., 2020b. Global drivers of gross and net capital
  flows. forthcoming in the Journal of International Economics.

Devereux, M. B., Young, E. R., Yu, C., 2019. Capital controls and monetary policy in
  sudden-stop economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 103, 52­74.

Durdu, C. B., Mendoza, E. G., Terrones, M. E., 2009. Precautionary demand for foreign assets
 in sudden stop economies: An assessment of the new mercantilism. Journal of development
 Economics 89 (2), 194­209.


                                             42
Eichengreen, B., Gupta, P., 2016. Managing sudden stops. World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper (7639).

Eichengreen, B., Rose, A., 2014. Capital controls in the 21st century. Journal of International
  Money and Finance 48, 1­16.

Fanelli, S., Straub, L., 2016. A theory of foreign exchange interventions. mimeo.

Fernandez, A., Rebucci, A., Uribe, M., 2015. Are capital controls prudential? an empirical
  investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 1­14.

Forbes, K., Warnock, F. E., 2012. Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and retrenchment.
  Journal of International Economics 88, 235­251.

Forbes, K. J., Klein, M. W., 2015. Pick your poison: the choices and consequences of policy
  responses to crises. IMF Economic Review 63 (1), 197­237.

Frankel, J. A., Saravelos, G., 2012. Can leading indicators assess country vulnerability?
  evidence from the 2008-09 global financial crisis. Journal of International Economics 87 (2),
  216­231.

Fratzscher, M., 2012. Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis.
  Journal of International Economics 88 (2), 341­356.

Fratzscher, M., Gloede, O., Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Stohr, T., 2019. When is foreign ex-
  change intervention effective? evidence from 33 countries. American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 11 (1), 132­56.

Fratzscher, M., Lo Duca, M., Straub, R., 2018. On the international spillovers of us quanti-
  tative easing. The Economic Journal 128 (608), 330­377.

Gabaix, X., Maggiori, M., 2015. International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1369­1420.

Ghosh, A. R., Ostry, J. D., Chamon, M., 2016. Two targets, two instruments: Monetary and
 exchange rate policies in emerging market economies. Journal of International Money and
 Finance 60, 172­196.

Ghosh, A. R., Qureshi, M. S., Kima, J. I., Zalduendo, J., 2014. Surges. Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics 92, 266­285.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Obstfeld, M., 2012. Stories of the twentieth century for the twenty-first.
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1), 226­265.

Hur, S., Kondo, I. O., 2016. A theory of rollover risk, sudden stops, and foreign reserves.
 Journal of International Economics 103, 44­63.

Jeanne, O., Ranciere, R., September 2011. The Optimal Level of International Reserves For
  Emerging Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications. Economic Journal
  121 (555), 905­930.



                                              43
Jeanne, O., Sandri, D., Oct. 2020. Global Financial Cycle and Liquidity Management. NBER
  Working Papers 27901, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Jorda, O., Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., Ward, F., 2019. Global financial cycles and risk
  premiums. IMF Economic Review 67 (1), 109­150.

Mendoza, E. G., 2002. Credit, prices, and crashes: Business cycles with a sudden stop.
 In: Edwards, S., Frankel, J. A. (Eds.), Preventing currency crises in emerging markets.
 University of Chicago Press, pp. 335­392.

Mendoza, E. G., 2010. Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. American Economic
 Review 100 (5), 1941­1966.

Miranda-Agrippino, S., Rey, H., 05 2020. U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial
 Cycle. The Review of Economic StudiesRdaa019.

Neumeyer, P. A., Perri, F., 2005. Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of interest
  rates. Journal of monetary Economics 52 (2), 345­380.

Obstfeld, M., 1981. Macroeconomic policy, exchange-rate dynamics, and optimal asset accu-
 mulation. Journal of Political Economy 89 (6), 1142­1161.

Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C., Taylor, A. M., 2009. Financial instability, reserves, and
 central bank swap lines in the panic of 2008. American Economic Review 99 (2), 480­86.

Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C., Taylor, A. M., 2010. Financial stability, the trilemma, and
 international reserves. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2), 57­94.

Ostry, J. D., Reinhart, C. M., 1992. Private saving and terms of trade shocks: Evidence from
  developing countries. IMF Staff papers 39 (3), 495­517.

Rey, H., 2015. Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy inde-
  pendence. NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

Rey, H., 2016. International channels of transmission of monetary policy and the mundellian
  trilemma. IMF Economic Review 64 (1), 6­35.

Rodrik, D., 2006. The social cost of foreign exchange reserves. International Economic Journal
  20 (3), 253­266.

Rogers, J. H., Scotti, C., Wright, J. H., 2018. Unconventional monetary policy and interna-
  tional risk premia. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 50 (8), 1827­1850.

Rose, A. K., Spiegel, M. M., 2011. Cross-country causes and consequences of the crisis: An
  update. European Economic Review 55 (3), 309­324.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., Uribe, M., 2003. Closing small open economy models. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 61, 163­185.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., Uribe, M., 2020. Multiple equilirbia in open economies with collateral
  constraints. forthcoming in the Review of Economic Studies.


                                             44
Stockman, A. C., Tesar, L. L., 1995. Tastes and technology in a two-country model of the
  business cycle: Explaining international comovement. American Economic Review 85 (1),
  168­185.

Uribe, M., Yue, V. Z., June 2006. Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives
  whom? Journal of International Economics 69 (1), 6­36.




                                          45
Not For Publication Technical Appendix
A       Variables and Equations

   Variables in the model:
                                  fs
                       cb
   ct,X , ct,Y , Rt , Bt  , Bt , Bt  , Ftf s , t , µt , pt , Tt , t , Ftcb , t taking B0 , F0
                                                                                            fs    cb
                                                                                               , F0       W
                                                                                                     and Rt as
given
   Equations:
   ct,X :
                                                                                  -
                                               -1                      -1    -1
                                     (ct,X )        + (1 - ) (ct,Y )                   ×


                                                                    
                                     -1                        -1   -1
                                                                       -1              -1
                          (ct,X )         + (1 - ) (ct,Y )                   (ct,X )         = t

    ct,Y :
                                                                                  -
                                               -1                      -1    -1
                                     (ct,X )        + (1 - ) (ct,Y )                   ×
                                                               
                               -1                        -1    -1
                                                                  -1                        -1
                     (ct,X )        + (1 - ) (ct,Y )                   (1 - ) (ct,Y )            = pt t

                  cb       fs
    Rt : Bt + Bt     + Bt     =0
      cb     cb      cb
    Bt : Bt + Ft = 0
            -µt
    Bt : tR  t
                 = t+1
      fs      fs
    Bt : Bt + Ftf s = 0
    Ftf s : Rt = Rt W
                        -   t
                             F fs
    t : ct,X + pt ct,Y + Bt = xt + pt yt + Rt-1 Bt-1 + Tt + t
    µt : µt = 0 or -Bt =  (xt + pt yt )
    pt : ct,Y = yt
                 W      cb         cb     cb    cb
    Tt : Tt = Rt  -1 Ft-1 + Rt-1 Bt-1 - Ft - Bt
                  W      fs         fs     fs    fs
    t : t = Rt     -1 Ft-1 + Rt-1 Bt-1 - Ft - Bt
    Ftcb : policy

B       Proof of effectiveness of foreign exchange intervention when  > 0

   To see how central bank foreign exchange intervention can have a macroeconomic effect
when the economy is in a non-binding equilibrium and  > 0, start from the non-binding
equilibrium where private sector demand for international bonds is given by Ftf s , the central
bank does not change their stock of international bonds Ftcb = Ftcb
                                                                 -1 , and thus traded goods
consumption in periods t and t + 1 is given by:




                                                          46
                        ct,X = x - Ftf s + Rt
                                            W      fs     cb  W     cb
                                              -1 Ft-1 - Ft + Rt-1 Ft-1

                      ct+1,X = x - Ftf s   W fs     cb    W cb
                                     +1 + Rt Ft - Ft+1 + Rt Ft



    Now suppose instead the central bank engages in a sale of some of their stock of interna-
tional bonds, Ftcb < Ftcb
                       -1 . Following this central bank intervention the private sector changes
their demand for international bonds from Ftf s to Ftf s . The new consumption level following
this central bank intervention and private sector response is:


                        ct,X = x - Ftf s + Rt
                                            W      fs     cb  W     cb
                                              -1 Ft-1 - Ft + Rt-1 Ft-1

                      ct+1,X = x - Ftf s   W fs
                                     +1 + Rt Ft - Ftcb    W cb
                                                    +1 + Rt Ft



     We want to prove that when  > 0, the central bank sale of international bonds led to
higher external debt, -Ftf s - Ftcb < -Ftf s - Ftcb and thus by extension, higher traded goods
consumption in period t.
     If Ftf s < Ftf s , the proof is trivial (this would be where the central bank sold foreign
bonds, and as a result the private sector also sold foreign bonds). Turning to the case where
Ftf s > Ftf s : combine the household's first order condition with respect the F in equation (6)
with the equilibrium condition for foreign borrowing in equation (14).
                                  t - µt        
                                            W
                                         = Rt -  Ftf s                                    (B.1)
                                  t+1           

   Thus in a non-binding equilibrium:

                            t             t    
                               +  Ftf s =    +  Ftf s                                     (B.2)
                            t+1           t+1 
where t and t+1 are the marginal utilities of consumption when traded goods consumption
is ct,X and ct+1,X , and t and t+1 are the marginal utilities of consumption when traded
goods consumption is ct,X and ct+1,X . If Ftf s > Ftf s and  > 0 then the above equality
becomes:

                                        t     t
                                            >                                             (B.3)
                                        t+1   t+1
which implies that the central bank intervention by selling international bonds lowers the
domestic interest rate. This implies:

                                 ct,X - ct+1,X < ct,X - ct+1,X
which implies that -Ftf s - Ftcb < -Ftf s - Ftcb . Note that the switch from the equality in
equation (B.2) to the inequality in equation (B.3) relied on the fact that  > 0. If there were
no intermediary frictions  = 0, then the inequality in equation (B.3) would be an equality
and -Ftf s - Ftcb = -Ftf s - Ftcb . Any central bank sale of international bonds would be

                                              47
exactly offset by a private sector purchase of international bonds, leaving total external debt
unchanged.

C      Proof of multiple equilibria
                                                                                ~ < -F A <
   We want to prove that for an initial level of external debt of -F A , where -F
 ¯ . The short term borrowing constraint given by:
-F

                                        1-      W     A
                                                                    1
                         -Ft   x +         x + Rt -1 F - Ft
                                                                    

                                         

    will have two points -F B and -F C where:


                                    1-                                     1
                       -F B =  x +     x + RW F A - F B                    

                                     
                                    1-                                     1
                       -F C   =  x+    x + RW F A - F C                    

                                     


                              ¯ , the borrowing constraint is not binding when -Ft =
    We know that when -F A < -F
-F A

                                         1-                            1
                        -F A <  x +         x + RW F A - F A           

                                          

                     ~ < -F A , the point -F
    We know that if -F                     ^ where the slope of the borrowing constraint
                                           1
                                           
                                             -1
is equal to one,  1- 1      W     A  ^
                    
                       x + Rt -1 F - F            = 1 must violate the borrowing constraint:
                                                                   1
                          ^ > x+        1-              ^          
                         -F                x + RW F A - F
                                         
                                                                                                       1
                                                                               1-        W     A
    Furthermore we know that when  < 1, the borrowing constraint,  x +              x + Rt -1 F - Ft
                                                                                                       
                                                                                
it convex. If at the point -Ft = -F A , the slope of the borrowing constraint is greater than
                                 1
                              A  -1
one,  1- 
         1
              x + RtW    A
                     -1 F - F        > 1, and the slope of the same borrowing constrain is
equal to one when -Ft = -F    ^ , then it must be that -F ^ < -F A . Thus is the borrowing
                                           A
constraint is non-binding when -Ft = -F and yet it is violated when -Ft = -F       ^ , then by
                                                                           ^
the intermediate value theorem there must be a point -Ft = -F where -F < -F B < -F A
                                                                B

where the borrowing constraint holds with equality.
    At the other end, at the maximum amount of deleveraging (i.e. the minimum -Ft ),
traded goods consumption in period t is zero, x + RW F A - Ft = 0. Thus at the point
where -Ft = -x - RW F A , the short term collateral constraint is equal to x, under what
parameterization is the constraint not binding at the minimum amount of traded goods
consumption, x > -x - RW F A . Thus we ask, what is the minimum set of parameter values
where -RW F A < (1 + ) x holds?
    We know that -F A < -F   ¯ where:


                                              48
                               ¯ = x+                   1-      W ¯      ¯
                                                                                    1
                              -F                           x + Rt -1 F - F
                                                                                    

                                                         
                                                    1
   Define a =  1- 1
                      x + RtW ¯     ¯  -1 , then we can rearrange the above equality -F
                             -1 F - F
                                                                                        ¯=
                  
              W ¯    ¯        ¯       (a +)x               A      ¯         A       (a +)x
x+a x + Rt    -1 F - F , or -F = (aRW +(1-a )) . Since -F < -F then -F < (aRW +(1-a )) .
                                      t-1                                           t-1

From this it should be obvious that -RW F A < (1 + ) x will also hold as long as a < 1,
                                                  1
                                                    -1
where a =  1-
            
                    W
               x + Rt     A
                      -1 F - F
                               A                                             W
                                                         . We know that x + Rt     A
                                                                               -1 F - F
                                                                                        A
                                                                                          < 1, so as long
                    W   A     A          1- 1
as  < 1-     x + Rt -1 F - F        < 1-    in our benchmark parameterization  = 0.31, so
                                  
                                         
as long as  < 0.44 the constraint is non-binding at point where traded goods consumption
is zero. (we use  = 0.27RW where RW = 1.04)
    Furthermore we know that at this point since traded goods consumption is zero, x +
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     -1
R F - Ft = 0, the slope of the borrowing constraint  1-
  W A
                                                             
                                                             1
                                                                x + Rt  W   A
                                                                        -1 F - Ft
                                                                                   
                                                                                        = 0.
Since the slope of the borrowing constraint is one when -Ft = -F^ , then -x - RW F A < -F ^.
                                                                 W A
By the intermediate value theorem there must be a point -x - R F < -F < -F    C      ^ where
the borrowing constraint holds with equality.

D      Social planner's problem

    The social planner's problem can be written as
                                         
               L{ct,X ,Ft ,Ftcb } = Et           t U (ct,X ) + t x + Rt
                                                                      W
                                                                        -1 Ft-1 - Ft - ct,X
                                         t=0

                                                               W                   
                                                  + t t - t+1 Rt -                  (Ft - Ftcb )
                                                                                   
                                                                                        1
                                                                1-               ct,X   
                                                  + µt      x+y                             + Ft
                                                                                  y
                                                  + t Ftcb
                        W 
given F-1 and shocks {Rt  }0 . Lagrange multipliers t  0, t  0, µt  0 and t  0.
   The optimality conditions can be written as follows. For traded consumption good, ct,X :
                                                                 1
                                                                   -1
                                    1-1                   ct,X                t               t
               t = Ux (ct,X ) + µt                                      + t        - t-1 Rt-1        (D.1)
                                                           y                  ct,X            ct,X

    For net external asset position Ft :
                                           W
                                   t = Et Rt t+1 + µt + t Et t+1                                     (D.2)


    For reserve Ftcb :
                                                   t = t Et t+1                                      (D.3)




                                                            49
   And complementarity conditions:
                                   W
                            t x + Rt -1 Ft-1 - Ft - ct,X = 0, t  0


                                    W                
                     t t -  Et t+1 Rt -               (Ft - Ftcb )            = 0, t  0
                                                     
                                                            1
                                  1-               ct,X     
                       µt     x+y                                + Ft = 0, µt  0                           (D.4)
                                                    y

                                        t Ftcb = 0, t  0

    Consider the planner's policy under discretion, therefore t-1 = 0. By definition, t =
Ux (ct,X ).
    From equation (D.1), the social marginal utility of traded consumption consists of three
parts: marginal utility of traded goods consumption t , the benefit of relaxing credit con-
straint when credit constraint is binding µt > 0, and the intertemporal reallocation of con-
              t
sumption t c   t,X
                    0.
    Equation (D.2) shows the social optimal Euler equation for external saving/borrowing.
Social marginal cost of saving is the foregone consumption t , while the social marginal
benefit of saving consists of relaxing current credit constraint, increasing future consumption
via saving in abroad and the intertemporal shifting of consumption, captured by t .
    Changes in reserves Ftcb will change domestic interest rate, Rt /Ftcb = / . Equation
(D.3) shows that when the reserve hits its lower bound below and reserves are decreased
by one unit, the marginal cost is captured by the shadow price t (public borrowing when
negative), while the marginal benefit is the product of the change of domestic interest rate (),
private marginal utility of consumption t+1 , and the shadow price of shifting consumption
intertemporally (t ).
    Substituting out t = Et    t
                              t+1
                                   from the FOCs, and the social Euler equation can be written
as
                                       1
                                         -1
                   1-1         ct,X                t     t
           t + µt                             +
                                y                 Et t+1 ct,X
                                                                1
                                                                  -1
               W                 1-1               ct+1,X                   t+1     t+1
       =   Et Rt     t+1 + µt+1                                        +                       + µ t + t
                                                      y                    Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X

which can be rewritten as
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      -1
                                W                          1-1               ct,X   
                       Et     (Rt     - Rt )t+1      - µt 
                                                                              y
                                       1
                                         -1
     W            1-1        ct+1,X                t+1     t+1                               1    t
+Et Rt      µt+1                              +                               + t 1 -                       =0
                                y                 Et+1 t+2 ct+1,X                          Et t+1 ct,X




                                                     50
E     Optimal FXI in an infinite horizon model

    This section presents the policy maker's problem under discretion in an infinite horizon
model. As usual, the policy maker's problem is defined as follows: a path of reserve holding
{Ftcb }t=0 that maximizes the representative domestic household's objective function, subject
to the constraints in the competitive equilibrium defined in the main text. In order to make
the expressions of constraints more concisely, we make the following equivalent changes of
                                                w
variables. Let the exogenous variable be st  Rt   , total external borrowing at the beginning of
period t, ft-1  -Rt-1 Ft-1 and reserve holding at the beginning of period t, ftcb
                     W                                                                  cb  W
                                                                                 -1  Ft-1 Rt-1 .
                                                                         W        cb     cb  W
Therefore the end-of-period portfolio can be written as Ft = -ft /Rt and Ft = ft /Rt           .
The Bellman equation for the policy maker's problem can be written as,

                    P1 :v (ft-1 , st ) =       max            {u(ct ) +  Et [v (ft , st+1 )]}   (E.1)
                                                       cb }
                                           {ct,X ,ft ,ft


subject to
                                                                       ft
                                      ct,X = xt - ft-1 +                w
                                                                                                (E.2)
                                                                       Rt
                                ux (ct )(1 - µt ) = Rt Et ux (ct+1 )                            (E.3)
                                           ft
                                            w
                                                (xt + pt yt )                                   (E.4)
                                           Rt
                                                        ft
                           µt  (xt + pt yt ) -           w
                                                           = 0, 0  µt < 1
                                                        Rt
                                                                        1
                                            1-                  ct,X    
                                       pt =                                                     (E.5)
                                                                 yt
                                            w                  ft + ftcb
                                      Rt = Rt +                    w
                                                                                                (E.6)
                                                               Rt
where aggregate consumption and marginal utility can be written as
                                                                                 
                                                -1                          -1   -1
                             ct = (ct,X )             + (1 - )(yt )         



                                                                            1
                                     ux (ct ) = c- 
                                                 t (ct /ct,X )
                                                               




    Note that central bank policy ftcb only appears in equation (E.6) as a control variable
and could change domestic bond interest rate Rt , which can facilitate computing an optimal
allocation substantially.




                                                        51
Figure 3: The policy function for reserve accumulation (blue solid line) and the multiplier
on the borrowing constraint (red dashed line) as a function of external borrowing and the
                                            W
exogenous state. Low, Mid and High Rt         denote the lowest level, middle level and highest
level of world interest rate, respectively.
                                                                                    Low Rw
                           FX Reserve in time t (% of GDP)
                                                                                         t
                                                             30


                                                             20


                                                             10


                                                             0
                                                                  27.5     28     28.5      29      29.5      30
                                                                         External Debt in t-1 (% of GDP)
                                                                                    Mid Rw
                           FX Reserve in time t (% of GDP)




                                                                                         t
                                                             30


                                                             20


                                                             10


                                                             0
                                                                  27.5     28     28.5      29      29.5      30
                                                                         External Debt in t-1 (% of GDP)
                                                                                    High Rw
                           FX Reserve in time t (% of GDP)




                                                                                          t
                                                             30


                                                             20


                                                             10


                                                             0
                                                                  27.5     28     28.5      29      29.5      30
                                                                         External Debt in t-1 (% of GDP)
                                                                            Fcb
                                                                             t           Tightness of constraint




                                                                                    52
Figure 4: The density of external debt in period t in the model without foreign exchange
intervention and in the model with optimal foreign exchange intervention. The smooth
parameter is 20 (average of between period t - 19 and t).
                          600




                          500




                          400
                Density




                          300




                          200




                          100




                            0
                             16   18   20     22          24        26      28   30
                                            External Debt in t (% of GDP)
                                                   No FXI         FXI




                                                     53
Figure 5: An event in a typical financial crisis when there is no foreign exchange intervention
(blue solid lines) and the corresponding event when there's foreign exchange intervention (red
dashed lines) along a simulated period of T = 106 . A crisis occurs at period t = 0 in the
competitive equilibrium without policy intervention. Interest rates, Lagrange multiplier and
nontraded good price are expressed in level and other variables are expressed as percentage
point of GDP.
                       Rw
                        t                                    External Debt                          Tradables Consumption
      1.15                                                                                    35
                                                  30

                                                  28                                          30
       1.1
                                                  26

                                                  24
                                                                                              25
                                                  22
      1.05
                                                  20
                                                                                              20
                                                  18

        1                                         16
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



              Price of Nontradables                        Current Account                                    Rt
       2.5                                                                                   1.15
                                                  12

        2                                         10

                                                   8
                                                                                              1.1
       1.5                                         6

                                                   4
        1
                                                   2                                         1.05

       0.5                                         0

                                                   -2
        0                                                                                      1
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



                    Multiplier                          Interest rate differential                       FX Reserves
        1                                         0.1

                                                                                               8
       0.8                                       0.08


       0.6                                       0.06                                          6


       0.4                                       0.04                                          4


       0.2                                       0.02                                          2


        0                                          0                                           0
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



                                                           No FXI              FXI




                                                                 54
Figure 6: An event in a typical financial crisis that following a shock that is large enough
to cause a crisis when foreign exchange intervention is used (red dashed lines) and the cor-
responding event in the competitive equilibrium without foreign exchange intervention (blue
solid lines) along a simulated period of T = 106 . A crisis occurs at period t = 0 in the
economy with optimal policy intervention. Interest rates, Lagrange multiplier and nontraded
good price are expressed in level and other variables are expressed as percentage point of
GDP.                w
                       Rt                                    External Debt                          Tradables Consumption
      1.15                                                                                    35
                                                  30

                                                  28                                          30
       1.1
                                                  26

                                                  24
                                                                                              25
                                                  22
      1.05
                                                  20
                                                                                              20
                                                  18

        1                                         16
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



              Price of Nontradables                        Current Account                                    Rt
       2.5                                                                                   1.15
                                                  12

        2                                         10

                                                   8
                                                                                              1.1
       1.5                                         6

                                                   4
        1
                                                   2                                         1.05

       0.5                                         0

                                                   -2
        0                                                                                      1
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



                    Multiplier                          Interest rate differential                       FX Reserves
        1                                         0.1

                                                                                               8
       0.8                                       0.08


       0.6                                       0.06                                          6


       0.4                                       0.04                                          4


       0.2                                       0.02                                          2


        0                                          0                                           0
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1    2   3   4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3     4   5      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5



                                                           No FXI              FXI




                                                                 55
