                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          UNDERSTANDING THE SUCCESS OF THE KNOW-NOTHING PARTY

                                        Marcella Alsan
                                       Katherine Eriksson
                                       Gregory Niemesh

                                      Working Paper 28078
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28078


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank seminar participants at UC-Davis, the 2017 NBER DAE Egg Timer Session, All U.C.
Economic History Conference, Economic History Association Meetings, University of
Wisconsin, Virginia Tech, Australian National University, NHH, Paris School of Economics,
Yale University, Northwestern University, Pitt/CMU Seminar Series, the Virtual Economic
History Seminar, the 2020 NBER DAE Summer Institute, and the Online Economics of
Migration seminar series. We appreciate comments from Leah Boustan, William J. Collins,
Christian Dippel, Naomi Lamoreaux, Marianne Page, and Giovanni Peri. Brian Lee, Morgan Foy,
Anlu Xing, Joyce Kim and Nick Shankar provided excellent research assistance. We also thank
many students at UC Davis and Stanford who helped digitize censuses. Funding from the
Stanford Institute of Policy and Economic Research is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marcella Alsan, Katherine Eriksson, and Gregory Niemesh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding the Success of the Know-Nothing Party
Marcella Alsan, Katherine Eriksson, and Gregory Niemesh
NBER Working Paper No. 28078
November 2020
JEL No. J01,J1,J15,J71,N12,N32

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the contribution of economic conditions to the success of the first avowedly nativist
political party in the United States. The Know-Nothing Party gained control of a number of state
governments in the 1854-1856 elections running on a staunchly anti-Catholic and anti-Irish
platform. Our analysis focuses on the case of Massachusetts, which had experienced a wave of
Irish Famine immigration and was at the forefront of industrialization in the United States. Voters
in towns with more exposure to Irish labor market crowdout and deskilling in manufacturing
were more likely to vote for Know-Nothing candidates in state elections. These two forces played
a decisive role in 1855, but not the other years of the Know Nothings' success. We find evidence
of reduced wealth accumulation for native workers most exposed to labor market crowdout and
deskilling, though this was tempered by occupational upgrading.


Marcella Alsan                                   Gregory Niemesh
Kennedy School of Government                     Department of Economics
Harvard University                               Miami University
79 John F. Kennedy St.                           800 East High Street
Rubenstein Bldg R403                             Oxford, OH 45056
Cambridge, MA 02138                              and NBER
and NBER                                         niemesgt@miamioh.edu
marcella_alsan@hks.harvard.edu

Katherine Eriksson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
kaeriksson@ucdavis.edu
I   Introduction
Many countries around the world, including the United States and in Europe, have expe-
rienced an upswing in support for nationalist and xenophobic parties over the past two
decades. These patterns have historical antecedents which help shed light on their for-
mation, evolution, and longevity. Pursuant to this aim, we study the Know-Nothings also
known as the American Party, the first nativist party to achieve electoral success in the
United States. In the mid-1800s, the party gained control of the governorships of five states
and several mayorships in the Northeast. The Know-Nothings' success came on the heels
of the influx of millions of low-skilled Irish Catholic famine refugees and during a period
of rapid industrialization and urbanization. Scholars have debated the key factors un-
derlying their ascendancy: Fogel (1989) and Mulkern (1990) emphasize distinct economic
factors whereas other scholars argue that widespread anti-Catholicism and xenophobia
were more central (Foner 1970; Anbinder 1992). We bring new data and modern methods
to deepen the understanding of the causes for the Know-Nothings' phenomenal success.
    The Know-Nothings enjoyed their most striking victory in the Commonwealth of Mas-
sachusetts, the focus of our analysis. In 1854, the Know-Nothing party secured all but three
seats in the Massachusetts legislature and won the governorship with over 60% of the
popular vote. More generally, Know-Nothing popularity was positively correlated with
manufacturing employment, immigration and urbanization (Figure 1).1 Massachusetts
was the vanguard of industrialization during this period and received a disproportionate
share of the immigrants from Ireland.
    We investigate the effects of immigrant labor market competition and deskilling in
manufacturing on the Know-Nothing vote share. On the labor supply side, a shock came
in the form of mass migration of Irish. An estimated one million Irish fled their home-
land during the Potato Famine of 1846 (see Figure 2). Over the period 1841 to 1851, Boston
absorbed over 100,000 Irish immigrants, and by 1855 the Irish comprised one-quarter of
the city's overall population and 85% of its foreign-born population (Handlin 1959). Irish
immigrants competed with low-skill native-born workers mainly as laborers, as factory
operatives, and in fishing (Ferrie 1997). On the labor demand side, the shock came from
deskilling in manufacturing. As early as the mid-1820s, manufacturing had grown to be
the largest sector of the Massachusetts economy. By the 1850s, the movement to factory
production led to the hollowing out of the skill distribution in manufacturing as skilled-
mechanics and artisans were replaced with less skilled factory operatives (Field 1980; At-
    1
    This analysis focuses on Northern and border states in which the Know-Nothing Party fielded a candi-
date. Anbinder (1992) argues that the party platform was dramatically different between these states and
the South.
ack et al. 2005; Katz & Margo 2013). Although this process occurred in many Northern
states at the time, the Commonwealth was at the leading edge (Temin 1999).
    Our primary outcome is town-level gubernatorial vote counts for the Know-Nothing
candidate digitized from the The Massachusetts Register yearly from 1854 to 1857. The
Know-Nothings were widely known as the nativist party, and placed anti-immigrant, anti-
Catholic grievances and policies at the center of the party's identity. Thus, votes for the
Know-Nothing Party may be viewed as a proxy for nativist sentiment. Following Autor
et al. (2020), we produce cross-sectional measures of exposure to labor market shocks and
test which, if any, were of political consequence. To construct measures of exposure to im-
migrant labor market competition and deskilling in manufacturing, we digitize the 1845
and 1855 Census of Manufacturers from Massachusetts in their entirety and digitize ap-
proximately 300,000 individual hand-written occupations from the 1855 Population Cen-
sus of Massachusetts. We also use the 100% population census from IPUMS for the state
of Massachusetts for the years 1840 and 1850 (Ruggles et al. 2018).
    Our measure of exposure to deskilling is constructed by weighting the state-level shift
in average establishment size between 1845 and 1855 with the town-specific specialization
in a given industry in 1845. A negative wage-establishment-size gradient has been docu-
mented in the 19th and 20th centuries, by Atack et al. (2004) and Goldin & Katz (1998),
respectively.2 The exposure of native workers to immigrant labor market competition is
constructed similarly in that state-level shifts are weighted by local shares and summed.
The state-level 1850 to 1855 occupation-specific shift in Irish-born employment relative to
initial employment in that occupation is multiplied by the initial 1850 town-specific native-
born occupational shares.3
    Our identifying assumption is that, conditional on other variables that proxy for com-
peting explanations, these indices capture the causal effect of crowdout and deskilling
on political outcomes. We include proxies for cultural assimilation and control for fiscal
burden, urbanization, pre-famine political and economic structure, the size of the immi-
grant population shock, and include county fixed-effects. For both exposure measures,
the identification concern remains that local shares may be endogenous, even conditional
on the broad set of controls included. We follow the procedures developed in Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al. (2020) to describe the identifying variation and assess potential threats to
identification. One advantage of our context is that the Know-Nothings targeted their at-
tacks most ardently on the Irish, above all other immigrant groups. Irish immigrants were
   Atack et al. (2004, 174) note this correlation is "broadly consistent with the deskilling hypothesis."
   2
   3
   Given data constraints during this early period, we use the earliest high quality data to construct the
exposure measures.



                                                    2
generally lower-skilled than the German "forty-eighters", the British, or even pre-Famine
Irish immigrants (Ferrie 1997; Dippel & Heblich 2019; Collins & Zimran 2019). Two key
features of antebellum Irish immigration make it unique: its massive numbers and over-
whelmingly low-skilled workforce. German and British immigrants in Massachusetts,
with their much smaller numbers and diverse skill mix, did not pose the same threat to the
native workers as the Irish immigrants did. We test whether local exposure to occupation
shifts in these groups elicit the same behavioral response from voters as shifts from Irish
workers.4 We also examine whether our exposure variables predict electoral outcomes
from the decade prior and assess robustness to the inclusion of lagged industry shares.
    Separate identification of the crowdout and deskilling effects is more challenging if
low-skill migrants spur industrialization (Rosenbloom 2002). Indeed, Sequeira et al. (2020)
document how immigration during the Age of Mass Migration (1860-1920) increased the
number of manufacturing establishments, and, by 1930, increased output per capita. To
address the question of endogenous industrialization, we test but fail to find evidence that
changes in average establishment size or value per capita are predicted by changes in Irish
immigration.5
    We find that direct labor market competition from low-skill Irish immigration had a
positive and significant effect on voter support for the Know-Nothing party: a one stan-
dard deviation increase in crowdout is associated with about a 3.5 percentage point in-
crease in the Know-Nothing vote share in 1854. Deskilling associated with industrial-
ization also played a prominent role, with a one standard deviation increase associated
with approximately a 1.4 percentage point increase in Know-Nothing vote share. Taken
together, labor market competition and deskilling explain approximately 15% of the mean
Know-Nothing vote share in 1854.
    These magnitudes are modest, but the effects are decisive in the 1855 election cycle
and consistent with Margalit (2019) who distinguishes between outcome and explanatory
significance of economic factors in the rise of populism throughout history. Margalit notes
that economic factors tend to be decisive for the outcome of electoral success for populist
leaders but are dwarfed in explanatory significance by non-economic factors (e.g. culture).
Of course, highly persistent and/or near ubiquitous cultural factors can be challenging to
identify. In our context, an Irish assimilation index does not predict vote shares; however,
   4
      For example, in the 1855 Massachusetts Census almost 60% of the Irish were laborers compared to only
20% of Germans. Germans were more likely to be employed as mechanics (40%) than the Irish (20%). More-
over, the size of the shifts from German and British immigrants were small relative to the large shifts from
Irish immigration. The majority of occupational shifts for these two immigrant groups were less than a
quarter the size of the Irish shifts (Author's calculations).
    5
      The discordant results are likely due to different contexts and time periods of analysis, discussed further
below in Section V.C.


                                                       3
the role of non-economic factors is hinted at by the fact that deskilling and crowdout does
not predict Know-Nothing vote shares in stronghold locations.6 Indeed, anti-Catholic and
xenophobic sentiment had percolated for decades prior to the 1850s, even leading to short
bursts of ethnic violence (Billington 1938).
    Our findings are robust to the inclusion of county fixed effects, controlling for Irish
immigration and proxies for Irish enfranchisement, urbanization, pre-famine voting pat-
terns as well as measures of fiscal burden and assimilation. In addition, we find much
weaker and statistically insignificant effects of British or German labor market crowdout.
We also fail to find evidence that Irish crowdout or deskilling positively predicted voting
behavior prior to the immigration wave from the Irish Potato Famine. The results are un-
affected by including controls of the pre-period economic structure, namely employment
shares by industry constructed from the 1840 Population census.7 Finally, we find nega-
tive impacts on wealth accumulation over the medium-term (between 1850 and 1860) for
native-born workers more exposed to crowdout and deskilling. As postulated by Haynes
(1897), however, these effects were partially offset by occupational upgrading.
    The Irish crowdout measure interacts with the share of Irish in a given location, sug-
gesting that labor-market competition is amplified by a greater number of Irish workers.
Deskilling (which captures movement into larger central establishments) interacts strongly
with the growth of cottage or "putting out" systems. As discussed by Hazard (1913) in her
detailed examination of the boot and shoe industries in New England, cottage industries
represented a step in the evolution from home to factory production. This interaction
captures a similar displacement effect on semi-skilled workers from moving production
to the "putting out" system, which was likely deskilling as it relied on increased division
of labor, and employed large numbers of women.
    Our study relates to several literatures. Scholarship by economists has tried to unpack
the factors contributing to the recent rise of populist, nationalist, and far-right political par-
ties.8 One line of research seeks to link trade shocks to electoral outcomes, in particular the
"China Shock". In the U.S., areas more exposed to import competition from China were
more likely to elect a conservative Republican in competitive house districts, more likely
to support Donald Trump for president in 2016, and had representatives who were more
likely to support protectionist legislation (Autor et al. 2020; Feigenbaum & Hall 2015).9
   6
     A possible interpretation of our findings is that these economic factors are set against a backdrop of
(somewhat universal) animus towards Irish Catholics by the primarily Protestant native-born population of
New England. We thank William J. Collins for this suggestion.
   7
     Note that we cannot construct our crowdout measure using these shares because they do not provide
ethnicity.
   8
     See Guriev & Papaioannou (2020) for a recent summary of this literature as well as Eichengreen (2018)
   9
     Voting behavior in Europe demonstrated similar patterns. See Colantone & Stanig (2018b), Colantone


                                                    4
Another line of research links technological progress and immigration to electoral out-
comes. For example, Frey et al. (2018) show that local exposure to automation in the form
of industrial robots leads to an increase in the voting share for Donald Trump in 2016, rel-
ative to Mitt Romney in 2012. Counterfactual exercises show that important swing states
would have instead voted for Hillary Clinton with modest decreases in automation.
    Findings on the electoral impact of immigration are more heterogeneous.10 In the U.S.
context, Tabellini (2020) uses a panel of 180 cities from 1910 to 1930 and variation from
World War I and the U.S. Immigration Quota Acts to estimate the impact of immigration
on political outcomes. The results indicate that although native workers benefited eco-
nomically from immigration, it led to a political backlash resulting in the election of more
conservative legislators and greater support for the Quota Acts. Goldin (1994) explored
the relationship between foreign-born share and support for quota restrictions, revealing
an inverted U-shape.
    Second, we relate to the literature on the effect of immigration on native labor mar-
ket outcomes and industrialization. We find negative impacts on wealth accumulation
for native-born males that faced more labor market competition from Irish immigrants,
which was partially offset by occupational upgrading. We find no evidence of a short-run
impact of immigration on the acceleration of industrialization. These conclusions differ
from recent contributions by Sequeira et al. (2020) and Tabellini (2020) likely due to differ-
ences in the context, size and nature of the shock and time horizon over which effects are
measured.11 Our results on native wealth accumulation accord with Goldin (1994) who
finds a negative effect of immigration on the manufacturing wage across U.S. cities during
the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
    The demise of the Whig party over compromises made on the extension of slavery to
new territories opened the door for the nativist Know-Nothings to gain power. In the end,
however, Know-Nothing success in Massachusetts was brief. Two years after their over-
whelming success in 1854 they lost control of the legislature, and by 1857 lost the gover-
norship. Their main rival for support, the anti-slavery Republicans, won the contest to
replace the Whigs as the second party in the North. By this time, deskilling and crowdout
had ceased to be predictive of electoral outcomes. The singular plank of nativism failed
& Stanig (2018a), Dippel et al. (2017), Barone & Kreuter (2019), Caselli et al. (2020), and Malgouyres (2017).
  10
     In Denmark, municipalities that received more refugees from 1986 to 1998 increased nativist voting in
small cities, but led to less nativist voting in the largest cities (Dustmann et al. 2018). Areas with higher
immigration were more likely to support the nativist, populist, or far-right candidate in Italy (Berlusconi:
Barone et al. (2016)), in Austria (Joerg Haider and the Freedom Party: Halla & Zweimueller (2017)), and in
France (Edo & Poutvaara (2017).
  11
     The U.S. economy of the 1850s was likely less able to absorb such a large influx (Fogel 1989) relative to
the later periods studied in Sequeira et al. (2020) and Tabellini (2020).



                                                      5
to reflect the electorate's increasing concerns regarding imminent civil war.12
    The rest of the article is structured as follows. First, we provide historical background
on the Irish immigration and the long history of anti-Catholic sentiment in the United
States. We then move to discussing industrialization and deskilling in antebellum Mas-
sachusetts and the success of the Know-Nothings. In Section III, we introduce the data we
use in the analysis and the construction of the indices. Section IV describes the empirical
framework. Section V reports the results and Section VI concludes.
II        Historical Background
In this section, we describe the Know-Nothing as a party and their platform. Next, we dis-
cuss key historical factors postulated to have contributed to the rise of the Know-Nothing
party, such as immigration, "papist" enfranchisement and industrialization.
II.A        Know-Nothing Origins, Principles and Platform
The Know-Nothing party grew from the union of oath-bound secret societies that merged
into the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner in 1852.13 Party structure centered around
lodges established in each town, with membership requirements including being a native-
born citizen, a Protestant, born of Protestant parents, and not married to a Roman Catholic.14
According to Desmond (1904, 52), the Know-Nothings were unique from other secret or-
ders such as the Free Masons in that they were dedicated to political advancement. The
oath used to induct members required them to "not vote or give your influence for any man
for any office in the gift of the people, unless he be an American-born citizen in favor of Amer-
icans ruling America, nor if he a Roman Catholic." Only native-born Protestants could be
supported for public office and political appointments (Massachusetts Constitution of the
State Council, 1854; Connecticut Constitution of the State Council, 1854).15
     12
      Our results are consistent with the narratives told by historians for the disappearance of the Know-
Nothings: first and foremost, that voters placed increasing priority on issues related to slavery (Foner 1970),
but also that Massachusetts Republicans absorbed pieces of the nativist agenda (Mulkern 1990), and perhaps
living standards improved for native-born New Englanders in the late 1850s (Fogel 1989).
   13
      Because lodge members were sworn to secrecy, they were instructed to say that they "knew nothing"
about the party if queried.
   14
      Strictness on native-born parentage varied across states. Connecticut required that a member's parents
also be native-born Protestants. Massachusetts initially required one set of grandparents to be native-born.
Indiana chapters did not even require the member to be native-born as these chapters recruited from a
population whose ancestry's only recently arrived in the U.S. (Massachusetts Register, 1853-1862)
   15
      What type of men joined the secret lodges of the Know-Nothing party? We replicate and extend the anal-
ysis of Anbinder (1992) who first linked Know-Nothing members listed in chapter books to their records in
the decennial U.S. census manuscripts. We digitized the names of members of the East Boston and Worces-
ter Membership lists, and hand-matched them to the 1850 census. Relative to the average 18-65 year old
man, members of the party are slightly older (36 versus 33 years old), slightly more likely to hold a pro-
fession rather than being a common laborer, and have about the same average occupational income (occ-
score). Over 10 percent of Know-Nothing members report positive real estate wealth, relative to 3.6 percent


                                                      6
    Less than two years after its formation, the party had branches in every state and
claimed over 1 million members (Gienapp 1985). Nationally, the Know-Nothings captured
nine gubernatorial seats, dozens of national legislative seats and mayorships in major cities
along the Eastern Seaboard. Nowhere did the party enjoy such unparalleled success as in
Massachusetts, as described by Mulkern (1990, 76):


      ...the American party had managed the greatest election upset in the history of the
      state. Every constitutional state officer, the entire congressional delegation, all forty
      state senators, and all but 3 of the 379 representatives bore the Know-Nothing stamp.
      Henry Gardner's 63% majority and his 81,500 vote total for governor were the largest
      ever. He carried every city and all but twenty of the state's more than three hundred
      towns.

    Once in power the Know-Nothings pursued a platform outlined in Gardner's inaugural
speech, including circumscribing foreign enfranchisement. The party pushed for a state
constitutional amendment for a literacy test for new voters, which was ultimately success-
ful, but was not able to push through an amendment that immigrants must wait 21 years
from entry before gaining suffrage. Other legislation targeting Catholics included convent
inspections, a ban on (Irish) militias, and the required reading of the King James Bible in
public schools. The Know-Nothings of Massachusetts also absorbed progressive elements
of the Whig and Democratic party ­ and under their leadership, funding for schools and
hospitals was increased, while anti-corruption reforms were enacted and taxes raised.16
    The Know-Nothings' emergence filled a power vacuum left by the Whig party after
it had been weakened considerably by the deaths of key leaders (Daniel Webster and
Henry Clay), the admission of California into the U.S., and subsequent compromises by
the Whigs on the expansion of slavery (Foner 1970). The timing has been linked to the
passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in May 1854, which allowed for the extension of slav-
ery into newly organized territories on the basis of a popular vote. The act effectively
repealed the Missouri Compromise that had limited slavery to south of latitude 36 30`
North since 1820. The passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act required the support of the
Southern Whigs, causing the large block of anti-slavery Northern Whigs to abandon the
party.
of male residents. The occupational distribution for Worcester is shown in Appendix Figure A.1 and can
be compared to the occupation distribution. Members of the Know-Nothing party were much more likely
to be mechanics than those in the general population, where mechanics includes carpenters, mechanics,
blacksmiths, wheelwrights, etc. We conclude from this preliminary comparison that Know-Nothing party
members were average working class men, not poor, but not the elite members of Boston society either.
   16
      Many of the campaign promises for labor reform went unfulfilled. These included a secret ballot for
laborers and 10-hour workdays.


                                                   7
    At the state-level, anti-corruption and pro-democracy reform efforts failed in a popular
vote to amend the Massachusetts Constitution in 1853 (Mulkern 1990). Fed up with elite
control of both the Whig and Democrat political machinery, Massachusetts voters were
attracted by the popular reform aspects of the Know-Nothings in 1854. Table 1 reports
state-wide vote shares by party for the annual gubernatorial elections, where the Know-
Nothings' overwhelming success and the Whig's demise can be seen in the 1854 totals.
II.B   Irish Immigration and Native Fears
The Know-Nothing party's success followed an increase in the numbers of immigrants
entering the state fleeing the Irish Potato Famine and the German revolutions. At the na-
tional level, immigration was 1.5 million in the decade prior to the Know-Nothing victory,
a vast increase over the approximately 100,000 for the twenty year period between 1790 to
1810, the 200,000 between 1820 and 1830, and nearly 800,000 in the 1830s (Gardner 1855).
    Irish immigration flows accounted for much of that surge, picking up in 1845, but slow-
ing down after 1855. In Massachusetts, immigrants moved to Boston, but also to manufac-
turing hubs and mill towns which stretched across the state ­ see Figure 3 panel (A). Over
40 percent of the working age male population of Boston was foreign-born by 1850, grow-
ing to 48 percent by 1860. The rapid demographic change stirred long held fears about
Catholics in the mostly Protestant native population of New England.17
    Anti-Catholicism: Anti-Catholic prejudice permeated the culture of the colonies well
before Famine-induced immigration, and was widespread throughout New England and
nationally (Billington 1938).18 Early Americans feared that Catholics lacked experience
with democratic institutions of government, which the colonists had fought for, and the
early Americans had sustained. Many in New England believed immigration could lead to
the U.S. becoming a Papal state, despite the fact that Roman Catholic power ­ as proxied by
Church property value ­ was not unusually high in the region, as evidenced by its location
on the distribution of valuations across states.19 Much of the hatred stemmed from the
anti-national nature of the Catholic church combined with the fear that Catholicism was
a force to overthrow Protestant governments (Billington 1938).
    Events in the early 1850s appeared to increase anti-Catholic sentiment, though the
United States had earlier experienced periodic outbursts of violence aimed at Catholics
(Anbinder 1992). School controversies developed in 1852 when a council of American
  17
      The port of Boston recorded 5,560 immigrants in 1840 jumping to nearly 30,000 by 1849 (Shattuck (1845)
quoted in Meckel (1985, 400).
   18
      As evidence of the widespread nature of religious prejudice, the most widely read contemporary book
was an anti-Catholic screed "The Awful Disclosures of Maria Monk," which described alleged horrific abuses
of nuns carried out by priests.
   19
      See Appendix Figure A.2 Panel (B)


                                                     8
Catholic Bishops called for Catholics to be educated in state funded parochial schools, a
use of public funds to which Protestants dissented. The sects also clashed on the use of
the King James Bible in the classroom. Catholics refused to let their children read from
this Bible in school, and Protestants saw a Papal conspiracy to "...overthrow and demolish
our Common schools."20
    Fear of the Irish Voter: Deep-seated concerns about the inability of the Catholic to
embrace separation of Church and state were stoked by the flood of Irish immigrants.
Allowing the Irish to vote could jeopardize U.S. sovereignty, as highlighted in Gardner's
inauguration speech: "Believing these dangers and probabilities real, it is a solemn duty to restrict
alien franchise, that while entire toleration is granted to others to worship their Maker according
to the dictates of their own judgment, we preserve the same right to us and ours untrammeled and
unendangered." (Gardner 1855)
    Two events reinforced Protestants' worries about the political leanings of potential Irish
voters. First, there was a concern among abolitionists that the Irish would favor the Fugi-
tive Slave Law and the Kansas-Nebraska Act (McPherson 1988, 137).21 Second, a proposed
new state constitution in 1853 of the Democratic, Free-Soil, and "Locofoco" coalition aimed
to reform the state political system and overhaul representation by giving more represen-
tation to rural areas where Democrats held a stronghold. Nativist language was used in the
defense of this reapportionment.22 When the constitution failed to pass, many contempo-
raries of the time blamed the Irish vote (O'Connor 1983). Indeed, the Catholic newspaper,
The Pilot delighted in the defeat of the Constitution: "The new Constitution rejected! Wa-
terloo defeat of the Coalition!" (O'Connor 1983). More recent analyses have suggested
that turnout among Whig strongholds was a more decisive factor (Sweeney 1976); with
Irish shares not correlating strongly with the vote percent (see Figure 3 panel (B)). How-
ever, given the perception of contemporaries that the Irish vote helped defeat the Consti-
tution, we use "nay" votes as measure of organized Irish electoral power in our empirical
exercise.
    Fear of the Irish Pauper: Over much of the antebellum period, local governments were
responsible for providing poor relief, and the increase in pauperism placed tremendous
pressure on local budgets (Kiesling & Margo 1997). Amplifying these concerns, was the
fact that a large and growing share of relief spending went to provide for indigent Irish
  20
      Pratt (1967) quoted in Anbinder (1992, 25)
  21
      These fears were heightened after an Irish militia in Massachusetts, the Columbian Artillery, prevented
the Sons of Liberty from freeing an imprisoned fugitive person who had been enslaved in Virginia. See
www.masshist.org/object-of-the-month/march-2017.
   22
      From the Free-soiler newspaper, Commonwealth, quoted by Sweeney (1976, 126) "what with vast accom-
modation of capital on one hand and the influx of a poor, ignorant foreign population on the other they
[cities] no longer represent the Historical Massachusetts."


                                                     9
immigrants. A report to the legislature captured the scale of the problem. Over 10,000
people without legal residence in the state applied for poor relief in 1851, with 8,527 being
foreign-born or children of the foreign-born. That year Massachusetts (towns and state
inclusive) spent $212,000 on paupers without legal residence (Report of the Joint Commit-
tee to the Senate, April 29, 1852, Boston Advertiser, May 8, 1852).23 Figure A.3 Panel (A)
from the 1850 census indeed demonstrates that foreign-born paupers dominated those
born in the U.S., and Massachusetts was second only to New York in the total annual cost
to support the pauper population.
     Town coffers were strained by immigrant arrivals, and the system of reimbursement
led to conflict and fraud. The State's response to the "futile struggle between the towns and the
Commonwealth over the support of unsettled paupers was the opening in 1855 of three large (but not
large enough) almshouses," (Meltsner 2012, 70). The constant friction between towns and the
state about the adjustments of the per capita reimbursements eased after the almshouses
opened, though not before cementing the stereotype of the Irish as beggars, paupers and
criminals.
     Fear of the Irish Laborer: Just as concerning was the threat the Irish influx might
pose to native workers, which was frequently cited by Know-Nothing newspapers: "[T]he
enormous influx of foreigners will in the end prove ruinous to American workingmen by reducing
the wages of labor to a standard that will drive them from the farm and workshops altogether"
from the Sun (1854) quoted in Ferrie (1999, 163). The party platform listed reducing the
immigrant threat to native workers as a primary political goal; a view espoused by their
most prominent member in Massachusetts; as stated by Henry Gardner in his acceptance
speech for Governor in 1855: "The present European immigration is deeply prejudicial to the
fair remuneration of American labor. The mechanic, the artisan, the agriculturist, daily suffer from
its influence...," (Gardner 1855).
     Despite contemporaries concern for negative wage effects from immigration, economic
historians debated their importance. As described by Haynes (1897) "The fear of the immi-
grant as a wage earner...the rank and file of the laboring class proved themselves devoted believers in
the wage fund theory." Haynes' view was that the antebellum economy could absorb the mi-
  23
     Legislative efforts aimed to stem the tide of Irish paupers backfired. An 1848 law created a Super-
intendent of Alien Passengers to inspect all ships carrying immigrants before allowing them to land in a
Massachusetts port. Passengers deemed unlikely to become paupers were charged $2 a head from the ship-
owner. For alien passengers thought likely to become a burden to any city or town at any time in the future,
the Superintendent required a bond from the ship-owner of $1,000 (Haynes 1897, 76). The per head charge
and size of the bond was onerous compared to those legislated in New York, leading to the practice of land-
ing passengers in New York who then completed the remainder of the journey to Massachusetts by rail. In
this case, New York received the benefit of the bond and fees without any of the expenditure risk (Haynes
1897).



                                                    10
grants, while opening up better opportunities for native workers as supervisors. Haynes
(1897, 75) defended his position quoting Edward Everett Hale from Letters on Irish Immigra-
tion (1852) who states: "They (the Irish) do the manual labor. It does not follow that natives who
must otherwise have performed it, do nothing or starve. They are simply pushed up into foremen of
factories, superintendents of farms, railroad agents, machinists, inventors, etc."24
    A century later, the question of whether direct competition for jobs between Irish and
native-born workers contributed to the wave of support for the Know-Nothing party re-
mained unsettled. Fogel (1992, 17) writes that "[T]he timing of immigration and the distribu-
tion of immigrants over space are very important for understanding the economic distress suffered
by native northern labor during the last two decades of the antebellum era". Fogel argued (1992,
6): "It is unlikely that the nativist political movement would have come close to the northern suc-
cesses it obtained in 1853-1855 without the pressures on labor markets generated by the massive im-
migration of 1848-1854....". The prominence of labor market explanations was not without
detraction, however. Mulkern (1990) notes that other states experienced mass immigration
yet did not turn with such enthusiasm to Know-Nothingism.25 The Irish immigrants into
Massachusetts were generally lower-skilled than the German "forty-eighters", the British,
or pre-Famine Irish immigrants (Ferrie 1997; see also Dippel & Heblich 2019 and Collins
& Zimran 2019). Since the Irish immigrants were generally low-skilled, direct job com-
petition and economic distress would have predicted to be worse for this group of native
workers. Yet, precisely the groups Gardner references, artisans, mechanics and agricul-
turalists, who were considered semi- to high-skill at the time, would have been affected
by changes to the Massachusetts economy that began decades earlier.26 Instead, he points
to "explosive urban and industrial growth" which led to "wrenching social and economic
dislocations" - i.e. industrialization and deskilling.
II.C    Industrialization and Deskilling in Antebellum Massachusetts
As early as the mid-1820s, manufacturing had grown to be the largest sector of the Mas-
sachusetts economy. Industrial statistics taken in 1845 and 1855 showed the value of
manufacturing output increased from $83 million to $215 million 10 years later (nominal
  24
      Haynes also cites lectures by Carroll D. Wright at Johns Hopkins as corroborating his stance.
  25
      Mulkern (1990, 5) writes: "Explosive urban and industrial growth had thrust the Commonwealth into the fore-
front of the industrializing states in the antebellum period, creating, in the process, wrenching social and economic
dislocations. The failure of the established parties to mount a significant response to the myriad issues and problems
spawned in the matrix of modernization weakened partisan attachments and set the rank and file of the established
parties on a quest for a political vehicle that would make a difference in their lives. In 1854, such a vehicle materialized
in the form of an anti-party, anti-politician populist movement that promised to cleanse the statehouse of corruption
and self-serving political careerists and turn the government over to the people..."
   26
      According to our data, the occupations listed by Gardner experienced only slight increases in the share
Irish (see Figure A.1).



                                                            11
dollars). The 1850 U.S. Manufacturing Census showed Massachusetts as the undisputed
leader of textile and boot and shoe manufacturing, the first and third largest industries in
the country. At the same time, the share of labor force in agriculture in the Commonwealth
fell from 0.57 in 1820 to 0.15 by 1850 with 65 percent of the decline occurring between
1840 and 1850 (Field 1978, 153). Field (1978; 1980) attributes the rapid sectoral shift to
competition from Midwestern agricultural products with increased East-West trade from
improved transportation networks (see also Atack et al. (2010)). Although some of this
labor was absorbed via an exodus to the frontier, credit and information constraints cou-
pled with opportunities in cities slowed adjustment along this margin and aided urban-
ization.27
    Field, in a series of papers, describes the sectoral shift from agriculture to industry in
antebellum Massachusetts, finding that the process overall was deskilling.28 Production
shifted to factories and increased the demand for less skilled labor (Atack et al. 2005).
The factory and putting out systems primarily displaced semi-skilled (i.e. artisan) labor
(Katz & Margo 2013).29 Other well-documented factors that contributed to the growth
in establishment size in manufacturing, included the development of financial markets
(Rousseau & Sylla 2005), and legal changes in business organization (Lamoreaux 2006;
Hilt 2008). Although this process was occurring in many Northern states at the time (see
Temin (1999)), the Commonwealth was at the leading edge.
    The rise of manufacturing meant population growth in cities. By 1840, Massachusetts
was the most densely populated state in the nation at 127 inhabitants per square mile.30
The proportion of the population living in towns of 2,500 residents or more increased
from 11 percent in 1790 to 23 percent in 1820, to 50 percent in 1850 (see Appendix Figure
A.4). With the exception of Rhode Island, Massachusetts was the most urbanized state,
and faced the most rapid increase in urbanization.31
  27
      According to Field (1978), such constraints explain why the overall "land abundant" U.S. industrialized
at all.
   28
      Field (1980, 165) writes: "[A] very large share of manufacturing employment in the period of early industrial-
ization in Massachusetts was in industries which, because of the nature of the materials being processed, were then,
and are today, relatively unskilled industries. Second, a relatively small share ­ perhaps 5 percent of the manufacturing
labor force, ...was employed in the relatively high-skill machine-building industry."
   29
      Field (1978) argues that Massachusetts farming involved expertise and thus any movement out of the
agriculture sector furthered overall deskilling.
   30
      See Table XII in DeBow (1854, 40).
   31
       Indeed, although by 1850 Massachusetts had the largest percent Irish, it was not very different from
New York or Rhode Island in that regard (they were all around 12% - see Figure A.2 Panel (A)). Mulkern
(1990) points out these other states did not overwhelmingly elect nativist leaders.




                                                          12
II.D   Conceptual Framework: Crowdout, Deskilling and Native-born Living Standards
Our framework for understanding this time period is a model in which deskilling and
immigration create differential shocks to high-skill and low-skill labor markets, thereby
affecting their equilibrium wages (see Figure 4). Deskilling would have reduced demand
for semi-skilled workers thus depressing their wages. This would have been exacerbated
by competition from immigration, though Irish were generally involved in low-skill jobs.
On the other hand, deskilling was complementary to low-skill workers at the time, push-
ing out the demand for factory workers. Although this alone might have increased equi-
librium low-skill wages, an increase in supply of Irish workers could still lead to a lower
overall equilibrium wage.
    We lack high-quality, high-frequency wage data during this time period which would
allow us to fully interrogate these hypotheses. In general, the wage data for this time
period has been criticized for not accurately capturing the living standards of ordinary
workingmen (Fogel 1992, 482-84). One notable exception is the series created by Margo
& Villaflor (1987) using wages paid to civilian workers by the U.S. Army. Based on these
data, wages of artisans and laborers fell by 18% and 10%, in the Northeast over the 1848
to 1855 period. Fogel remarks these are likely underestimates as they are not adjusted
for unemployment. Moreover this figure neglects other margins of adjustment ­ such as
migration and occupational upgrading by the native-born. Apart from this series, the
Census of Social Statistics, reported at the town level, did include average wages for four
occupations: farm laborers, day laborers, carpenters, and domestic servants. We digitized
these data and explored their potential use. However, this source of wage information
displays significant heaping both across towns and over time, and does not separate wages
to immigrants or the native-born. Appendix Figure A.5 plots the distribution of wages in
1850 and 1860 and demonstrates these issues.
    Ferrie (1999) examines the specific question of whether immigration depressed native
incomes in the antebellum period.32 Using a sample of approximately 3,000 adult native-
born men linked across the 1850 and 1860 decennial censuses, Ferrie finds a positive effect
of foreign-born on occupational upgrading of native-born low-skill workers but a negative
effect for skilled workers. We conduct a similar exercise looking at the effect of labor mar-
ket crowdout and deskilling on wealth accumulation for native-born men between 1850
and 1860 in Section V.C.
  32
   Goldin (1994) and Hatton & Williamson (1998) find that mass immigration at the turn of the 20th century
had a negative effect on native wages.




                                                   13
III     Data and Measurement
III.A    Election Returns Data
Our primary outcome is town-level gubernatorial race vote counts for the Know-Nothing
candidate published in the The Massachusetts Register (1853-1862). We digitized votes using
hand-double-entry, and verified the data with original hand-written returns for the 1854
and 1857 elections held at the Massachusetts State Archives. Massachusetts provides the
finest geographic detail for election returns during the period based on using the town
as the primary political unit (see Figure A.6). Summary statistics for election returns are
reported in Appendix Table A.1.
    Massachusetts towns were meaningful political and economic units with local elec-
tions conducted at this level. Know-Nothing vote share is calculated as the number of
votes for the Know-Nothing candidate divided by the total votes in the town. The benefit
of election data is that it measures actual behavior as opposed to self-reported percep-
tions, since the latter can be contaminated with demand bias.33 One drawback of using
vote data as a proxy for anti-immigrant sentiment is that voters select a candidate based
on a bundle of attributes such as valence and policy positions. However, the core of the
platform for the Know-Nothing party was anti-immigrant. As another measure of nativist
policy and sentiment, we digitize town-level state legislature representatives' votes for the
1857 literacy amendment which aimed to disenfranchise immigrant voters.
III.B    Exposure to Immigrant Labor Market Competition:
Town-level exposure to Irish labor market competition is measured as the change in the
number of Irish-born workers in each occupational group j between 1850 and 1855 nor-
malized by total employment in occupational group j in 1850. This shift is then weighted
by the share of native-born workers in town i in occupational group j :34

                                           L1850 ,i
                                            N ative,j         (L1855 ,M ass
                                                                Irish,j     - L1850 ,M ass
                                                                               Irish,j     )
(1)                   crowdouti =                         ·                                    ,
                                       j
                                           L1850 ,i
                                            T otN ative               L1850 ,M ass
                                                                       T otal,j


and the time step is between the 1850 Federal Census and the 1855 Massachusetts Census.
   Variation in crowdouti across local labor markets comes from variation in the local
occupation-structure of employment during the initial period, prior to the Irish immigra-
  33
      Opinion polls provide another measure of the extent of nativist views and are commonly used in the
modern literature (Hainmueller & Hopkins 2014; Inglehart & Norris 2016)
   34
      We follow the construction of the exposure index from Autor et al. (2013), and used in Autor et al. (2020)
to link import competition from China to electoral outcomes. Acemoglu & Restrepo (2020) and Collins &
Niemesh (2019) use a similar construction of local exposure to a labor market shock, industrial robots in
manufacturing and labor unions, respectively. See also Card & Peri (2016) for the link to theory.


                                                          14
tion. Towns where native employment was concentrated in occupations with large shifts
were more exposed to Irish labor market crowdout.
    Occupation groups are defined as broad categories, comparable across datasets: agri-
culturalists, boot and shoe makers, factory operatives, laborers, manufacturers, mariners,
low-skill mechanics, high-skill mechanics, merchants, professionals, and miscellaneous.
The eleven broad categories correspond to those used in the published aggregate statis-
tics of the 1855 Massachusetts census. We use these to verify that our digitization of the
microdata aligns closely with the published aggregates.35 We restrict the sample to men
between the ages of 15 and 65. Female employment during this period was heavily con-
centrated in the cottage industries (the boot and shoe industry as well as straw hat making)
as well as in textile mills. We include cottage employment (the sum of employment in boot
and shoe and hat making) as a control variable.36
    State-level shifts in Irish workers for each occupation group are constructed from a
combination of the 1850 complete count census provided by IPUMS, and the 1855 Mas-
sachusetts Population Census microdata provided by FamilySearch.org (Ruggles et al.
2018; FamilySearch 2016). The latter required digitizing the 1855 Massachusetts micro-
data, hand-entering occupations for 300,000 working age men.37
    Figure 5 plots the share of state-level native employment in each occupation in 1850 and
the occupation-specific Irish employment shift, the first and second terms of Equation 1,
respectively. Although we use town-level shares in our empirical exercise, the figure pro-
vides a visualization of the variation in the shift and a summary of the native occupational
distribution. The largest shifts occurred in factory operatives, boot and shoe makers, and
laborers. Native-born employment, on the other hand, was concentrated in farming, me-
chanics of all type, boot and shoe making, and laborers.38
  35
      Card (2001) and Friedberg (2001) used occupations as a measure of skill when estimating the impact of
immigration in the modern United States.
   36
      Employment was only asked of men ages 15 and older in the 1850 census, not for women. Moreover,
women could not vote in state and presidential elections in Massachusetts at this time. The voting data does
not include the political views of women, except to the extent that men took them, or the economic effects
of immigration on women's labor market outcomes, into account.
   37
      First, occupation strings were coded into the 1880 specific IPUMS occupation codes (OCC). The 1850
IPUMS complete count census microdata contains OCC codes. For both the 1850 and 1855 data, we then
constructed the state-level foreign-born (or Irish) proportion in each of the 11 broad occupation categories.
   38
      The mechanics category includes carpenters, blacksmiths, and all jobs ending in "maker" such as paper-
maker, etc., except for boot and shoe makers, which we place in its own category. Boot and shoe making was
the second largest manufacturing industry in the state by output value after textiles. Production occurred
primarily through the putting-out system of home production, not in factories.




                                                     15
III.C   Exposure to Deskilling
Exposure to deskilling in manufacturing follows the general setup of Equation 1 ­ industry-
specific changes in average establishment size are interacted with lagged local industry
employment shares:

                                        L1845
                                         k
                                              ,i
                                                     L1855
                                                      k
                                                           ,M ass
                                                                    L1845
                                                                     k
                                                                          ,M ass
(2)                 deskillingi =             ,i ·                -                ,
                                    k
                                        L1840
                                         T ot
                                                      1855,M ass
                                                     Nk              1845,M ass
                                                                    Nk

where i denotes town, k denotes industry, L denotes employment and N represents the
number of establishments. The initial industry shares by town are constructed from town-
level reports in the 1845 Massachusetts Manufacturing Census, which were hand-entered
(Palfrey 1846). Note that the denominator for the share of employed is taken from the 1840
census. This is so we could normalize by all employment in a town, not just manufacturing
employment as reported in the 1845 Manufacturing Census.
    We focus on average establishment size since it is often viewed as a signpost of in-
dustrialization and deskilling. New England underwent a transition from the small ar-
tisanal shop to factories from 1820 to 1860. Sokoloff (1984) documents a sharp increase
in establishment size over this period, in both mechanized and non-mechanized indus-
tries. High-skilled artisans were replaced by capital and machines, but also by moving
to a minute division of labor in non-mechanized factories. Goldin & Sokoloff (1984) show
that employment of women and children, two groups that arguably represent a less skilled
workforce, increased with establishment size. Finally, Atack et al. (2004) demonstrate that
the average wage declines with establishment size consistent with deskilling.
    To construct this measure, we digitized town-level aggregate reports from the 1837,
1845, and 1855 Massachusetts censuses of manufacturing (Bigelow 1838; Palfrey 1846; De-
Witt 1856). The average establishment size for the years 1837, 1845 and 1855 is shown in
Figure 6, increasing from 20 in 1837 to 35 in 1855. Our preferred specification uses the
shares available from 1845, and shifts from 1845 to 1855, as this specification provides the
most coverage of industries.39
III.D   Control Variables
We collect a variety of town-level characteristics from various sources. The Data Appendix
provides details on the construction and sources of all control variables. Summary statis-
tics are reported in Appendix Table A.3.
    To distinguish our Irish labor crowdout measure from Irish immigration, we include
  39
    Industry coverage in the 1837 manufacturing census is less complete than in 1845. We provide results
using the 1837 measure in Appendix Table A.2.


                                                     16
the share of town population in 1855 that was born in Ireland (see Figure 3 Panel (A)).
This variable also partially captures Irish voting patterns, though in robustness checks we
include a better measure: the 1853 vote for a new Massachusetts Constitution. As noted
above, the defeat of the proposed Constitution was widely blamed on the Irish voter (see
Chapter 2 of Mulkern (1990)). A map of the nay vote is shown in Figure 3 Panel (B).
    We measure the fiscal burden posed by Irish immigration by digitizing the number and
nativity of paupers by town from the 1850 Census of Social Statistics schedules. Included
in our control set is an indicator for any foreign pauper in the town as the distribution is
highly skewed. However, normalizing foreign paupers by ratable polls (as a measure of
population of taxable adults/voting population) or total pauper population does not alter
our main results.
    To capture urbanization more broadly, we include an urban indicator equal to one for
towns with populations greater than 2,500 in 1855. In robustness checks we include log
population in 1855. We also include the town-level number of manufacturing establish-
ments per capita in 1855, the 1840 share of the population that is involved in manufactur-
ing and the number of individuals in cottage employment in 1837. The latter is defined as
those in industries dominated by women but are not organized into establishments (i.e.
the putting out system).40
    To proxy for assimilation, we construct measures of the fraction of Irish-born immi-
grants granting their U.S. born children traditionally Irish names, using methods described
in Abramitzky et al. (2019). Examples of names identified as being "Irish" include Brigit
and Pat, whereas Willie and Georgeanna are categorized as non-Irish. The Data Appendix
B describes the full construction of this index.
    The local shares used to construct the exposure indices are potentially endogenous, so
we include a set of earlier industry sector shares as controls: manufacturing, commerce,
agriculture, mining, river navigation, ocean navigation and professional staff/engineering
using the IPUMS 1840 Population Census schedule for Massachusetts (Ruggles et al. 2018).
    To provide further confidence in our preferred interpretation of the findings, we digi-
tize additional election returns from ten years prior to the rise of the Know-Nothing party
and before increase in immigration from the Irish famine. In robustness checks, we use
the earlier vote shares for the Whig gubernatorial candidate in 1844 as a control for pre-
existing variation in voting patterns. There is some narrative evidence that the Whigs
  40
    Cottage industries include: boots and shoes (71% of all cottage employment); straw bonnets and hats
(27%); snuff, tobacco, and cigars (< 1%); whips; port-monnaies, pocket-books, etc. (< 1%); clothing (< 1%);
bookbinding (< 1%). The boot and shoe, and straw bonnet and hat industries make up 45 percent of total
manufacturing employment in the state. See the Data Appendix for more details on the construction of the
cottage industry exposure variable.



                                                    17
were the home of anti-Catholic nativism in the early 1840s (Mulkern 1990). This control
potentially captures any pre-existing "cultural" nativist voting behavior.
IV    Empirical Framework
To test the contribution of labor market crowdout and deskilling to the Know-Nothing
electoral success in Massachusetts, we estimate:

(3)     KnowN othingSharei =  +  crowdouti +  deskillingi + Xi  + county + i

where X includes the elements described above, and county is a set of county indicators.
We first estimate the effect of crowdout and deskilling on Know-Nothing vote share in
1854, their first election on the ballot and in which they won a resounding victory (Figure
A.6 Panel (A)), before turning to subsequent gubernatorial races.
    Identification of  and  , the coefficients of interest, comes from within-county varia-
tion in the exposure to direct Irish labor market competition and deskilling, conditional
on Xi . Regressions are weighted by eligible voters by town from the registration reports
(i.e. ratable polls). Because the governor was elected by state-wide popular vote, weight-
ing provides a more natural estimate of the treatment effect. Additionally, since some of
the towns are small, weighting helps reduce noise in our estimates. We reduce concerns
of one major outlier driving the results by dropping Boston from the main analysis. We
provide results without weighting and with including Boston in robustness checks (Table
3). Note both the deskilling and crowdout measures are standardized to have mean zero
and a standard deviation of one.
    Identification of  and  as the causal effect of labor market crowdout and deskilling
rely on our construction of indices using time-lagged shares and state-level shifts and the
conditional independence assumption. In particular, our empirical strategy is an expo-
sure design, where the exogenous initial shares capture the differential exposure to the
common shock. In papers that seek to identify the effects of immigration on economic
outcomes using shift-share instruments, the identification concern is that historical immi-
gration patterns are endogenous to growth. In our context, we use nativist occupation
shares, and our main outcome is a political one. We follow the guidance of Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al. (2020) and include lagged industry sector shares as a control in robustness
checks below. We also demonstrate that neither exposure index has positive explanatory
power for historical voting patterns prior to the Irish famine shock.
    Although lagged values of indices reduce simultaneity bias, they engender the concern
that native workers might move between the time of our shocks and the Know-Nothing
vote. In the best case scenario, this would only lead to measurement error in our exposure

                                            18
estimates. However, the moves may be systematic; indeed they may be caused by crowdout
or deskilling. However, we find economically small effects of either factor on migration
rates of native-born workers (see Table 6).
V        Results
V.A       Main Results
Results from estimating Equation (3) are in Table 2, where the outcome is the share of
votes for the Know-Nothing candidate for Massachusetts governor in 1854, Henry J. Gard-
ner. We add controls moving across columns. In Column (1) we include only the main
variables of interest ­ the deskilling and crowdout indices. We find that a one standard
deviation increase in labor market crowdout increases the Know-Nothing vote share by
3.1 percentage points. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the deskilling index
increases the vote share by 0.8 percentage points.
    In column (2) we add county fixed effects (combining Dukes and Nantucket due to
their small number of towns, resulting in 13 indicator variables). Column (3) adds the
controls for urbanization discussed above, an indicator for towns with greater than 2,500
people in 1850; the employment in cottage industries in 1845; and manufacturing estab-
lishments per capita at the town level in 1855. Column (4) adds the percent Irish in 1855;
column (5) adds the controls for culture and fiscal burden. Finally, column (6) adds share
of employment in manufacturing and in agriculture as recorded in the 1840 U.S. census.
The results across all columns are fairly consistent and column (6) is our preferred speci-
fication. The magnitude of the crowdout effect is roughly double the effect of deskilling
for a one standard deviation increase in the variables, respectively. However, the p-value
of the Wald test that the coefficients between crowdout and deskilling is only marginally
statistically significant when the full controls are included.
    The economic factors are not highly correlated nor are they driven by outliers. Figure 7
panels (A) and (B) demonstrate the marginal effect of crowdout and deskilling holding
all other variables constant from our preferred specification (Table 2 column (6)). The
unadjusted scatter plot between the two measures is shown in Panel (C). Deskilling is
null in some locations either because industry employment shares are equal to zero in
industries with establishment size shifts, or average establishment size in an industry did
not increase over 1845 to 1855 (i.e. the shift was zero).41 In these instances, we set deskilling
to the minimum value in the sample when standardizing.
    To benchmark the relative importance of crowdout and deskilling, we conduct a coun-
    41
    Out of 106 industries listed, establishments were reported for 62 in both 1845 and 1855. Six of the remain-
ing industries are considered cottage industries with shift equal to zero as deskilling was already complete
by 1845.


                                                      19
terfactual exercise where there was no change in Irish employment (i.e. the shifts are equal
to zero) and manufacturing establishment size remained unchanged between 1845 to 1855,
yet Irish immigration settlement patterns remained the same (holding the share of Irish
population constant at the 1855 observed levels). We obtain coefficient estimates using
our observed data, then set each observation, for one exposure at a time, to the sample
minimum and predict the outcome. The counterfactual Know-Nothing vote share drops
5% when deskilling is set to its minimum and approximately 10% when crowdout is so
minimized. We find that these factors were not decisive in 1854, when the Know-Nothing
party victory was overwhelming - but as the support began to wane in subsequent years,
reshuffling Know-Nothing votes due to economic factors would have changed the electoral
outcome.42
V.B    Robustness and Falsification Checks
In Table 3 column (1) we add the vote share from the constitution of 1853 as a proxy for
perceived Irish enfranchisement. In column (2) we add the historical vote for the Whigs
in 1844. Neither change the results significantly. Columns (3) and (4) expand the control
set for urbanization by adding an indicator for a mill town and the log of 1855 popula-
tion. Column (5) controls for native labor demand by using the change in employment
of natives between 1850 and 1855 across all industries in town i normalized by their ini-
tial value. Column (6) accounts for early industrial development by including local em-
ployment shares of all categories reported in the 1840 Population Census: Manufacturing,
Commerce, Professional, River Transportation, Ocean Transportation, Mining, and Agri-
culture.43 Column (7) includes Boston in the sample. The results are fairly consistent
across all these changes. Finally in column (8), we drop weighting by eligible voters. The
standard errors increase and the magnitudes do decline, but not substantially.
    Tables 2 and 3 convey a robust association between the Know-Nothing vote share and
Irish labor market crowdout and deskilling. As an additional robustness check against
spurious correlations, we run permutation tests. We replace the actual exposures in a
town with randomly chosen values of the crowdout and deskilling indices from the full
sample of towns. We create 1,000 samples and re-estimate Equation (3), placing our actual
estimates in the distribution of the placebo estimates. Appendix Figure A.7 presents the
distribution of coefficients on deskilling and crowdout. Our main results are in the tails
of the distribution: the actual effect of crowdout is greater than the 99th percentile of the
placebo distribution, and the actual effect of deskilling is greater than the 94th percentile.
  42
     We reach this conclusion by setting each economic factor to the minimum, predicting votes and reallo-
cating the votes to other parties.
  43
     The omitted category is the share of employment in ocean transportation.


                                                   20
Finally, we show that spatial correlation in the data does not artificially inflate the p-values
for our main findings (Kelly 2019; Conley 1999). See Appendix Table A.7 for these results.44
    Shift-share Identification We follow the procedure developed in Goldsmith-Pinkham
et al. (2020) to identify which initial occupation and industrial shares drive the identifying
variation in our shift-share exposure indices. Results are reported in Appendix Tables A.4
through A.6. An analysis of the Rotemberg weights for the crowdout index reveals that
identification stems from the native shares with the largest Irish shifts.45 The identifying
variation for the deskilling index stems from a set of textile industries and boots and shoe
production. Note that our results are robust to including additional controls such as a mill
town indicator and the level of cottage industry employment. Moreover, our results are
robust to the inclusion of pre-period industry sector shares from 1840.46
    An additional test of the identification assumption is to assess whether the shift-share
exposure predicts pre-trends in the outcome (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2020). The Know-
Nothings first competed in an election in 1854, so we test whether crowdout and deskilling
predict political outcomes prior to the Irish-Famine migration. Table 4 repeats our main
specification from Table 2 with Democratic Governor vote share in 1844 and Whig vote
share in 1844 as the outcome (columns (1) and (2), respectively). We fail to find strong evi-
dence that either factor predicts pre-Irish Famine political outcomes. Although crowdout
is marginally significant for the 1855 Whig share outcome, it has the wrong sign.
    Non-Irish Crowdout: We exploit the anti-Irish and Catholic sentiment at the center of
the Know-Nothing platform to construct crowdout exposures for non-Irish immigrants.
In our setting, there is little overlap in the occupational structure of Irish immigrants with
that of German and British immigrants. Figure 8 demonstrates that almost 60% of the
Irish were laborers compared to only 20% of Germans. Germans were more likely to be
employed as mechanics (40%) than Irish (20%). Moreover, there were far fewer German
and British immigrants to Massachusetts than the Irish (see Figure 8 Panel (B) for fre-
quencies). Finally, the size of the shifts in Figure 8 Panel (C) from German and British
  44
     The null of no spatial correlation is rejected at very short distances, such as 20km, but allowing for
correlation of residuals at longer distances we fail to reject the null. For reference, Massachusetts is 296km
East to West and 186km North to South. In general, the tests indicate that our data do not suffer from a high
degree of spatial correlation. We also test and find no evidence of spatial spillovers.
  45
     The correlation coefficient between the occupation weights and the magnitude of the occupation-specific
shifts is 0.80, consistent with the intuition of the shift-share the common shock of Irish immigration affected
places differently based on the initial composition of occupations.
  46
     Not only do these historical sectoral shares follow the suggestions of Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020),
they effectively stratify the analysis to compare locations with similar initial levels of manufacturing (or
agriculture), but which are differentially exposed to the shocks based on a town's concentration in different
types of manufacturing. This variation likely provides better comparisons across towns that would have had
counterfactually similar outcomes absent the Irish labor supply shock and deskilling labor demand shock.



                                                      21
immigrants is small relative to the large shifts from Irish immigration.
    Columns (3) to (5) of Table 4 examine the robustness of our findings to these addi-
tional crowdout measures using occupational shifts for Germans, the British, and the
two groups combined. The magnitudes on Irish crowdout and deskilling remain essen-
tially unchanged. Moreover, the coefficients on these crowdout measures are economically
small and statistically insignificant, suggesting no additional impact from these groups on
top of Irish labor market competition. Note that the shifts for these groups are smaller but
are somewhat correlated with the shifts from Irish immigrants, particularly for factory
operatives (see Figure 8 Panel (C)). The fact that the distribution of skill/occupations in
Panels (A) and (B) are so different across ethnic groups, but the shifts are similar suggests
that there was growing demand for labor in these occupations ­ potentially independent
from the Irish per se; a point we turn to next.
V.C   Short- and Medium-term Effects on Industrialization and Native-born Living Stan-
      dards
One threat not addressed in the robustness analyses above is whether the Irish aided in
industrialization. Furthermore, no evidence has been presented that demonstrates native-
born workers materially suffered from these economic exposures. We address both these
issues in this section.
    Did the Irish Cause Short-Run Industrialization? We find no evidence that Irish im-
migrants were more likely to settle in areas that experienced faster industrialization be-
tween 1845 and 1855, consistent with immigration not causing short-run industrialization
in our setting. Table 5 investigates whether Irish settlement patterns predict either levels
or changes in manufacturing measures. In column (1), we find that the percent Irish in a
town in 1855 is negatively associated with the number of manufacturing establishments
per capita in 1855, and in column (4) is positively associated with the dollar value of man-
ufacturing output per capita in 1855. These results are consistent with Irish immigrants
being more likely to reside in larger cities, mill towns, and mill villages with a small num-
ber of large establishments. However, the more relevant test is whether the level or change
in Irish employment predicts growth in manufacturing. We find no evidence that this was
the case for the change in establishments in columns (2) and (3), or for the change in output
value in columns (5) and (6).
    Effects of State-level Irish Crowdout on Native Wealth, Migration and Occupational
Upgrading Although the results in Table 5 suggest that there was no short-run benefit to
industrialization from Irish immigration, there could still have been effects on the native-
born worker. As discussed above, we lack detailed wage data from this period, but there


                                             22
are other margins of adjustment we can explore.
    Following Ferrie (1997), we construct a linked sample of 50,587 native-born Massachusetts
men from the 1850 to the 1860 Census.47 The individual-level data on economic outcomes
and occupation enables us perform an analysis using a crowdout measure specific to the
individuals' occupational group as defined in 1850. Such an analysis is not possible with
aggregate town-level voting outcome data. Specifically, we define state-level crowdout as
the 1850 to 1855 growth of Irish-born into the native individual's 1850 occupational group,
essentially the occupation-specific "shift" portion of our crowdout measure.48
    We use the town-level deskilling exposure from the main analysis, because unlike for
crowdout, a person-specific measure for deskilling is impossible to construct. The 1850
census reports occupation, not industry. Thus, industry-level changes in average estab-
lishment size cannot be linked to individual workers. Instead, we include town-level ex-
posure to deskilling as a proxy. Deskilling is interacted with an indicator for mechanics to
capture the likely heterogeneity of effects across occupations.49
    The outcomes of interest include property wealth in 1860 (dollar value of personal and
real estate property), occupational upgrading (an increase in the wealth score of the occu-
pation between 1850 and 1860) and migration. Migration is an indicator for any individual
who has changed towns between the two censuses. Approximately 60% of the movers in
the sample migrate within state. All regressions condition on county and age group fixed
effects as well as 1850 real estate wealth and an indicator for any positive amount of prop-
erty in 1850.
    The results are gathered in Table 6. In column (1), a one standard deviation increase
in crowdout reduces wealth by 22%. The effect of deskilling is concentrated in native me-
chanics, with a one standard deviation increase associated with an 8% decrease in wealth.
In column (2), we add an indicator for whether the individual moved and the interaction
between crowdout and migration. We find that the negative effects of crowdout on wealth
are mitigated to some extent by migration. Similarly, in column (3) the negative effects of
crowdout on wealth are offset by occupational grading.50 Column (4) to (6) replicate the
  47
      We follow the standard iterative method of Abramitzky et al. (2014). These links are available on the
CensusLinkingProject.org website. In Appendix Table B.10, we show that linked individuals have higher
wealth and more prestigious occupations than those who were not matched, consistent with other matching
literature. Our results are unchanged if we reweight the matched sample to match the population
   48
      This is the state-level change in Irish-born individuals in occupational group j between 1855 to 1850
divided by the total employed in occupational group j in 1850.
   49
      Using the individual matched sample, we could recover the town-level Irish crowdout exposure mea-
sure used in the main analysis. Collapsing the occupational frequencies in the individual data to the town
level would provide the weights for a weighted sum of the state-level occupation specific shifts. Doing so
results in noisy estimates of negative impacts on property wealth from both Irish crowdout and deskilling.
   50
      There are differences between the two adaptations to economic pressures, whereby the main effect of


                                                    23
results from columns (1) to (3) for the outcome of any positive wealth in 1860. Results
are consistent with crowdout decreasing property wealth on the extensive margin, and
deskilling having no effect. Column (7) demonstrates that a one standard deviation in-
crease in deskilling increases the propensity to move by 1.4 percentage points (5% of the
mean), but is not concentrated solely in mechanics. Crowdout is not associated with in-
creased migration. Finally in column (8), a one-standard deviation increase in Irish crowd-
out (deskilling) is associated with a 13.7 percentage point (1.7 percentage point) increase
in occupational upgrading, respectively. Taken together, these results suggest that more
exposure to Irish labor market crowdout and deskilling in manufacturing led to decreased
wealth accumulation for native-born men over the medium term.
V.D    Heterogeneity and Mechanisms
Know-Nothing Strongholds Although the Know-Nothings lost popular support rather
quickly, some voters clearly continued to prefer them ­ despite having alternatives in the
new Republican party to the former Whig hegemony. Know-Nothing support declined
from 63 percent of the state-wide vote in 1854 to 29 percent in 1857, when they lost the gov-
ernorship to the Republicans.51 We turn our attention to understanding whether economic
factors have predictive power in "stronghold locations". Since there is no universally ac-
cepted definition of a stronghold location we use several. These definitions all share the
general notion that a stronghold is a place where Know-Nothing support is consistently,
relatively high. We then use such definitions to examine whether the Know-Nothing rise
in 1854 in stronghold locations is affected by economic factors.
    These results are gathered in Table 7. The outcome is the Know-Nothing vote share
in 1854. Column (1) replicates the preferred specification from Table 2 column (6) for
comparison. In column (2) we define stronghold as a town that was in the upper 75th
percentile of the Know-Nothing vote share in both 1854 as well as in 1855 ­ when there
existed another viable alternative for abolitionists and progressives in the Republican can-
didate. Column (3) uses a definition of stronghold based on the other year a Republican
candidate was fielded ­ 1857. Finally column (5) defines a stronghold as a place that was
in the top 50th percentile of Know-Nothing votes in every year from 1854 to 1858. A map
of these locations according to this last definition is shown in Panel (B) of Figure A.6.
    Across all columns, we see a pattern in which economic factors, particularly crowdout,
are less relevant in predicting Know-Nothing early success in stronghold locations. In the
moving is negative but of occupational upgrading is positive on wealth. Though these must be interpreted
with caution as they do not take into account the interaction, plausibly capture selection into migration and
upgrading, and we do not have instruments for either.
  51
     Table 1 lists vote totals for all major parties in the 1852-1858 elections.



                                                     24
last column, among locations where the vote shares are more reliably at the upper end
of the distribution for Know-Nothings, there is no effect of crowdout or deskilling once
adding the main and interaction effects.
    In sum, our results document Know-Nothing support related to both long-simmering
(i.e. industrialization and deskilling) and more acute (i.e. immigration and crowdout)
economic changes. This support was brief, however, and economic factors do not well
explain nativist patterns for the most ardent supporters.
    1857 Suffrage Literacy Amendment Next, we examine the correlation of deskilling
and crowdout with support for a clearly nativist policy, the passage of the 1857 consti-
tutional amendment implementing a literacy test to vote. The amendment required men
whose grandfathers were unable to vote to pass a literacy test to gain suffrage rights. In
practice and in purpose, immigrants, the formerly enslaved, and their descendants were
disenfranchised. We estimate our preferred specification from Table 2 Column (6) us-
ing votes of state legislators in favor of the amendment as the dependent variable.52 We
find evidence that our exposure measures are indeed correlated with nativist sentiment.
Crowdout is positively correlated with a yes vote on the amendment (coef.: 0.067; s.e.:
0.040), and is marginally significant. Deskilling works in the same direction, but is smaller
and not statistically significant (coef.: 0.017; s.e.: 0.024). These results suggest that crowd-
out and deskilling, through their effect on anti-immigrant sentiment, increase support for
the Know-Nothing candidate, not through support for other planks in the Know-Nothing
platform.
    Heterogeneity Next, in Table 8 we examine whether interactions with our main eco-
nomic factors can further elucidate the relationship between crowdout, deskilling and the
Know-Nothing vote share in 1854. In column (1) we find that there is not a strong inter-
action between deskilling and crowdout. This may now not be very surprising since the
two measures are not highly correlated and are designed to pick up different shocks for
different skill levels in the occupational distribution (see Figure 7 Panel (C)).
    Column (2) demonstrates that crowdout has a larger effect where there are more Irish
living in a location. Evaluated at the 75th percentile share Irish in 1855 (approximately .27)
- the results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in crowdout would increase
Know-Nothing vote share by about seven percentage points. The next column of interest
is the interaction of deskilling with cottage industries (column (5)). Our main specifica-
tion includes a lagged control for cottage employment, and in this interaction we assess
whether the growth in cottage industries interacts with the shift towards factory produc-
  52
   The sample consists of 221 towns. Some towns sent no representative. The variable takes on a 0 or 1 in
towns with a single representative, and ranges between 0 and 1 in the 21 towns that sent multiple.



                                                   25
tion. We find evidence that these two effects are indeed multiplicative. Lastly, we test
whether there is an interaction between lack of assimilation, fiscal burden and crowdout
or deskilling. Using the measures we have at hand for these postulated "non-economic"
factors, we fail to find consistent support for their importance in the movement.
    Effects on Voter Turnout We find no evidence that Irish labor market crowdout and
deskilling in manufacturing increased the Know-Nothing vote share by increasing voter
turnout. Table 9 reports regression results using turnout in a given election year as the
dependent variable in our preferred specification from column (6) in Table 2. In general,
deskilling and crowdout do not strongly predict turnout. If anything, increased crowd-
out reduced turnout, working against Know-Nothing success. These results are consis-
tent with economic factors increasing Know-Nothing vote share through the movement
of marginal voters away from the other established parties.
V.E    Results in Broader Context: the Dynamics of Realignment
In this section, we place our results in the broader context of the realignment and dis-
ruptions occurring in the lead-up to the Civil War. In the 1850s, it became increasingly
difficult for a national party to straddle the North and South regions of the United States
(Foner 1970; Holt 1992; Howe 1976). The Whig party dissolved after its capitulation on the
expansion of slavery caused many Northerners to abandon it (Holt 1973). The collapse of
the Whigs coupled with changing views on slavery, immigration and labor reform created
an opportunity for new parties to emerge: including the Free Soilers, Know-Nothings, and
(later) the Republicans (Anbinder 1992). In Massachusetts, the platforms of all three par-
ties overlapped to some extent. For instance, before the emergence of the Know-Nothing
party, the anti-slavery Free Soilers embraced pro-labor reforms and provided the work-
ingman with an alternative to the feckless Democratic party (Mulkern 1990).53
     Table 1 reports vote shares for gubernatorial elections between 1852 and 1858 with bold
font denoting winners. The table reveals the fluidity that characterized this time period.
The Whigs were the dominant party prior to 1854, but the Free Soil party began to gain
momentum with over 20 percent of the vote share in the early 1850s. Free Soil momentum
stalled with the entrance of the Know-Nothings in 1854, who held the Governor's office
for three years. In 1857, the Republicans gained control of all branches of power in the
state, which they then held for decades.
     How did the economic forces described above affect voters over time? Figure 9 plots
the estimated coefficients and confidence intervals for crowdout and deskilling for the
  53
    According to Mulkern (1990), the Whigs were the party of Boston capital, they were against the 10-hour
workday and land redistribution in the West, and in favor of the Tariff. The Free Soilers, on the other hand,
ran on pro-labor and anti-corruption platform in Massachusetts.


                                                     26
Know-Nothing party. The results demonstrate that economic factors were important for
the years in which they were in power (1854 to 1857, see Panels (A) and (B)). Once they lost
power, however, economic factors cease to be predictive of vote share. In sharp contrast,
Panel (C) demonstrates that the non-economic factors pauperism and assimilation, as we
measure them, were never important predictors in any year.
    Figure 10 repeats the exercise for years 1852 to 1859 and for all parties. Consistent
with the emphasis on economic factors made by Mulkern (1990) and Fogel (1989, 1992),
we find that labor market crowdout reduced support of the Whig party, in Panel (A).54 In
the early years, the lost Whig votes went to the upstart Free Soilers, who combined fervent
abolitionism and lukewarm support for labor reforms (Mulkern 1990). In 1854, the Know-
Nothings provided a new outlet for a combined nativist and labor reform agenda. Now,
crowdout shifted marginal voters to the Know-Nothings, away from the Whigs. In Panel
(B) we find that deskilling slightly shifted voters to the Democratic Party prior to 1854, but
again, this changed with the appearance of the Know-Nothing party as a potentially more
effective political force for reform (Mulkern 1990).
    The estimated effects of crowdout and deskilling remain consistent for the three elec-
tion years in which Gardner was victorious, 1854 to 1856. In 1857, the Know-Nothings
lost the governorship to the Republicans. In that year and after, the effect of crowdout
and deskilling on Know-Nothing vote share declines, and remains essentially zero for all
parties. Irish labor market crowdout and deskilling in manufacturing had lost their influ-
ence on election outcomes in the state. After the 1856 election, the Know-Nothings played
only a minimal role in Massachusetts politics. Our results on the declining influence of
Irish labor market competition and deskilling in manufacturing are consistent with many
of the hypothesized causes of disappearance of the Know-Nothings. Nativism's pull as a
political issue diminished in the face of an overshadowing existential threat to the Union
in the Civil War.
    This interpretation accords with many historians who have studied the period. The
rising importance of anti-slavery in the North, culminating in the Civil War, was the main
force that led to the decline of the Know-Nothings as a national party (Foner 1970; Baum
1978; Gienapp 1985; Fogel 1989; Mulkern 1990; Anbinder 1992). In the end, Republicans
won the competition to replace the Whigs as the northern anti-Democrat party. Repub-
lican leaders learned from their defeat as a single-issue (abolitionist) party in 1855, and
worked to expand their coalition at the expense of the American Party by including parts of
  54
       Because vote shares across parties sum to one, lost votes to one party must be a gain to another.




                                                       27
the Know-Nothing's nativist agenda (Mulkern 1990).55,56 In addition, Fogel (1989) empha-
sizes a number of improvements in the economic situation in the mid-1850s that reduced
the pull of nativism: drastic reductions in immigration, the rapid recovery in northern
manufacturing from the Panic of 1857, and a decline in prices ending a decade of erosion
of the real wage.
VI     Conclusion
We investigate a long-standing question in economic history regarding the causes of the
success of the Know-Nothing Party. Using newly digitized population and manufacturing
censuses for Massachusetts, we construct local measures of exposure to both Irish labor
market crowdout and deskilling in manufacturing. Consistent with Fogel's hypothesis, we
find strong support for the notion that labor market competition among low-skill workers
was an important factor accounting for approximately 10% of the rise. However, the pro-
cess of industrialization and deskilling in manufacturing that started at least two decades
before the great waves of Irish immigration also played a key role (Mulkern 1990). We
find evidence of direct economic harm on native-born men more exposed to crowdout
and deskilling, a potential motive for the nativist backlash against Irish immigration.
    Our findings on when and where economic factors matter are also instructive. Eco-
nomic factors predict vote shares for the Know-Nothing candidate for governor in years
in which they win, were decisive overall in the 1855 election but unimportant among
stronghold locations. These results suggest economic factors may tip marginal communi-
ties towards a nativist platform. The electoral impact of deskilling and crowdout evapo-
rated as the crisis over slavery and the existential threat to the Union posed by civil war
sidelined other concerns. This shift in emphasis was foreshadowed by Abraham Lincoln,
writing in 1855: "I am not a Know-Nothing. . . how could I be? How can any one who abhors the
oppression of negroes, be in favor of degrading classes of white people?" The differences between
native-born and Irish-born exploited by the Know-Nothing party were overshadowed, at
  55
      Some historians argue that the inclusion of nativist elements did not play an important role in Republi-
can success in the late 1850s. See Foner (1970) and Baum (1978). Republicans as a national party were wary
to adopt the mantle of nativism. Foner (1970) says the nativists "were absorbed into a party which made no
concessions to them". The Western states (WI, IL, IN, OH) needed the anti-slavery votes of a large group of
German voters. In New England, however, German immigrants were a small minority, where most immi-
gration was of Irish Catholics. Moreover, nativism earned its biggest successes in this region, leading other
historians to point out that Republican coalitions in New England actively sought out former Know-Nothing
voters, but went to great lengths to distance their nativist agenda from the national party (Gienapp 1985;
Fogel 1989; Mulkern 1990; Holt 1992).
   56
      The findings on Know-Nothing voters are similar to those on Know-Nothing legislators. Using data
on town-level representatives from the elections of 1853 to 1857, we find that almost all Know-Nothing
legislators who had prior experience in the General Court (11 individuals), defected from the Whig Party.
For those Know-Nothing legislators that survived the party's demise, they moved to the Republican party
(see Appendix Figure A.8 Panel (B)).

                                                     28
least temporarily, by the divide between North and South.




                                          29
References
. 1854. Sun, Nov.

A              ,R ,B          ,L     P  ,&E      ,K          . 2014. A Nation of Immi-
    grants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration. Journal of
    Political Economy, 122(3), 467­506.

A           ,R ,B         ,L     ,&E        ,K         . 2019. Do Immigrants Assimilate
    More Slowly today than in the past? American Economic Review: Insights.

A          ,D      ,&R             ,P      . 2020. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
    Markets. Journal of Political Economy, 128(6), 2188­2244.

A       ,G       . 1853. The Massachusetts Register for the Year 1853, Containing a Business
    Directory of the State, with a Variety of Useful Information.

A       ,G       . 1855. The Massachusetts Register for the Year 1855.

A       ,G      . 1856. The Massachusetts Register, Containing a Record of the Govern-
    ment and Institutions of the State, Together with a variety of Useful Information, for the
    Year 1856.

A       ,G       . 1862. The Massachusetts Register, 1862, containing a record of the Gov-
    ernment and Institutions of the State, together with a very complete account of the Mas-
    sachusetts Volunteers.

A           ,T    . 1992. Nativism and slavery: the northern Know Nothings and the politics of
    the 1850's. New York: Oxford University Press.

A       ,J      ,B      ,F   ,&M      ,R     A. 2004. Skill Intensity and Rising Wage
    Dispersion in 19th Century American Manufacturing. The Economic History Review,
    64(1), 172­192.

A       ,J      ,B         ,F   ,&M      ,R       A. 2005. Capital deepening and the rise
    of the factory: the American experience during the nineteenth century 1. The Economic
    History Review, 58(3), 586­595.

A      ,J      ,B        ,F    ,H      ,M         ,&M         ,R    A. 2010. Did Rail-
    roads Induce or Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the
    American Midwest, 1850-60. Social Science History, 34, 171­197.



                                              30
A       ,D     ,D     ,D     ,H      ,G       ,&M        ,K     . 2020. Importing Political
    Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure. American Economic
    Review, 110(10), 3139­83.

A       ,D      H., D    ,D   ,&H       ,G         H. 2013. The China Syndrome: Local
    Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic
    Review, 103(6), 2121­68.

B        ,G         ,I        , A. D, B     , G., & N         , P. 2016. Mr. Rossi, Mr. Hu
    and Politics. The Role of Immigration in Shaping Natives' Voting Behavior. Journal of
    Public Economics, 136(1), 1­13.

B         ,G            ,&K           ,H       . 2019. Low-wage import competition and populist
    backlash: The case of Italy. FiFo Discussion Papers - Finanzwissenschaftliche Diskussions-
    beiträge 19-05. University of Cologne, FiFo Institute for Public Economics.

B      , D . 1978. Know-Nothingism and the Republican Majority in Massachusetts: The
    Political Realignment of the 1850s. The Journal of American History, 64(4), 959­986.

B        ,J    . 1838. Statistics of the Condition and Productions of Certain Branches of Industry
    in Massachusetts, 1845. Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, State Printers.

B           ,R    . 1938. The Protestant Crusade: A Study of the Origins of American Nativism.
    Rienhart.

C      ,D     . 2001. Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Im-
    pacts of Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22­64.

C      ,D    ,&P ,G              . 2016. Immigration Economics by George J. Borjas: A Re-
    view Essay. Journal of Economic Literature, 54(4), 1333­49.

C        ,M     ,F        ,A        ,&T         ,S      . 2020. Globalization and electoral
    outcomes: Evidence from Italy. Economics and Politics, 32(1), 68­103.

C             ,I     ,&S        ,P    . 2018a. Global Competition and Brexit. American Polit-
    ical Science Review, 112(2), 201­218.

C             ,I     ,&S     ,P    . 2018b. The Trade Origins of Economic Nationalism:
    Import Competition and Voting Behavior in Western Europe. American Journal of Political
    Science, 62(4), 936­953.



                                                31
C        ,W         J., & N        ,G       T. 2019. Unions and the Great Compression
    of wage inequality in the US at mid-century: evidence from local labour markets. The
    Economic History Review, 0(0).

C        ,W         J., & Z     ,A       . 2019. The economic assimilation of Irish Famine
    migrants to the United States. Explorations in Economic History, 74, 101302.

C       ,T          G. 1999. GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of
    Econometrics, 92(1), 1­45.

D B , J.D. 1854. The Seventh Census of the United States: 1850. Washington, DC: Robert
 Armstrong, Public Printer.

D          ,H           J      . 1904. The Know-Nothing Party: A Sketch. New Century Press.

D W ,F          . 1856. Branches of Industry in Massachusetts, 1855. Boston: William White,
 Printer to the State.

D        ,C         ,&H           ,S      . 2019. Leadership in Social Networks: Evidence from
    the Forty-Eighters in the Civil War. Working Paper 24656. National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

D       ,C          ,G     ,R      ,H       ,S      ,&P      ,R          . 2017 (March). In-
    strumental Variables and Causal Mechanisms: Unpacking The Effect of Trade on Workers and
    Voters. Working Paper 23209. National Bureau of Economic Research.

D           ,C         ,V       ,K        ,&P D         ,A      . 2018. Refugee Migration
    and Electoral Outcomes. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(5), 2035­2091.

E     ,A          Y        G        ,J           O       ,&P          ,P    . 2017. Immigration
    and Electoral Support for the Far Left and the Far Right. Working Paper 2017-20. CEPII.

E             ,B      . 2018. The Populist Temptation: Economic Grievance and Political Reaction
    in the Modern Era. Oxford University Press.

F      S        . 2016. Massachusetts State Census, 1855. Citing Secretary of the Common-
    wealth. State Archives, Boston.

F            ,J   J, & H , A         B. 2015. How Legislators Respond to Localized
    Economic Shocks: Evidence from Chinese Import Competition. Journal of Politics, 77,
    1012­30.


                                               32
F        ,I    ,&W        ,W        F. 1929. International Migrations, Volume I: Statistics.
    New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

F      ,J       P. 1997. The Entry into the U.S. Labor Market of Antebellum European
    Immigrants, 1840-1860. Explorations in Economic History, 34(3), 295­330.

F       ,J      P. 1999. Yankees Now: Immigrants in the Antebellum U.S. 1840-1860. NBER
    Series on Long-term Factors in Economic Development. Oxford University Press.

F      ,A           . 1980. Industrialization and Skill Intensity: The Case of Massachusetts.
    The Journal of Human Resources, 149.

F      ,A            J     . 1978. Sectoral shift in antebellum Massachusetts: A reconsidera-
    tion. Explorations in Economic History, 15(2), 146­171.

F       ,R        W       . 1989. Without Consent or Contract : the Rise and Fall of American
    Slavery. 1st ed. edn. New York: Norton.

F       ,R        W         . 1992 (January). Toward a New Synthesis on the Role of Economic Issues
    in the Political Realignment of the 1850s. Working Paper 34. National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

F       , E . 1970. Free Soil, Free labor, Free Men: the ideology of the Republican Party before the
    Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press.

F      ,C    B      ,B      ,T     ,&C     ,C          . 2018. Political Machinery: Automa-
    tion Anxiety and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. Oxford Review of Economic Policy,
    34, 418­442.

F          ,R         M. 2001. The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1373­1408.

G          , H        J.; M              .G           (    -     : G          ); M             .
    G          C      . 1855. Address of His Excellency Henry J. Gardner, to the Two Branches of
    the Legislature of Massachusetts, January 9, 1855. Senate (Series) (Massachusetts. General
    Court. Senate). W. White.

G        ,W         E. 1985. Nativism and the Creation of a Republican Majority in the North
    before the Civil War. The Journal of American History, 72(3), 529­559.




                                                 33
G         ,C        . 1994. The political economy of immigration restriction in the United
    States, 1890 to 1921. Pages 223­258 of: The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to
    Political Economy. University of Chicago Press.

G         ,C       ,&K ,L                . 1998. The Origins of Technology-Skill Complemen-
    tarity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3), 693­732.

G        ,C         ,&S       ,K        . 1984. The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of
    Industrialization: The American Case, 1820 to 1850*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    99(3), 461­487.

G          -P       ,P ,S       ,I    ,&S     ,H     . 2020. Bartik Instruments: What,
    When, Why, and How. American Economic Review, 110(8), 2586­2624.

G       ,S     ,&P             ,E     . 2020 (Feb.). The Political Economy of Populism. CEPR
    Discussion Papers 14433. C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

H        , M          R.,           C                 P         , I    , &R           , S     .
    2010. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002.

H              ,J ,&H              ,D        J. 2014. Public Attitudes toward Immigration. An-
    nual Review of Political Science, 17, 225­249.

H      ,E        E       . 1852. Letters on Irish emigration. Books for Libraries Press.

H       ,M             A           FW         ,&Z             ,J     . 2017. Immigration and
    Voting for the Far Right. Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(6), 1341­1385.

H          ,O      . 1959. Boston's immigrants [1790-1880]; a study in acculturation. Rev. and
    enl. ed. edn. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

H        ,T        J, & W         ,J      G. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and
    Economic Impact. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

H       ,G        H. 1897. The Causes of Know-Nothing Success in Massachusetts. The
    American Historical Review, 3(1), 67­82.

H        , B         E. 1913. The Organization of the Boot and Shoe Industry in Mas-
    sachusetts Before 1875. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 27(2), 236­262.

H     , E . 2008. When did ownership separate from control? Corporate governance in
    the early nineteenth century. The Journal of Economic History, 68(3), 645­685.

                                               34
H      ,M         F. 1973. The Politics of Impatience: The Origins of Know Nothingism.
    Journal of American History, LX, 309­31.

H      ,M          F. 1992. Political Parties and American Political Development from the Age of
    Jackson to the Age of Lincoln. Louisiana State University Press.

H      ,D          W      . 1976. The Political Culture of the American Whigs. Chicago University
    Press.

I          ,R       F, & N      ,P     . 2016. Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of Populism: Economic
    Have-Nots and Cultural Backlash. Tech. rept. Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Research
    Working Paper Series.

I       -            C                P                 S       R          . 1999. United States His-
    torical Election Returns, 1824-1968.

K     ,L          ,&M       ,R      . 2013. Technical Change and the Relative Demand for
    Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective. NBER Working Paper Series,
    18752.

K      ,M          . 2019. The Standard Errors of Persistence. June.

K        , L.L   ,&M       ,R      A. 1997. Explaining the rise in antebellum pauperism,
    1850­1860: New evidence. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 37(2), 405 ­ 417.

L              ,N       . 2006. Business Organization. In: C         ,S       .B.      (ed), Historical
    Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Volume 3, Part
    C: Economic Structure and Performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.

M              ,C         . 2017 (Mar.). Trade Shocks and Far-Right Voting: Evidence from French
    Presidential Elections. RSCAS Working Papers 2017/21. European University Institute.

M           ,Y      . 2019. Economic Insecurity and the Causes of Populism, Reconsidered.
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(4), 152­70.

M      ,R       A., & V        ,G         C. 1987. The Growth of Wages in Antebellum
    America: New Evidence. Journal of Economic History, 47(4), 873­895.

M P           ,J       M. 1988. Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. Oxford University
 Press.

M        ,R        A. 1985. Immigration, mortality, and population growth in Boston, 1840-
    1880. The Journal of interdisciplinary history, 15(3), 393­417.

                                                  35
M           , H . 2012. The Poorhouses of Massachusetts: A Cultural and Architectural History.
    Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland and Company.

M          ,J   . 1990. The Know-Nothing Party in Massachusetts: The Rise and Fall of a People's
    Party. Lebanon, New Hampshire: University Press of New England.

O'C        ,T       . 1983. Irish Votes and Yankee Cotton: The Constitution of 1853. Pro-
  ceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society, Third Series.

P        , J     . 1846. Statistical Tables: Exhibiting the Condition and Products of Certain
    Branches of Industry in Massachusetts, 1837. Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, State Print-
    ers.

P       ,J     W . 1967. Religion, politics, and diversity; the church-state theme in New York
    history. Cornell University Press.

R             ,J        L. 2002. Looking for work, searching for workers: American labor markets
    during industrialization. Cambridge University Press.

R         , P     L, & S      , R       . 2005. Emerging financial markets and early US
    growth. Explorations in Economic History, 42(1), 1­26.

R         ,S      ,F      ,S     ,G    ,R       ,G        ,J         ,M      ,E   ,P      ,J   ,
    &S      ,M         . 2018. IPUMS USA: Version 8.0 [dataset].

S        ,S       ,N     ,N       ,&Q ,N             . 2020. Immigrants and the Making of
    America. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 382­419.

S          ,L       . 1845. Census of Boston, 1845. Boston: John H. Eastburn, City Printer.

S          ,K       L. 1984. Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Nonmech-
    anized Factory Associated with Gains in Efficiency?: Evidence from the US. manufac-
    turing Censuses of 1820 and 1850. Explorations in Economic History, 21, 351­382.

S        ,K    . 1976. Rum, Romanism, Representation, and Reform: Coalition Politics in
    Massachusetts, 1847-1853. Civil War History, 22(2), 116­137.

T          ,M     . 2020. Gifts of the immigrants, woes of the natives: Lessons from the
    age of mass migration. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 454­486.

T      ,P      . 1999. The Industrialization of New England, 1830 - 1880. IDEAS Working
    Paper Series from RePEc.

                                               36
VII   Tables

          Table 1: Massachusetts Gubernatorial Election Outcomes, 1852-1858

                                  (1)  (2)   (3)  (4)  (5)         (6)    (7)
                                 1852 1853 1854 1855 1856         1857   1858
           Share of state-wide votes
             Know-Nothing          .    .   0.63 0.38 0.59        0.29   0.10
             Whig                 0.45 0.46 0.21 0.10 0.05          .      .
             Democrat            0.28 0.27 0.11 0.25 0.25         0.24   0.32
             Republican            .    .     .  0.27   .         0.47   0.58
             Free Soil           0.26 0.23 0.05    .    .           .      .
          Notes: State-wide vote shares (including Boston). Winning party in
          bold. An empty cell implies no votes cast for the party in that year.
          Sources: Various issues of the Massachusetts Register (1853-1860).




                                           37
                Table 2: Main Findings ­ Know-Nothing Rise, 1854 Vote Share

                                      (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)

  Irish Labor Crowdout             0.031***    0.034***     0.033***    0.034***     0.034***    0.035***
                                    (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.010)

  Deskilling Index                  0.008**     0.009**     0.009**     0.015***     0.014***     0.014**
                                    (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.006)

  County FE                           No          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Urbanization                        No          No           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
  Pct Irish 1855                      No          No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes
  Culture & Fiscal Burden             No          No           No          No          Yes          Yes
  Share Mfg & Ag 1840                 No          No           No          No          No           Yes

  No. of Observations                 307         307          307         307         307          307
  R-squared                          0.056       0.189        0.188       0.198       0.193        0.188
  P-value                            0.029       0.018        0.035       0.108       0.111        0.099
  Mean of Dept. Var                  0.628       0.628        0.628       0.628       0.628        0.628
Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation (3). The outcome across all specifications is the Share
of Know-Voting Vote for Governor in Massachusetts in 1854. Please see text for the formal definition of
crowdout and deskilling in Section III.B. Urbanization controls refer to an urban indicator (population >
2500 in 1855), number employed in cottage industries (1837), the share of native working age males in 1850
with an empty occupation string, and manufacturing establishments per capita (1855). Culture and Fiscal
Burden control include an indicator for housing a foreign-born pauper in a given town and the assimilation
index based on names of children of Irish-born parents. Share manufacturing and share agriculture are
based on the 1840 census which asked employment at the household level. Regressions are weighted by
ratable polls (similar to a measure of potential voters). The p-value from a Wald test of equality between the
crowdout and deskilling coefficients is reported for each column. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
*, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.




                                                     38
                                                    Table 3: Robustness Checks

                                  (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                             Added Controls
                                  Irish     Share        Mill Town    Log Popu-    Native    All Sector    Add        No
                                Enfran-    Whig 1844     Indicator      lation     Labor      Shares      Boston     Weights
                               chisement                                 1855     Demand       1840

     Irish Labor Crowdout       0.034***    0.034***       0.033***    0.034***   0.035***    0.028***    0.032***   0.020*
                                 (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.011)

     Deskilling Index           0.014**     0.014**        0.012*      0.015**    0.014**      0.009      0.013**     0.011
                                (0.006)     (0.006)        (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.007)

     Const. Vote 1853            0.023
                                (0.070)
39




     Share Whig 1844                         -0.068
                                            (0.075)
     Mill                                                   0.019
                                                           (0.019)
     Log Population 1855                                                -0.011
                                                                       (0.016)
     Native Labor Demand                                                           0.007
                                                                                  (0.024)

     County FE                    Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Urbanization                 Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Pct Irish 1855               Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Culture & Fiscal Burden      Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     Share Mfg & Ag 1840          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
     All Sector Shares            No          No             No          No         No          Yes         No         No

     No. of Observations          307         307            307         307        307         307         308        307
     R-squared                   0.185       0.188          0.187       0.187      0.185       0.215       0.201      0.153
     P-value                     0.104       0.121          0.093       0.130      0.100       0.127       0.115      0.526
     Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation (3). The outcome across all specifications is the Share of Know-Voting Vote for Governor in Mas-
     sachusetts in 1854. Please see text or data appendix for the formal definition of crowdout and deskilling in Section III.B. Urbanization controls refer
     to an urban indicator (population > 2500 in 1855), number employed in cottage industries (1845), the share of native working age males in 1850 with
     an empty occupation string, and manufacturing establishments per capita (1855). Culture and Fiscal Burden control include an indicator for housing
     a foreign-born pauper in a given town and the assimilation index based on names of children of Irish-born parents. Share manufacturing and share
     agriculture are based on the 1840 census which asked employment at the household level. Each column is a slightly different specification indicated
     by the column table. Column (1) includes a proxy for Irish enfranchisement ­ the constitutional vote of 1853. Column (2) includes the Share Whig vote
     in 1844 as a control for historical voting patterns. Column (3) includes an indicator for mill town. Column (4) includes log population 1855. Column
     (5) includes a proxy for native labor demand - the shift in native men in manufacturing between 1850 and 1855. Column (6) includes employment
     shares that span all categories in the 1840 census. Column (7) includes Boston in the sample. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls (similar to a
     measure of potential voters) except in column (8). Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1
     percent level, respectively.
     Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.
40
                      Table 4: Placebo Outcomes and Non-Irish Crowdout

                                       (1)         (2)               (3)            (4)        (5)
                                      Placebo Outcomes                      Non-Irish Crowdout
                                     1844         1844 Whig       British        German       German &
                                   Democrats                     Crowdout       Crowdout       British
                                                                                              Crowdout

 Irish Labor Crowdout                  0.007        -0.017*       0.033***       0.034***       0.033***
                                      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.012)

 Deskilling Index                      0.003         0.005         0.013*         0.013*        0.013*
                                      (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)

 British Labor Crowdout                                             0.004
                                                                   (0.010)

 German Labor Crowdout                                                             0.004
                                                                                  (0.010)

 British & German Crowdout                                                                       0.004
                                                                                                (0.010)

 County FE                              Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Urbanization                           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Pct Irish 1855                         Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Culture & Fiscal Burden                Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Share Mfg & Ag 1840                    Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

 No. of Observations                    307           307            307            307           307
 R-squared                             0.180         0.170          0.185          0.185         0.185

Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation (3). The outcome varies across the first two columns and is
listed in the column heading. The outcome for columns (3) to (5) is the share of Know-Nothing vote in 1854
with British crowdout (column (3)), German crowdout (column (4)) and British-German crowdout (column
(5)) as added as controls. Please see text for the formal definition of crowdout and deskilling in Section
III.B. Urbanization controls refer to an urban indicator (population > 2500 in 1855), number employed in
cottage industries (1837), the share of native working age males in 1850 with an empty occupation string,
and manufacturing establishments per capita (1855). Culture and Fiscal Burden control include an indicator
for housing a foreign-born pauper in a given town and the assimilation index based on names of children
of Irish-born parents. Share manufacturing and share agriculture are based on the 1840 census which asked
employment at the household level. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.




                                                    41
                                            Table 5: Short-Run Industrial Response to Irish Immigration

                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                       1855            1855-45           1855-45            1855             1855-45          1855-45
                                                    Estab. p.c.       Estab. p.c.       Estab. p.c.       Value p.c.        Value p.c.       Value p.c.

      Percent Irish 1855                             -0.018***           -0.006                            3.262***            1.363
                                                      (0.005)           (0.005)                             (0.852)           (0.873)
       Share Mfg Labor Irish Males                                                         0.003                                                 0.551
                                                                                          (0.004)                                               (0.701)
42




      County FE                                          Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
      Urbanization                                       Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
      Culture & Fiscal Burden                            Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
      Share Mfg & Ag 1840                                Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes

      No. of Observations                                307               307              307               307               307               307
      R-squared                                         0.320             0.340            0.338             0.627             0.203             0.194

     Notes: Table reports OLS estimates on the relationship between industrialization and the percent of Irish in 1855 (columns (1) (2), (4), and (5)) or the
     change in share manufacturing labor comprised of Irish males (columns (3) and (6)). The other controls are as described in the notes for Table 2.
     Regressions are weighted by registered voters. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1
     percent level, respectively.
     Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.
                 Table 6: Effects of State-level Irish Crowdout on Native Wealth, Migration and Occupational Upgrading

                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)
                                                                                                                                                   Occupational
                                                   Ln(Total Wealth, 1860)                  Any Wealth in 1860 (=1)               Moved (=1)          Upgrade

      Irish Labor State Crowdout              -0.221***    -0.311*** -0.504*** -0.012***             -0.016*** -0.034***             0.004            0.137***
                                                (0.026)     (0.033)   (0.040)   (0.003)               (0.004)    (0.006)            (0.003)            (0.007)
      Deskilling Exposure (Town)                 -0.001       0.003   -0.022    -0.002                -0.001     -0.003            0.014**            0.017***
                                                (0.030)     (0.030)   (0.029)   (0.005)               (0.005)    (0.005)            (0.006)            (0.005)
      Deskill X Mechanic                        -0.080*     -0.075*    -0.062    -0.007                -0.007    -0.006              0.000             -0.012
                                                (0.043)     (0.044)   (0.042)   (0.007)               (0.007)    (0.006)            (0.004)            (0.008)
      Mechanic (=1)                            -0.109**      -0.087  -0.150***    0.004                 0.006     0.001            0.043***           0.100***
                                                (0.051)     (0.053)   (0.046)   (0.006)               (0.006)    (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.018)
      Crowdout X Moved (=1)                                0.268***                                   0.013**
                                                            (0.037)                                   (0.006)
43




      Moved (=1)                                           -0.508***                                 -0.053***
                                                            (0.067)                                   (0.010)
      Crowdout X Occ. Upgrade                                        0.313***                                   0.024***
                                                                      (0.045)                                    (0.006)
      Occ. Upgrade                                                   0.740***                                   0.057***
                                                                      (0.041)                                    (0.006)

      County FE                                  Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes
      Age Group FE                               Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes
      Ln(Real Property, 1850)                    Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes
      Any Real Property, 1850 (=1)               Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes

      No. of Observations                      50587         50587         50587         50587         50587         50587           50587             50587
      Mean of Dept. Var                        5.862         5.862         5.862         0.796         0.796         0.796           0.266             0.282

     Notes: Observations represent native-born Massachusetts men linked in the 1850 and 1860 censuses. Crowdout is the state-level shift of Irish into the
     occupation of the native-born individual in 1850. All regressions include county fixed effects for 1850 residence, age group fixed effects, and controls
     for real property in 1850. Standard errors are clustered at the town level are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1
     percent level, respectively.
     Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.
             Table 7: Predictors of Know-Nothing Rise in Stronghold Locations
                                      (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
                                  All towns     Stronghold Stronghold Stronghold Stronghold
                                                 75th pctile 75th pctile 75th pctile      >
                                                  1854 &      1854 &      1854 &     50th pctile
                                                   1855        1857        1858      every year

      Irish Labor Crowdout          0.035***     0.029***      0.037***      0.040***      0.033***
                                     (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.011)
      Deskilling Index              0.014**      0.014***      0.012**       0.013**       0.014**
                                     (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.007)
      Stronghold1                                0.167***
                                                  (0.013)
      Stronghold1xCrowdout                       -0.030**
                                                  (0.015)
      Stronghold1xDeskill                          -0.021
                                                  (0.013)
      Stronghold2                                               0.166***
                                                                 (0.016)
      Stronghold2xCrowdout                                      -0.043**
                                                                 (0.020)
      Stronghold2xDeskill                                      -0.048***
                                                                 (0.010)
      Stronghold3                                                             0.136***
                                                                               (0.019)
      Stronghold3xCrowdout                                                   -0.062***
                                                                               (0.021)
      Stronghold3xDeskill                                                       0.008
                                                                               (0.021)
      Stronghold4                                                                          0.092***
                                                                                            (0.019)
      Stronghold4xCrowdout                                                                   -0.028
                                                                                            (0.024)
      Stronghold4xDeskill                                                                  -0.018**
                                                                                            (0.008)

      Full Controls                   Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
      No. Stronghold                    .            40            26            22           34
      No. Observations                307           300           300           300          307
      R-squared                      0.188         0.382         0.317         0.274        0.229

Notes: Table reports OLS estimates on the relationship between Share of Gubernatorial Votes for 1854 Know-
Nothing Candidate and the Irish labor crowdout and deskilling indices. All specification includes full con-
trols, which are: urbanization controls refer to an urban indicator (population > 2500 in 1855); number em-
ployed in cottage industries (1837); the share of native working age males in 1850 with an empty occupation
string; manufacturing establishments per capita (1855); culture and fiscal burden control include an indica-
tor for housing a foreign-born pauper in a given town and the assimilation index based on names of children
of Irish-born parents; share manufacturing and share agriculture are based on the 1840 census which asked
employment at the household level. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.


                                                    44
                                                                  Table 8: Heterogeneity
                                (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)           (9)
                             Deskill x      Crowdout       Deskill x    Crowdout       Deskill x    Crowdout       Deskill x     Crowdout       Deskill x
                             Crowdout        x Irish        Irish       x Cottage      Cottage       x Assim.       Assim.       x Pauper       Pauper

      Irish Crowdout           0.032***       -0.001       0.035***      0.037***      0.033***       -0.016        0.035***       0.010        0.035***
                                (0.011)      (0.017)        (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.063)        (0.010)      (0.017)        (0.010)
      Deskilling Index           0.010       0.013**       0.027**       0.014**         0.008        0.014**        -0.005       0.013**         0.024
                                (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.014)       (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.058)      (0.006)        (0.021)
      CrowdoutxDeskill           0.009
                                (0.005)
      CrowdoutxIrish                         0.272***
                                              (0.089)
      DeskillxIrish                                          -0.059
                                                            (0.056)
      CrowdoutxCottage                                                     -0.014
                                                                          (0.019)
45




      DeskillxCottage                                                                   0.035**
                                                                                        (0.016)
      CrowdoutxAssim.                                                                                  0.074
                                                                                                      (0.094)
      DeskillxAssim.                                                                                                 0.028
                                                                                                                    (0.086)
      CrowdoutxPauper                                                                                                             0.039**
                                                                                                                                  (0.019)
      DeskillxPauper                                                                                                                             -0.011
                                                                                                                                                 (0.021)

      Full Controls              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
      Estimate                  0.040         0.271         -0.024         0.023         0.069         0.058         0.063         0.048          0.024
      Standard Error            0.009         0.076         0.055          0.018         0.018         0.033         0.088         0.012          0.022
     Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation (3). The outcome across all specifications is the Share of Know-Voting Vote for Governor in Mas-
     sachusetts in 1854. Please see text for the formal definition of crowdout and deskilling in Section III.B. Each of these indices is interacted and the
     name of the interaction is given by the column heading. Irish is the share of population that is Irish-born in 1855 (ranges from 0-1). Cottage industry
     employment in 1845 is measured in thousands of employed. Pauper is an indicator for the presence of any foreign-born pauper in 1850. See the text
     and data appendix for detailed explanations of variable construction. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls (similar to a measure of potential
     voters). Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
     Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for sources.
                                                     Table 9: Turnout by Year

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                                         1852           1853            1854            1855            1856            1857
                                        Turnout        Turnout         Turnout         Turnout         Turnout         Turnout

      Irish Labor Crowdout              -0.013*         -0.016**        -0.017*          -0.007          -0.008         -0.001
                                        (0.007)          (0.008)        (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.010)

      Deskilling Index                    -0.004         -0.003          0.000           0.005           -0.002          0.006
                                         (0.007)        (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.012)         (0.011)         (0.012)

      County FE                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
46




      Urbanization                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Pct Irish 1855                      Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Culture & Fiscal Burden             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Share Mfg & Ag 1840                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

      No. of Observations                 308             307             308             307             308             307
      R-squared                          0.487           0.395           0.199           0.280           0.336           0.266
      P-value                            0.306           0.177           0.093           0.308           0.609           0.521
     Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation (3). Turnout is measured as total votes for governor divided by ratable polls,
     a measure of eligible voters. Urbanization controls refer to an urban indicator (population > 2500 in 1855), number employed
     in cottage industries (1837), the share of native working age males in 1850 with an empty occupation string, and manufacturing
     establishments per capita (1855). Culture and Fiscal Burden control include an indicator for housing a foreign-born pauper
     in a given town and the assimilation index based on names of children of Irish-born parents. Share manufacturing and share
     agriculture are based on the 1840 census which asked employment at the household level. Robust standard errors are in
     parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
                Figure 1: Correlates of Know-Nothing Governor Vote Share


                             Panel (A): Manufacturing Employment




                           Panel (B): Share Population Foreign-born




                                Panel (C): Share Population Urban




Notes: Binned scatterplots depict the bivariate relationship between county-level vote share for Know-
Nothing gubernatorial candidates and socio-economic variables measured in the 1850 Census. The sample
is limited to Northern and border states in which the Know-Nothing Party (also known as American Party)
fielded a candidate (e.g. 1854: Delaware, Massachusetts, New York; 1855: Kentucky, New Hampshire, Ver-
mont; 1856: Illinois; 1857: Iowa, Maryland, Ohio, Pennsylvania). The underlying regressions include state
fixed effects and are weighted by county vote totals. The slope estimates reported with standard errors in
parentheses clustered by state. Sources: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (1999)
and Haines et al. (2010).
                                                   47
                              Figure 2: Irish Immigration into U.S.


                            Panel (A): Irish Immigration 1820 ­ 1870




                          Panel (B): Immigration Inflows 1820 ­ 2000




Notes: Shaded area is the timing of the Potato Famine in Ireland (1845-1852). Dark red line is the timing of
the Know-Nothing landslide in Massachusetts. Source: Ferenczi & Willcox (1929).




                                                   48
                      Figure 3: Percent Irish and Nay Votes


                          Panel (A): Percent Irish (1855)




                 Panel (B): Percent Vote Nay 1853 Constitution




Note: Data from for Panel (A) from the 1855 Massachusetts Census and data from Panel (B)
are from the Daily Advertiser. Values for Boston are not included in the maps.




                                          49
                             Figure 4: Conceptual Framework



               Deskilling due to
               Industrialization


                    Ds                 Ss
              Ds                            Ss Irish Immigration




     Ws
     Ws                                                    Su
Ws


                                                                   Su   Irish Immigration



     Wu
     Wu
     Wu

                                                                               Du Demand Shock due to
                                                                                    Industrialization
                                                                          Du




                           Qs Qs Qs             Qu Qu      Qu




          Notes: Supply and Demand Shocks in Antebellum Massachusetts.




                                               50
Figure 5: Irish Shift (1850 to 1855) and Baseline (1850) Share Native in Occupational Cat-
egories




Notes: Figure depicts the state-level Irish shift across 11 occupational categories used as the second term in
Equation 1. Baseline native employment shares in 1850 (males 15-65 years of age) average across state used
as the first term in Equation 1. The actual crowdout measure uses town-level variation in native shares.
Source: Massachusetts and Federal Population Censuses, 1850 and 1855.




                                                     51
            Figure 6: Change in Average Establishment Size, Massachusetts




Notes: Data from the Massachusetts Manufacturing Census in 1837, 1845 and 1855. Histogram of average
establishment size (number of workers per establishment by industry) over the three time periods.




                                               52
              Figure 7: Correlation Plots: Rise of Know-Nothings


                                Panel (A): Crowdout




                                Panel (B): Deskilling




          Panel (C): Correlation between Crowdout and Deskilling




Note: Partial correlation plots from Equation (3) between crowdout in Panel (A) and
deskilling in (B) and the outcome of Share Know-Nothing votes for Governor in Mas-
sachusetts, 1854. Panel (C) depicts a simple correlation between crowdout and deskilling.
See text for details.
                                           53
            Figure 8: Occupations by Ethnicity


    Panel (A): Percent of Ethnicity in an Occupation




 Panel (B): Frequencies of Ethnicity in an Occupation




                Panel (C): Shift by Ethnicity




Source: Massachusetts and Federal Population Censuses, 1850 and 1855
(FamilySearch 2016; Ruggles et al. 2018).

                                54
                                    Figure 9: Regression Results: Hypothesized Factors


      Panel (A): Deskilling                                Panel (B): Crowdout                          Panel (C): Non-Economic Factors
55




     Note: Figure plots estimates from Equation (3). The outcome across all specifications is the Share of vote for the respective
     party in each year. Please see text or data appendix for the formal definition of crowdout and deskilling in Section III.B. We
     include the same controls as 2 Column (6). The Panel heading provides the coefficient plotted.
 Figure 10: Regression Results for All Political Parties


        Panel (A): Irish Labor Market Crowdout




                    Panel (B): Deskilling




Note: Standardized coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from
Equation (3) over time for each party running a gubernatorial
candidate: Whigs (W), Democrats (D), Free Soilers (FS), Know-
Nothings (KN), and Republicans (R). We include the same controls
as 2 Column (6). The Panel heading provides the coefficient plot-
ted.

                               56
A   Supplemental Appendix

                   Table A.1: Summary Statistics: Voting Outcomes

                                     (1)         (2)     (3)    (4)    (5)   (6)
                                    Mean         s.d.   25th   50th   75th    N
         Know-Nothing Vote Share
           1854                      0.61        0.15   0.52   0.63   0.71   307
           1855                      0.35        0.16   0.22   0.36   0.46   306
           1856                      0.61        0.16   0.51   0.63   0.73   305
           1857                      0.25        0.15   0.14   0.25   0.36   306
           1858                      0.08        0.08   0.02   0.05   0.12   307
           1859                      0.11        0.10   0.03   0.09   0.16   303

         Turnout
           1852                      0.63        0.13   0.56   0.64   0.71   307
           1853                      0.59        0.13   0.52   0.60   0.68   306
           1854                      0.56        0.13   0.48   0.56   0.63   307
           1855                      0.58        0.13   0.50   0.59   0.66   306
           1856                      0.66        0.14   0.59   0.67   0.73   307
           1857                      0.55        0.14   0.48   0.54   0.62   306

         Legislator "Yea" on 1857 Literacy Amendment
           Mean within town           0.76     0.40     0.50   1.00   1.00   221


        Notes: Unweighted summary statistics for towns in the main estima-
        tion sample (excludes Boston). Turnout is measured as the number of
        votes cast for governor in an election divided by ratable polls in 1854.
        The 1857 literacy amendment enforced literacy tests for voters whose
        grandfathers could not vote, (e.g. immigrants and the formerly en-
        slaved and their descendants). Votes for the amendment were in the
        legislature. This variable is the proportion of legislatures for a given
        town that voted "Yea" for the amendment.
        Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for detailed information on
        the construction and data sources for all variables.




                                            57
                Table A.2: Robustness Check: 1837-55 Deskilling Index

                                                        (1)              (2)
                                                       Base            1837-55
                                                   Tab 1 - Col. 6     Deskilling

                  Irish Labor Crowdout                 0.035***         0.034***
                                                        (0.010)          (0.010)

                  1845-55 Deskilling Index             0.014**
                                                       (0.006)

                  1837-55 Deskilling Index                              0.017***
                                                                         (0.006)

                  County FE                              Yes               Yes
                  Urbanization                           Yes               Yes
                  Pct Irish 1855                         Yes               Yes
                  Culture & Fiscal Burden                Yes               Yes
                  Share Mfg & Ag 1840                    Yes               Yes

                  No. of Observations                    307              307
                  R-squared                             0.188            0.192
                  P-value                               0.099            0.178

Notes: Table reports OLS estimates from Equation 3. The outcome across all specifications is the Share of
Know-Voting Vote for Governor in Massachusetts in 1854. Column (1) uses the deskilling index measured
from 1845-55 and 1845 industry shares. Column (2) uses the deskilling index measured from 1837-55 and
1837 industry shares. Controls are the same as in Table 2 Column (6). Regressions are weighted by ratable
polls (similar to a measure of potential voters) except in column (8). Robust standard errors are in parenthe-
ses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for a detailed list of data sources.




                                                 58
                        Table A.3: Summary Statistics: Controls

                                                (1)     (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)  (6)
                                                                   th     th     th
                                              Mean      s.d.    25     50     75     N
 Irish Labor Crowdout                         -0.011   0.934   -0.761 -0.065 0.756 307
 Deskilling Index                             0.001    1.002   -0.534 -0.447 0.139 307
 Population in 1855                           3,165    4,298   1,112 1,876 3,246 307
 Ln(Population) in 1855                       7.615    0.869   7.014 7.537 8.085 307
 Urban (=1)                                   0.384    0.487   0.000 0.000 1.000 307
 Share population Irish in 1855               0.092    0.073   0.034 0.075 0.135 307
 Any foreign-born pauper in 1850              0.505    0.501   0.000 1.000 1.000 307
 Failure to assimilate                        0.682    0.124   0.649 0.681 0.715 307
 Share labor in manufacturing (1840)          0.316    0.191   0.160 0.274 0.446 307
 Share in agriculture (1840)                  0.581    0.241   0.388 0.621 0.785 307
 Share in mining (1840)                       0.003    0.019   0.000 0.000 0.000 307
 Share in commerce (1840)                     0.022    0.027   0.004 0.015 0.029 307
 Share in professional (1840)                 0.016    0.012   0.009 0.013 0.018 307
 Share in river transport (1840)              0.002    0.009   0.000 0.000 0.000 307
 Share in ocean transport (1840)              0.060    0.158   0.000 0.001 0.013 307
 Native-born share of employment (1850)       0.894    0.061   0.875 0.908 0.932 307
 Change in labor demand of native-born        -0.055   0.311   -0.105 0.005 0.104 307
 Cottage industry employment (1845)            203      512       8     46    203 307
 Manufacturing estab. per capita (1855)       0.007    0.006   0.003 0.005 0.008 307
 Change in man. estab. p.c. (1855-45)         0.001    0.006   -0.001 0.001 0.003 307
 $ value of man. output p.c. (1855)           4.557    1.111   3.989 4.731 5.337 307
 Change in $ val. of man. out. p.c. (1855-45) 0.783    0.850   0.327 0.689 1.191 307
 Change in p.p. of Irish emp. (1855-45)       0.037    0.077   0.006 0.029 0.063 307
Notes: Unweighted summary statistics for the 307 towns included in the main results.
Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for detailed information on the construction and
data sources for all variables.




                                          59
      Table A.4: Shift-Share Exposure: Rotemberg Weights

Panel (A): Crowdout Exposure Occupation Weights and Shifts
                       ^k       gk             ^k
                                               
Factory Operatives    0.27     0.37          0.047
Laborer               0.20     0.06          0.004
Agriculturalist       0.16    -0.06          0.036
Low Skill Mechanics   0.11    -0.05          0.018
Boot and Shoe         0.11     0.03          0.051
Merchants             0.07    -0.07          0.100
Mariners              0.02    -0.07          0.083
High Skill Mechanics 0.02     -0.04         -0.016
Misc                  0.02    -0.04         -0.011
Professionals         0.02    -0.07          0.077
Manufacturers         0.00    -0.07         -0.407

Share Top-5                    0.84
cor(^ k ,gk )                  0.80

Panel (B): Deskilling Exposure Negative and Positive Weights
                         Sum Mean              Share
Positive                1.049 0.016            0.623
Negative                -0.049 -0.001          0.377

 Panel (C): Deskilling Exposure Industry Weights and Shifts
                         ^k       gk             ^k
                                                 
Cotton Mills            0.57   40.89           0.022
Calico                  0.15   37.34          -0.001
Boots and Shoes         0.12    -8.85          0.039
Woolen                  0.06   18.84           0.012
Linen                   0.03 154.65            0.040

Share Top-5                    0.94
cor(^ k ,gk )                  0.27
Notes: This table reports summary statistics of the Rotemberg weights (^    k )
on each initial share in the exposure indices using the procedure developed
in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020). Panel (A) explores the underlying iden-
tifying information for the Irish labor market crowdout exposure index. Oc-
cupations are listed in order of the highest weight. Note that all occupations
have positive weights. gk is the the demeaned occupation-specific shift and
^k is the coefficient from the just-identified regression using the share as the

instrument. The top-5 occupation categories by weight make up 84 percent
of the total weight, and the correlation coefficient between the Rotemberg
weights and occupation shifts is 0.80. Panel (B) reports the sum of weights,
mean weight, and share of industries with positive and negative weights.
Panel (C) repeats the analysis of Panel (A) for the top-5 industries by weight
in the deskilling exposure index.


                                      60
                Table A.5: Relationship Between Occupation Shares and Observable Characteristics

                                         (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)
                                      Factory                                         Low-Skill        Boots and
                                     Operative      Laborer      Agriculturalist      Mechanics            Shoes      Crowdout
      Percent Irish (1855)             0.001         0.008         -0.528***             0.053            -0.012         0.662
                                      (0.038)       (0.093)          (0.089)            (0.108)           (0.191)       (0.988)
      Urban (=1)                       -0.000        0.002         -0.046***             0.001             0.008         0.013
                                      (0.003)       (0.014)          (0.015)            (0.014)           (0.020)       (0.123)
      Man. Est. p.c. (1855)            -0.019        -0.560          -0.748              1.181            -1.293        -5.830
                                      (0.205)       (0.830)          (0.850)            (1.093)           (1.346)       (7.422)
      Native Labor Demand             -0.014*        -0.007          -0.013              0.009             0.028        -0.267
                                      (0.008)       (0.016)          (0.015)            (0.015)           (0.023)       (0.173)
      Cottage Emp (1845)               -0.003        0.001           -0.003           -0.024***          0.037**         0.114
                                      (0.003)       (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.019)       (0.091)
      Pauper                           0.000         0.011           -0.011              0.011            -0.016         0.001
61




                                      (0.003)       (0.011)          (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.017)       (0.101)
      Assimilation                     0.019         0.042           -0.013              0.069            -0.001         0.688
                                      (0.018)       (0.056)          (0.074)            (0.053)           (0.074)       (0.563)
      Share Whig (1844)                0.010         -0.033         0.088**             0.093*           -0.127*       -0.671*
                                      (0.008)       (0.038)          (0.040)            (0.053)           (0.066)       (0.358)
      Deskilling Index                0.006**        0.008          0.011**              0.001          -0.038***       -0.012
                                      (0.002)       (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.005)           (0.009)       (0.051)
      Share Man. (1840)                0.013         -0.029          -0.036            0.191***          0.502***      2.542***
                                      (0.016)       (0.056)          (0.051)            (0.065)           (0.097)       (0.495)
      Share Ag. (1840)                 0.010        0.090**         0.467***             0.024           0.234***      2.039***
                                      (0.016)       (0.040)          (0.033)            (0.056)           (0.075)       (0.435)
     Notes: Each column reports results of a single regression of town-level native-born occupation share on observable charac-
     teristics. Only the top five occupation categories by weight are reported. See Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020) for the proce-
     dure to construct weights. The final column is the Irish labor market crowdout exposure index. Regressions are weighted
     by ratable polls (similar to a measure of potential voters). Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to
     statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.
     Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for detailed information on the construction and data sources for all variables.
     Table A.6: Relationship Between Manufacturing Industry Shares and Observable Characteristics

                                              (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)               (5)           (6)
                                          Cotton                  Boots and
                                             Mills    Calico        Shoes    Woolen             Linen      Deskilling
         Percent Irish (1855)              0.460*      0.220        -0.003     0.155             0.019       5.233***
                                           (0.246)    (0.137)      (0.003)   (0.142)           (0.018)        (1.849)
         Urban (=1)                         -0.030    -0.015        0.000    0.035**             0.002         -0.134
                                           (0.025)    (0.012)      (0.000)   (0.016)           (0.002)        (0.171)
         Man. Est. p.c. (1855)              -0.412    -1.435        0.005      1.275            -0.075         -9.225
                                           (2.122)    (1.204)      (0.029)   (0.833)           (0.110)       (17.128)
         Native Labor Demand                -0.072    -0.013        0.000     -0.021            -0.004         -0.534
                                           (0.079)    (0.023)      (0.000)   (0.018)           (0.003)        (0.412)
         Cottage Emp (1845)              -0.057***    -0.011        -0.000  -0.025***          -0.002*      -0.546***
                                           (0.015)    (0.007)      (0.000)   (0.007)           (0.001)        (0.117)
         Pauper                             -0.007     0.006        0.000      0.011            -0.001         0.108
                                           (0.021)    (0.013)      (0.000)   (0.010)           (0.002)        (0.143)
62




         Assimilation                       -0.093     0.098        0.000      0.025            -0.008         -0.052
                                           (0.101)    (0.068)      (0.001)   (0.048)           (0.018)        (0.800)
         Share Whig (1844)                  -0.003    -0.002        0.001     -0.060             0.002         0.275
                                           (0.092)    (0.025)      (0.001)   (0.059)           (0.003)        (0.653)
         Irish Labor Crowdout               0.014     -0.006        0.000      0.002             0.001         -0.027
                                           (0.017)    (0.009)      (0.000)   (0.008)           (0.001)        (0.109)
         Share Man. (1840)                0.544***     0.111        0.000   0.182***             0.008       5.159***
                                           (0.133)    (0.073)      (0.001)   (0.054)           (0.007)        (0.980)
         Share Ag. (1840)                   0.075      0.031        0.000   0.154***           0.014*         1.863**
                                           (0.110)    (0.049)      (0.001)   (0.044)           (0.008)        (0.777)
        Notes: Each column reports results of a single regression of town-level industry share in 1845 on observable
        characteristics. Only the top five industry categories by Rotemberg weight are reported. See Goldsmith-
        Pinkham et al. (2020) for the procedure to construct weights. The final column is the deskilling exposure
        index. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls (similar to a measure of potential voters). Robust standard
        errors reported in parentheses. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, re-
        spectively.
        Sources: See Data Appendix in Section B for detailed information on the construction and data sources for
        all variables.
                      Table A.7: Robustness to Spatial Correlation

                                        (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

                                                            Distance Cutoff
                             20km        50km      100km 150km                           None
              Panel (A): Moran's I Statistic of Global Correlation
   Chi-square                 4.43        2.99      2.60      2.32                        2.44
   p-value                    0.04        0.08      0.11      0.13                        0.12

           Panel (B): Standard Errors Adjusted for Spatial Correlation
   Irish Labor Crowdout       0.035*** 0.035** 0.035** 0.035** 0.035***
                               (0.011)  (0.014)   (0.015)   (0.014)    (0.005)

   Deskilling Index                  0.014**      0.014**      0.014***    0.014***    0.014***
                                     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.002)

             Panel (C): Local Spillovers of Crowdout and Deskilling
   Irish Labor Crowdout        0.029** 0.034*** 0.033*** 0.031*** 0.033***
                               (0.012)    (0.011) (0.011)  (0.011)  (0.011)

   Deskilling Index                  0.014**      0.014**      0.015***    0.015***     0.015**
                                     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
   Lagged Crowdout                    0.017       -0.003         0.008       0.015       0.006
                                     (0.018)      (0.022)       (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.024)
   Lagged Deskilling                  0.027        0.023         0.025      0.033*      0.032*
                                     (0.016)      (0.015)       (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)

   County FE                           Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Urbanization                        Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Pct Irish 1855                      Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Culture & Fiscal Burden             Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Share Mfg & Ag 1840                 Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Notes: The outcome across all specifications is the Share of Know-Voting Vote for Governor in
Massachusetts in 1854. Panel (A) reports results from estimating Moran's I using residuals from
Equation (3) from Column (6) of Table 2, and an inverse distance weighting matrix. Panel (B) ad-
justs standard errors for spatial autocorrelation using the procedure developed by Conley (1999)
and a weighting matrix with a linear distance decay. Panel (C) estimates a SLX model using an
inverse distance weighting matrix and includes first-order spatial lags of the two exposure vari-
ables of interest. Regressions are weighted by ratable polls in 1854. *, **, *** refer to statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                 63
Figure A.1: Occupational Distribution for Know-Nothing Members and All Native Males
in Massachusetts




 Notes: Data from Archives of Massachusetts Historical Society provided by Tyler Anbinder (Anbinder 1992).
 Pink bars describe the occupational distribution for Know-Nothing members using lists from Worcester and
 purple bars provide the same for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.




                                                  64
                                  Figure A.2: State Characteristics


               Panel (A): Share Irish                     Panel (B): Share Catholic Valuation
65




     Notes: Data from 1850 U.S. Census. Panel (A) describes the share of population that is Irish-born,
     Panel (B) describes the share of church property value that is owned by Roman Catholics.
                             Figure A.3: Pauperism and Criminals

Panel (A): Total Number of Paupers Supported                     Panel (B): Total Annual Cost of Support




Panel (C): Total Number of Criminals Convicted              Panel (D): Total Number of Criminals In Prison




Notes: Data from Table CLXXIII. Pauperism in the United States, 1850. Panel (A) describes the whole
number of native and foreign Paupers supported in whole or part within the year ending June 1,
Panel (B) describes an annual cost of support. Data from Table CLXXVI. Statistics of Criminals.
Panel (C) describes the whole number of criminals convicted within the year of 1850, Panel (D)
describes the whole number of criminals in prison on June 1, 1850.




                                                  66
                    Figure A.4: Urbanization Rates by State (1790-1860)




Notes: Blue line is Massachusetts. Black line is New York. Top gray line is Rhode Island. Source: Author
calculation from 1790 - 1860 Census: US Population Data provided by NHGIS




                                                 67
       Figure A.5: Wage Observations from Census of Social Statistics (1850 & 1860)

                       Panel (A): Daily wage without board for day laborers
                             1850                               1860




                                    Panel (B): Daily wage carpenters
                                1850                                1860




                               Panel (C): Monthly wage for farm laborers
                                1850                               1860




Notes: Histograms provide the frequency of exact reported wages in contemporary dollars. The sample size
varies between 299 and 302 towns. Directions to Census marshalls as to how to collect and report local wage
information consisted entirely of the following statement: "The information called for in the six columns relating
to wages is so simple, and so plainly set forth in the headings thereof, that it is deemed unnecessary to add thereto."
(DeBow 1854, xxv)
Source: Manuscripts of the Census of Social Statistics of 1850 and 1860. Data was hand entered by authors
from manuscript images published on Ancestry.com.




                                                         68
                                  Figure A.6: Know-Nothing Gubernatorial Votes Over Time (Percent)


                                                  Panel (A): Map of Votes in 1854 and 1857
                                    (a) 1854                                                             (b) 1857
69




                                          Panel (B): Map of Republicans in 1857 and Stronghold
                                    (c) 1857                                             (d) Stronghold




     Notes: Color scheme held constant across exhibits (a)-(c) with breakpoints at 0, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100. Stronghold defined as municipalities
     where the Know-Nothing vote is greater than 50 pctile in every year. Sources: Various years of the Massachusetts Register.
               Figure A.7: Permutation Tests


                    Panel (A): Crowdout




                     Panel (B): Deskilling




Notes: Distribution of coefficients from permutation test of crowd-
out and deskilling indicies, respectively.




                                70
         Figure A.8: Know-Nothing Legislators


   Panel (A): Know-Nothing Town Representatives




 Panel (B): Know-Nothing Legislators Shifting Parties




Note: Data from the Daily Advertiser entered for the election cy-
cles 1853 to 1857 and demonstrates the number of legislators of a
given party and, for those Know-Nothing legislators that could be
linked, their party affiliation over time.




                               71
B   Data Appendix
B.A   Town Harmonization
Over the period from which we draw data sources, 1840-1860, Massachusetts newly incor-
porated 26 towns and cities. We begin with towns listed in the 1840 U.S. Decennial Census
to create a base list used to construct a panel of consistent towns across data sources. We
aggregate data from the post-1840 incorporated towns into the original town from which
they were split, leaving us with 309 towns in the base list (dropping Boston in the main re-
gressions leaves a sample size of 308). Appendix Table B.8 provides a crosswalk of newly
incorporated towns to original towns in the 1840 town base list.

                                Table B.8: Town Crosswalk

          Town            Year of Incorporation Original/Aggregate Town
          Achushnet                1860         Dartmouth
          Agawam                   1855         West Springfield
          Ashland                  1846         Framingham
          Belmont                  1859         Cambridge
          Blackstone               1845         Mendon
          Chicopee                 1848         Springfield
          Clinton                  1850         Lancaster
          Holyoke                  1850         West Springfield
          Lakeville                1853         Middleborough
          Lawrence                 1847         Andover
          Marion                   1852         Rochester
          Mattapoisett             1857         Rochester
          Melrose                  1850         Malden
          Monterey                 1847         Tyringham
          Nahant                   1853         Lynn
          North Andover            1855         Andover
          North Reading            1853         Reading
          Norwell                  1849         Scituate
          Peabody                  1855         Danvers
          Revere                   1852         Chelsea
          Swampscott               1852         Lynn
          West Brookfield          1848         Brookfield
          Winchester               1850         Woburn
          Winthrop                 1852         Chelsea

    Two towns additional towns - Boston Corner and Mashpee - are dropped from the
analysis that infrequently appear in reported sources. Boston Corner was ceded from
Massachusetts to New York in 1853. Mashpee was a reservation for the Wampanoag tribe
of indigenous peoples.




                                            72
B.B        Voting Data
The primary outcome variables are town-level annual election returns for governor of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts from various years of the Massachusetts Register (1856),
and various newspapers. Election returns for governor for 1852-1859 were hand-entered
from the Massachusetts Register, an annually published state almanac during the period.
We corroborate the reported vote totals for 1854 and 1857 in the Massachusetts Registers
with the original hand-written tallies from the Secretary of Commonwealth's office kept
in the Massachusetts State Archives. Returns for the 1853 State Constitution vote also come
from the Massachusetts Register. Election returns for the 1844 gubernatorial election and
were entered from the hand-written records of the Secretary of the Commonwealth held
at the Massachusetts State Archives.
    We convert the candidate votes in the share of votes received by each political party
by dividing by the total votes cast in the town. Turnout in a given year is calculated from
the total votes cast in the town divided by the ratable polls in 1854. Ratable polls were the
concept used at the time to measure the number of potential voters, and were reported in
the Massachusetts Register (1855).
    Infrequently, a few towns did not send returns to the State. These towns are dropped
from regressions in years in which vote totals are not reported, but are included in the
sample in years for which totals were reported. This is the reason why the sample size
varies across years in the election outcomes regressions. These anomalies in the reporting
are listed below and any adjustments that we make:

      1. 1852 - Governor votes not reported in Sharon. Used presidential votes for turnout.
      2. 1853 - Governor votes not reported in Tisbury. Missing turnout.
      3. 1855 - Governor votes not reported in Chilmark. Missing turnout.
      4. 1854 - All towns reported.
      5. 1856 - Governor votes not reported in Holland and Tolland. Used presidential votes
         for turnout.
      6. 1857 - Governor votes not reported in New Ashford. Missing turnout.
      7. 1858 - Used unofficial results reported in footnotes for Oxford and Wellfleet.

In addition, ratable polls in 1854 were not reported for Sherbourn and Weymouth. For
these two towns, we predicted ratable polls as a function of 1855 town population, using
the regression coefficient of ratable polls on population.
B.C        Exposure to Labor Market Crowdout
Labor market crowdout measures a town's exposure to the state-wide labor supply shock
from Irish immigration. It interacts the initial town-level occupation distribution of native-
born workers with the state-wide growth in Irish employment in those same occupational
categories:

                                                     1855,M ass
                                       L1850 ,i
                                        N ative,j ·(LIrish,j    - L1850 ,M ass
                                                                   Irish,j     )
(4)                  crowdouti =                                                   ,
                                   j
                                       L1850 ,i
                                        T otN ative        L1850 ,M ass
                                                            T otal,j




                                                      73
    where i indexes local labor markets, j represents skill groups, and the time step is
between the 1850 Federal Census and the 1855 Massachusetts Census. State-wide shifts
in skill cell-specific labor market competition from Irish immigrants - the second term
in Equation (4) - is measured as the change in the number of each skill cell that is Irish-
born between 1850 and 1855 normalized by total labor in that occupation in 1850. These
shifts are weighted by the skill cell's share in each local labor market's initial native-born
employment.
    Skill-groups are defined by broad occupational categories, comparable across datasets:
agriculturalists, boot and shoe makers, factory operatives, laborers, manufacturers, mariners,
low-skill mechanics, high-skill mechanics, merchants, professionals, and miscellaneous.
The eleven broad categories correspond to those used in the published aggregate statis-
tics of the 1855 Massachusetts census (DeWitt 1856). We use these to verify that our data
digitization of the 1855 microdata aligns closely with the published aggregates.
    The initial occupation distributions are constructed from the 1850 Decennial Census
microdata provided by (Ruggles et al. 2018). State-level changes in foreign-born penetra-
tion for each skill group are constructed from a combination of the 1850 complete count
census, and the 1855 Massachusetts Population Census microdata provided by Family-
Search.org (FamilySearch 2016). The latter required digitizing the 1855 Massachusetts
microdata, hand-entering occupations for 300,000 working age men. First, occupation
strings were coded into the 1880 specific IPUMS occupation codes (OCC). The 1850 IPUMS
complete count census microdata contains OCC codes. For both the 1850 and 1855 data,
we then constructed the state-level foreign-born (or Irish) proportion in each of the eight
broad occupation categories. The sample is limited to men, at least 16 years old, with a
reported occupation and reported country of birth for both the 1850 and 1855 data. A
reported occupation corresponds to an 1880 IPUMS OCC code of less than 300.
    The primary labor market crowdout variable includes only the increase in Irish workers
in each broad occupational category between 1850 and 1855. However, we also construct a
number of other shocks based on immigrant ethnicity to use in robustness checks: British,
German, and a combined British and German category.
B.D   Exposure to Deskilling
Exposure to deskilling follows the general setup of a shift-share variable equation ­ state-
wide industry-specific changes in average establishment size are interacted with lagged
local industry employment shares:

                                     L1845
                                      k
                                           ,i
                                                  L1855
                                                   k
                                                        ,M ass
                                                                 L1845
                                                                  k
                                                                       ,M ass
(5)              deskillingi =             ,i ·                -                ,
                                 k
                                     L1840
                                      T ot
                                                   1855,M ass
                                                  Nk              1845,M ass
                                                                 Nk

where i denotes town, k denotes industry, L denotes employment and N represents the
number of establishments. The initial industry employment levels L1845
                                                                   k
                                                                       ,i
                                                                          by town are con-
structed from town-level reports in the 1845 Massachusetts Manufacturing Census, which
we hand-entered (Palfrey 1846). The census reported town by industry aggregates, not
firm-level microdata. An example of the type of information provided can be seen in
Appendix Figure B.9. A total of 106 industry categories were reported in the 1845 Manu-
facturing Census, which are listed in Appendix Table B.9. Note that the denominator for

                                                  74
the share of employed is taken from the 1840 U.S. Decennial Population Census provided
by IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2018). This is so we could normalize by all employment in both
manufacturing and agriculture, since the latter is not reported in the manufacturing cen-
sus. Transportation workers, merchants, and professionals are also included in the total
labor force.
    Atack et al. (2004) demonstrate that average establishment wage declines with estab-
lishment size consistent with deskilling. See also Sokoloff (1984), Goldin & Sokoloff (1984)
and Atack et al. (2010) for additional motivation for the use of establishment size as re-
lated to deskilling. Thus, the shifts in the deskilling exposure variable comes from the
industry-specific state-wide changes in average establishment size. We use the 1845 and
1855 Massachusetts Manufacturing Censuses to construct this shift (Palfrey 1846; DeWitt
1856). State-wide totals of establishments and employment by industry were hand-entered
to construct the shift. Per the instructions to assessors, information on the number of es-
tablishments was not requested for all industries. We are left with 62 industries in 1845
and 83 in 1855 where we can estimate average establishment size. The industries that did
not report number of establishments fit into one of two categories: cottage industries us-
ing the putting-out system where the idea of an establishment lacks much meaning in our
measure, or in industries with relatively small employment that resembled small shops.
    By construction, our deskilling index gives a shift of zero in the industries where we
cannot estimate average establishment size in both years. However, cottage industries had
already experienced the deskilling process. These industries that formerly relied on itin-
erant artisans for all aspects of production now moved to using the putting out system.
Production was divided into a series of low- and high-skill tasks, with low-skill tasks given
to private households to complete during free time, say when not working in fields. For
example, according to Hazard (1913) the boot and shoe industry in Massachusetts had al-
ready switched from skilled artisan cobblers to the low-skilled putting out system by the
late 1830s. Thus, the fact that cottage industries experience no deskilling in the construc-
tion of our exposure variable is not an issue.

B.E   Other variables
  1. Population, urbanization, and share Irish population in 1855: Controls for log pop-
     ulation, an indicator for urban (town population >= 2,500), and the share of town
     population that was Irish immigrants are constructed using the 1855 Massachusetts
     Census microdata provided by FamilySearch (2016).
  2. Culture: We proxy for culture using an index of how Irish are first names that Irish
     born parents give to their children once in the United States. We take all native-born
     children born to native or Irish parents and under age 10 in the 1855 State Census.
     We calculate the Irish name index following Abramitzky et al. (2019). Specifically
                                                   #Irishi
                                                    T otali
      for each given name i, IrishIndexi =   #Irishi    #N ative   . This variable ranges from 0 to
                                             T otali
                                                     + T otal i
                                                              i
     1, with 0 being a completely American name and 1 being a solely Irish name.
  3. Fiscal Burden of Immigration: We measure the fiscal burden of immigration using
     the number of foreign-born paupers in the 1855 Massachusetts Census microdata.
     The primary variable to measure fiscal burden is an indicator equal to 1 if there are

                                             75
                  Table B.9: Industries Used in Exposure to Factories Variable
      MA Census                                                      MA Census
No.     Code      1845 Listed Industries                       No.     Code      1845 Listed Industries
 1        1       Cotton Mills                                 54       58       Fire Arms
 2        2       Calico Manufacturies                         55       59       Cannon
 3        3       Bleaching and Coloring                       56       60       Chocolate Mills
 4        4       Woollen                                      57       61       Chair and Cabinet Manufacturers
 5        5       Carpeting                                    58       62       Tin ware
 6        6       Worsted                                      59       63       Comb Manufactories
 7        7       Hosiery                                      60       64       White Lead and Other Paints
 8        8       Linen                                        61       65       Linseed Oil
 9        9       Silk                                         62       66       Camphene or Burning Fluid
10       10       Rolling, Slitting, and Nail Machines         63       67       Glue and Gum Manufactories
11       11       Forges                                       64       68       Cotton Gins
12       12       Pig-iron                                     65       69       Flour Mills
13       13       Hollow Ware and Castings                     66       70       Tanneries
14       14       Machinery                                    67       71       Currying Establishments
15       15       Steam Engines and Boilers                    68       72       Patent and Enameled Leather
16       16       Fire Engines                                 69       73       Boots and Shoes
17       17       Scythes                                      70       74       Straw Bonnets and hats
18       18       Axes, Hatchets, and Edge Tools               71       75       Bricks
19       19       Cutlery, Door Handles and Latches            72       76       Mathematical Instruments
20       20       Screws                                       73       77       Snuff, Tobacco, and Cigars
21       21       Butts or Hinges                              74       78       Building Stone
22       23       Locks                                        75       79       Marble
23       24       Tacks and Brads                              76       80       Lime
24       25       Shovels, Spades, Forks, and Hoes             77       81       Mineral Coal and Iron Ore
25       26       Ploughs and Other Agricultural Implements    78        82      Charcoal
26       27       Iron Railings, Fences, and Safes             79       83       Whips
27       28       Copper                                       80       84       Blacking
28       29       Brass Foundries                              81       85       Blocks and Pumps
29       30       Brittania Ware                               82       86       Mechanics Tools
30       31       Buttons                                      83       87       Wooden Ware
31       32       Glass                                        84       88       Corn and Other Brooms
32       33       Starch                                       85       90       Lasts and Shoe Pegs
33       34       Chemical Preparations                        86       91       Lumber
34       35       Paper                                        87       92       Firewood
35       36       Piano-Fortes and Other Musical Instruments   88       117      Casks
36       37       Clocks                                       89       118      Fringe and Tassels
37       38       Sewing Machines                              90       119      Stone and Earthen Ware
                  Chronometers, Watches, Gold and Silver
38       40       Ware and Jewelry, Gold Pens                   91      120      Sashes, Doors, and Blinds
39       41       Brushes                                       92      121      Gas
40       42       Saddles, Harness, and Trunks                  93      122      Pickles and Preserves
41       43       Upholstery                                    94      123      Alcohol and other Distilled Liquors
42       44       Hats and Caps                                 95      124      Beer
43       45       Cordage                                       96      125      Friction Matches
44       46       Boats                                         97      126      India Rubber Goods
45       48       Masts and Spars                               98      127      Bread
46       50       Cards                                         99      128      Types and Stereotype Plates
47       51       Salt                                         100      129      Boxes of all kinds
                  Railroad Cars, Coaches, Chaises, Wagons,
48       52       Sleighs, and Other Vehicles                  101      130      Confectionery
49       53       Lead                                         102      132      Porte-monnaies, Pocket-books, etc.
50       54       Sugar Refined                                103      133      Clothing
51       55       Oil and Sperm Candles                        104      138      Printing
52       56       Soap and Tallow Candles                      105      139      Bookbinding
                                                                                 Gravestones, Wheelwright Stock, Baskets,
                                                                                 Umbrellas and a variety of other articles not
53       57       Powder Mills                                 106      140      elsewhere enumerated




                                                         76
Figure B.9: Example of 1845 Massachusetts Manufacturing Census Town-level Tabulation




                Source: Palfrey (1846)




                                         77
   any foreign-born paupers in a town. As a robustness check, we use the share of
   paupers that are foreign-born. The distribution of the share is highly skewed with a
   majority of zeros, and thus suggests our use of the indicator.
4. Pre-existing industry composition: In regressions, we control for some or all town-
   level industry shares of employment from the 1840 U.S. Population Census provided
   by IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2018). The industry categories include: agriculture, man-
   ufacturing, commerce, professional, mining, river transportation, and ocean trans-
   portation. There were nine towns that existed in 1840 and should have been included
   in the census microdata, but were not. We use the county average industry shares for
   these towns: Boxford, Brookline, Easthampton, Essex, Georgetown, Hanover, Row-
   ley, Somerville, Westhampton.
5. Mill Town Indicator: A mill town is defined as a settlement that developed around
   one or more textile mills. The mill town indicator is equal to one if the town had
   a high proportion of town employment in textile mills in the 1845 Massachusetts
   Manufacturing Census (Palfrey 1846).
6. Native Labor Demand Shift: Meant to control for potential changes in demand for
                                                                         L1855   -L1850
   native labor, the native demand shift is measured as: Di,native = i,native
                                                                         L1850
                                                                                 i,native
                                                                                          , using
                                                                           i,native
   data from the 1850 U.S. and 1855 Massachusetts population censuses (Ruggles et al.
    2018; FamilySearch 2016).
7. Industrialization variables: Our results on the short-run industrial response to Irish
   immigration use the level and change in establishments per capita and log output
   dollar value per capita at the town level. Establishments per capita is calculated as
   the total number of manufacturing establishments in a town in 1855 (or 1850) divided
   by the population in the town in 1855 (1850). The log dollar value of manufactur-
   ing output per capita is calculated similarly. Change in establishments per capita
   is the difference in levels. Change in output value is the difference in log dollars
   per capita. Establishments and output value was digitized from the 1845 and 1855
   Massachusetts Manufacturing Censuses (Palfrey 1846; DeWitt 1856). Population is
   calculated from the 1850 U.S. census and 1855 Massachusetts census microdata (Rug-
   gles et al. 2018; FamilySearch 2016).
8. Cottage industry exposure: Town cottage industry employment is measured using
   the employment counts in the 1845 Massachusetts Manufacturing Census (Palfrey
   1846). We code an industry as "cottage" if it has a high percentage of female workers
   and a high percentage of hand power in 1850, or there is narrative evidence that pro-
   duction was primarily done by the putting out system. Cottage industries include:
   boots and shoes (71% of all cottage employment); straw bonnets and hats (27%);
   snuff, tobacco, and cigars (< 1%); whips; port-monnaies, pocket-books, etc. (< 1%);
   clothing (< 1%); bookbinding (< 1%). The boot and shoe, and straw bonnet and hat
   industries make up 45 percent of total manufacturing employment in the state.
9. Share empty occupation string: Measured in 1850 at the town-level using the 1850
   U.S. census microdata (Ruggles et al. 2018), this variable captures the share of native-
   born males of working age (>15) with an empty occupation string or non-occupational
   response. We include this variable to capture potential measurement error in the ini-
   tial 1850 occupation shares used in the crowdout exposure index. Errors by census

                                             78
     takers, in the digitization process, and when categorizing occupation strings into
     codes may lead to empty occupation strings that cluster within towns and lead to
     mismeasured occupation shares.
 10. Town latitude and longitude: Robustness to forms of spatial correlation requires
     the use of location information for each historical town. We calculate the latitude
     and longitude of the centroid of each modern town using the shapefile produced
     by the Massachusetts Bureau of Geographic Information.57 The shapefile uses the
     state plane coordinate system (Massachusetts - 2001), which we convert to latitude
     and longitude and calculate town centroids using ArcMap. The modern shapefile
     includes towns incorporated after our 1840 town base list, and does not include his-
     torical towns that no longer exist. To handle towns incorporated after 1840, we use
     two methods. First, we apply the modern geographic centroid of the original town
     from which the newly incorporated town seceded. Second, we average the latitude
     and longitude of all modern town centroids that were part of the 1840 town. Results
     are not affected by this choice. Nine historical towns no longer exist: four were an-
     nexed by Boston, four were flooded by the construction of the Quabbin Reservoir in
     1938, and one town was ceded to Rhode Island.58
       (a) Brighton - annexed by Boston in 1874, dropped pin by eyeballing centroid in
            google maps, 42.34; -71.15
       (b) Charlestown - annexed by Boston in 1874. See https://tools.wmflabs.org/
            geohack/geohack.php?pagename=Charlestown,_Boston&params=42_22_31_N_71_
            03_52_W_region:US-MA_type:city
        (c) Dorchester - annexed by Boston in 1870, dropped pin by eyeballing centroid in
            google maps, 42.29; -71.06
       (d) West Roxbury - annexed by Boston in 1868, dropped pin by eyeballing centroid
            in google maps, 42.28; -71.16
       (e) Dana - disincorporated as part of Quabbin Reservoir. See https://tools.wmflabs.
            org/geohack/geohack.php?pagename=Dana,_Massachusetts&params=42_25_19_
            N_72_13_39_W_type:city_region:US-MA
        (f) Enfield - disincorporated as part of Quabbin Reservoir. See https://tools.
            wmflabs.org/geohack/geohack.php?pagename=Enfield,_Massachusetts&params=
            42_19_0_N_72_19_58_W_type:city_region:US-MA
       (g) Greenwich - disincorporated as part of Quabbin Reservoir. See https://tools.
            wmflabs.org/geohack/geohack.php?pagename=Greenwich,_Massachusetts&params=
            42_21_33_N_72_17_47_W_type:city_region:US-MA
       (h) Prescott - disincorporated as part of Quabbin Reservoir. See https://tools.
            wmflabs.org/geohack/geohack.php/pagename=Prescott,_Massachusetts&params=
            42_23_30_N_72_20_41_W_type:city_region:US-MA
        (i) Pawtucket - ceded to Rhode island in 1862. See https://tools.wmflabs.org/
            geohack/geohack.php?pagename=Pawtucket,_Rhode_Island&params=41_52_32_
            N_71_22_34_W_type:city
  57
      Source: http://www.mass.gov/anf/research-and-tech/it-serv-and-support/application-serv/office-
of-geographic-information-massgis/datalayers/townsurvey.html (Accessed on June 17, 2020)
   58
      All websites accessed on June 17, 2020.


                                                79
                      Table B.10: Matched Sample vs Unmatched Population

                                                 (1)                                 (2)
                                           Population Mean          Difference: Matched-Population
     =1 if urban                                0.248                           -0.0559***
                                                                                   (0.002)
     =1 if owns property                          0.336                           0.111***
                                                                                   (0.002)
     Ln(Real Estate Property+1)                   2.462                           0.822***
                                                                                   (0.018)
     =1 if literate                               0.996                           0.002***
                                                                                  (0.0001)
     =1 if Agriculturalist                        0.250                           0.053***
                                                                                   (0.002)
     =1 if Boots and Shoes                        0.119                           0.015***
                                                                                   (0.002)
     =1 if Factory Operative                      0.005                          -0.001***
                                                                                  (0.0001)
     =1 if High Skill Mechanic                    0.095                             0.001
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Laborer                                0.110                          -0.031***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Low Skill Mechanic                     0.146                          -0.013***
                                                                                   (0.002)
     =1 if Manufacturer                           0.025                           0.002***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Mariner                                0.072                          -0.003***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Merchant                               0.094                          -0.013***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Miscellaneous                          0.056                          -0.006***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     =1 if Professional                           0.025                          -0.003***
                                                                                   (0.001)
     Age                                          35.80                           0.824***
                                                                                   (0.076)


Notes: N=176,634 (118,908 unmatched; 60,726 matched). Table reports Population means and differences in
variables between population and matched sample. We regress the variable of interest on a dummy for being
in the matched sample. *, **, *** refer to statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                        80
