                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      OPTIMAL VACCINE SUBSIDIES FOR ENDEMIC AND EPIDEMIC DISEASES

                                    Matthew Goodkin-Gold
                                       Michael Kremer
                                    Christopher M. Snyder
                                      Heidi L. Williams

                                      Working Paper 28085
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28085


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The authors are grateful for helpful comments from Witold Wicek and seminar participants in
the Harvard Economics Department, Yale School of Medicine, the "Infectious Diseases in Poor
Countries and the Social Sciences" conference at Cornell University, the DIMACS "Game
Theoretic Approaches to Epidemiology and Ecology" workshop at Rutgers University, the
"Economics of the Pharmaceutical Industry" roundtable at the Federal Trade Commission's
Bureau of Economics, the U.S. National Institutes of Health "Models of Infectious Disease
Agent" study group at the Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, the American
Economic Association "Economics of Infectious Disease" session, and the Health and Pandemics
(HELP!) Economics Working Group "Covid-19 and Vaccines" workshop. Maya Durvasula,
Nishi Jain, Amrita Misha, Frank Schilbach, and Alfian Tjandra provided excellent research
assistance. Williams gratefully acknowledges financial support from NIA grant number T32-
AG000186 to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew Goodkin-Gold, Michael Kremer, Christopher M. Snyder, and Heidi L.
Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Vaccine Subsidies for Endemic and Epidemic Diseases
Matthew Goodkin-Gold, Michael Kremer, Christopher M. Snyder, and Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 28085
November 2020
JEL No. D4,I18,L11,L65,O31

                                         ABSTRACT

Vaccines exert a positive externality, reducing spread of disease from the consumer to others,
providing a rationale for subsidies. We study how optimal subsidies vary with disease
characteristics by integrating a standard epidemiological model into a vaccine market with
rational economic agents. In the steady-state equilibrium for an endemic disease, across market
structures ranging from competition to monopoly, the marginal externality and optimal subsidy
are non-monotonic in disease infectiousness, peaking for diseases that spread quickly but not so
quickly as to drive all consumers to become vaccinated.

Motivated by the Covid-19 pandemic, we adapt the analysis to study a vaccine campaign
introduced at a point in time against an emerging epidemic. While the nonmonotonic pattern of
the optimal subsidy persists, new findings emerge. Universal vaccination with a perfectly
effective vaccine becomes a viable firm strategy: the marginal consumer is still willing to pay
since those infected before vaccine rollout remain a source of transmission. We derive a simple
condition under which vaccination exhibits increasing social returns, providing an argument for
concentrating a capacity-constrained campaign in few regions. We discuss a variety of extensions
and calibrations of the results to vaccines and other mitigation measures targeting existing
diseases.

Matthew Goodkin-Gold                                   Christopher M. Snyder
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Harvard University                                     Dartmouth College
Littauer Center                                        301 Rockefeller Hall
1805 Cambridge Street                                  Hanover, NH 03755
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    and NBER
United States                                          chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu
mgoodkingold@g.harvard.edu
                                                       Heidi L. Williams
Michael Kremer                                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                  Stanford University
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics             579 Serra Mall
1126 E. 59th St.                                       Office 323
Chicago, IL 60637                                      Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                               and NBER
kremermr@uchicago.edu                                  hlwill@stanford.edu
1. Introduction
Technologies that help prevent infectious diseases such as vaccines, condoms, and mosquito nets
can generate positive health externalities. While standard economic models provide a justification
for public subsidies of such preventive technologies, existing models provide little guidance on the
appropriate magnitude of these subsidies. This gap in understanding makes it difficult for economists
to provide guidance--even at a conceptual level--on both the optimal level of government subsidies
for infectious disease control and the ways in which the level of such subsidies should vary across
diseases. Furthermore, most existing work by economists has been oriented toward endemic diseases
and policies which play out over years or decades such as vaccination campaigns to eradicate polio
or circumcision to reduce the spread of HIV. However, the Covid-19 pandemic has underscored
the urgency of understanding short-run policy responses to the epidemics that can result from the
emergence of novel diseases or from localized outbreaks of otherwise dormant diseases such as
Ebola or MERS.
   To address these questions, we construct a tractable model integrating epidemiological and eco-
nomic considerations. For concreteness, the discussion is focused on the market for a vaccine, but
the analysis applies to any technology (circumcision, bed nets, social distancing) preventing con-
sumers from contracting a disease. Consumers and producers base their economic decisions on
rational expectations of disease dynamics based on a susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model
standard in the epidemiology literature. Section 2 adopts a long-run perspective suited to an en-
demic disease. Consistent with this perspective, we incorporate population turnover into the SIR
model and analyze the steady-state equilibrium of the vaccine market. Section 3 shifts to a short-run
perspective of a vaccine campaign introduced at a single point in time into an SIR epidemic without
population turnover. Absent preventive measures, such an epidemic can rapidly peak before ulti-
mately burning out, leaving some untouched. Consumers in the short-run analysis make vaccination
decisions based on their probability of being infected before the disease burns out, while consumers
in the long-run analysis base their decisions on the probability of infection in the steady state.
   For a continuum of market structures--including perfect competition, monopoly, and Cournot
competition nesting these extremes--the long-run analysis generates a closed-form solution for the
marginal vaccine externality in steady-state equilibrium as a function of estimable parameters in-
cluding disease infectiveness, recovery rate, vaccine cost, and efficacy. A key finding is that this
marginal externality is nonmonotonic in the disease's basic reproductive ratio R0 , a widely used
measure of infectiveness. For sufficiently low values of R0 (technically, R0  1), the disease dies


                                                   1
out in the steady state even without a vaccine, so there is no vaccine market and no marginal ex-
ternality. For sufficiently high values of R0 , vaccinating a given consumer does not provide much
protection to others since they are almost certain to contract the disease from another source any-
way. To be sure, a consumer's vaccination provides a substantial social benefit when R0 is extremely
high, but most of that benefit is internalized by the consumer themselves. The marginal externality
on others is greatest not for extreme but for intermediate values of R0 . The optimal vaccine subsidy
(minimum subsidy needed to obtain the first-best quantity) is likewise nonmonotonic in R0 . Hold-
ing constant disease burden (the product of prevalence and harm), our results suggest that the best
candidates for vaccine subsides are rarer but more serious diseases.
    Our crude calibrations suggest that optimal subsidies may be very large relative to current lev-
els in the case of competitively supplied products. For example, the external benefit from using
circumcision to prevent HIV in developing countries could justify subsidies of more than $1,000,
while programs studied to date paid participants no more than $15 beyond procedure costs. For
products produced by a monopoly selling directly to consumers, a per-dose subsidy may not always
be a viable policy option since the minimum subsidy achieving the first best can be enormous: in
our measles calibration, for example, fifteen times the harm from actually having the disease. Given
plausible values for the social cost of public funds, such subsidies would be prohibitively expensive.
Bulk purchase of the optimal quantity coupled with subsidized distribution may be a cheaper route
to the first best.
    Moving from the long-run to the short-run analysis, the latter is technically more difficult because
equilibrium variables no longer have closed-form expressions, requiring the Lambert W function
to express analytically. Still, we are able to recover the result from the long-run analysis that the
marginal externality and optimal subsidy are nonmonotonic in R0 for market structures ranging from
perfect competition, to Cournot, to monopoly. The featured calibration of the short-run analysis is
to the Covid-19 pandemic.
    A major point of departure between the long- and short-run analyses regards the viability of
universal vaccination as a business strategy. In the long-run analysis, a perfectly effective vaccine
would never be universally purchased if sold at a positive price because, with all other consumers
protected, the marginal consumer obtains no private benefit. A number of previous game-theoretic
analyses of vaccine uptake make exactly this point (Geoffard and Phillipson 1997, May 2000, Bauch
and Earn 2004). In our short-run analysis, however, universal vaccination with a perfectly effective
vaccine may be a profitable business strategy. The risk of contracting the disease from those infected


                                                   2
before the arrival of the vaccine but not yet recovered preserves a positive willingness to pay for the
marginal consumer even if all other susceptibles are protected. Not only is universal vaccination
with a perfectly effective vaccine a possible equilibrium for some parameters for some market struc-
ture, this outcome is guaranteed in equilibrium even under monopoly for sufficiently low cost and
sufficiently high infectiousness.
   Another point of departure regards capacity constraints. The long run leaves little room for
capacity constraints, but they may be relevant in the short run. We can thus apply the short-run
analysis to understand how to allocate a limited capacity across states, countries, or other regions
with separate epidemiologies, owing, say, to travel restrictions. We show that if the product of R0 and
^0 (the susceptible proportion of the population upon vaccine rollout) exceeds 2, there are initially
S
increasing social returns to vaccination, meaning that a small capacity would be more efficiently
concentrated in a single region than spread evenly across them. The condition R0 S
                                                                                 ^0 > 2 has intuitive
appeal, which can be understood by analogy to forest fires. Infectiousness R0 promotes disease
spread much as prime weather conditions (low moisture, hot temperature, high winds) promote
                                         ^0 acts like the stock of flammable material providing fuel
fires' spread; the stock of susceptibles S
for the fire. For an epidemic to grow initially rather than diminishing from the outset requires a
certain level of both factors in the absence of a vaccine, technically R0 S
                                                                          ^0 > 1. When R0 S
                                                                                          ^0 exceeds
the higher threshold of 2, the epidemic is so explosive that a small amount of vaccine does little to
slow it. To make a measurable dent in the epidemic requires concentrating supplies in one region.
If R0 S
      ^0 exceeds a yet higher threshold than 2 that we specify, vaccination exhibits increasing social
returns for all capacity levels, meaning that would be efficient to serve all susceptibles in a region
before moving to the next region.
   Section 4 extends the model to allow for consumer heterogeneity, conducting several exercises.
We show that the nonmonotonicity in the marginal externality, observed for both long- and short-run
analyses and for all market structures is robust to the addition of consumer heterogeneity (in, say,
disease harm). We illustrate how even imprecise targeting can help an otherwise expensive program
subsidizing consumers' heterogeneous adoption costs to pass a cost-benefit test. We provide con-
ditions under which a naïve researcher who estimates the marginal externality using aggregate data
ignoring heterogeneity in infectiousness across groups can arrive at an unbiased estimate of the av-
erage marginal externality across consumers; in other cases, a simple adjustment is all that is needed
to remove the bias.
   To the various ways in which the vaccine's epidemiological externality impacts the market, Sec-


                                                  3
tion 5 compares the results to a market for a drug is similar in all ways to the vaccine except that it
treats symptoms but does nothing to reduce disease spread from treated individuals. We show that a
monopolist would always prefer to develop the drug but parameters exist in both the long- and short-
run analyses for which social welfare is higher with the vaccine. Consistent with nonmonotonicities
found elsewhere, the monopolist's bias toward a drug is greatest for intermediate values of R0 .
    While the SIR model we use is standard in the epidemiology literature by design, our novel
contribution to that literature is to incorporate an epidemiological model into a welfare economics
framework, facilitating the analysis of market equilibrium and optimal policy. Much of the epi-
demiology literature focuses on characterizing when disease eradication is feasible, whereas our
framework admits nontrivial analysis even in settings in which eradication is impossible (long-run
equilibrium with a perfectly effective vaccine) or certain (the disease always dies out in our short-run
analysis). An important exception is Althouse, Bergstrom, and Bergstrom (2010), who also consider
welfare analysis of vaccination, calibrating a simple model for four prominent diseases to estimate
optimal subsidies under perfect competition and perfectly effective vaccination. We view our paper
as building on their work, allowing for imperfect vaccines, including a supply-side model of firm be-
havior, and generating comparative statics which allow theoretical insights into how epidemiological
and economic parameters impact market outcomes and optimal policy.
    The epidemiology literature previously recognized the possibility that the nonlinear nature of
epidemics may dictate optimal policy concentrating a scarce stockpile in one population rather
spreading across them. Keeling and Shattock (2012) provided an early contribution, subsequently
refined by work including Keeling and Ross (2015), Nguyen and Carlson (2016), and Enayati and
´
'Ozaltin (2020). This literature has the advantage of studying increasingly rich epidemiological
models, the results are simulated in numerical examples. We contribute a formal conceptualization
of initial and eventual increasing social returns and aid understanding by providing a necessary and
sufficient condition for these outcomes in analytical form.
    Economists have long observed that vaccines may provide positive externalities that could affect
consumers' and firms' decisions (see, among others, Brito, Sheshinski, and Intrilligator 1991; Chen
and Toxvaerd 2014; Francis 1997; Geoffard and Philipson 1997; Gersovitz 2003; Gersovitz and
Hammer 2004, 2005).1 Boulier, Datta, and Goldfarb (2007) use a standard epidemiological model
alone (i.e., neither interacted with consumer decisions nor a supply-side model of firm behavior)
   1 Recent  work in behavioral epidemiology implicitly incorporates externalities, considering, for example, game-
theoretic analyses of decisions around whether to vaccinate or to free ride on herd immunity. (Funk et al. 2010; Manfredi
and D'Onofrio 2013)



                                                           4
to examine properties of vaccination externalities that arise solely due to epidemiological concerns.
Geoffard and Philipson (1997) use an epidemiological model similar to ours to show that a vaccine
producer with market power will not choose to eradicate the disease in the steady-state. Galeotti
and Rogers (2013) model vaccination choices in a heterogenous population, and consider the effect
of network structures in determining optimal vaccine allocation.2 Economists have attempted to
provide well-identified empirical estimates of vaccine externalities (Cook et al. 2009, Ward 2014,
Bethune and Korinek 2020). Given the difficulty of using randomized controlled trials to estimate
externalities, Manski (2017) provides theoretical guidance on how to optimize the decision to man-
date a vaccine when the extent of externality is unknown. We make a number of contributions to
this economics literature. First, we incorporate a model of firm behavior and explicitly characterize
equilibrium solutions for both positive and normative outcomes--specifically, externalities and op-
timal subsidies--in terms of estimable parameters. Second, our short-run analysis provides what to
our knowledge is the first treatment of vaccination externalities and subsidies oriented to the initi-
tial stages of a novel disease or localized outbreak and the first to characterize increasing returns to
vaccination in this setting.


2. Long-Run Analysis of Endemic Disease
This section analyzes the market for vaccine against an endemic disease such as HIV that persists in
the population over the long run. We begin by outlining a standard epidemiological model into which
we introduce an economic model of the vaccine market. Reflecting our long-run perspective, we
focus on the steady-state equilibrium. We solve for the equilibrium under various market structures
ranging from perfect competition to monopoly, analyzing comparative statics, welfare implications,
and optimal subsidies.


2.1. Epidemiological Model
The foundation of our analysis is the standard susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) epidemiological
model due to Kermanck and McKendrick (1927). See Martcheva (2015) for a textbook treatment
of the basic model as well as the enhanced version with vaccination and demographic flows (births
and deaths) that we specifically employ. Time is continuous, indexed by t . Let µ  (0, 1) denote the
    2 Mecholan (2007) provides some analysis of treatments (conditional on infection) for communicable diseases in

the context of a monopoly manufacturer, but provides no analytical results, instead focusing on numerical simulations,
primarily related to issues of drug resistance.



                                                          5
mortality rate from causes other than the disease, referred to as "natural causes." For simplicity, we
will study the case of a non-fatal disease and set the birth rate to equal to µ, leaving the population
size constant over time. Anticipating their role in the vaccine market, we call members of this
population "consumers." Normalize the mass of consumers to 1. Consumers are partitioned into
four compartments: susceptible to infection St , currently infected It , recovered from an infection Rt ,
or immunized Vt .
    Since the compartments partition the mass of consumers (i.e., the compartments are mutually
exclusive and exhaustive),
                                                St + It + Rt + Vt = 1.                                             (1)

With the total mass on the right-hand of (1) normalized to 1, the compartments on the left-hand side
can be interpreted as either masses or proportions.
    Turn next to the equations determining the evolution of compartments over continuous time,
starting with Vt . Let Q  0 be the quantity of vaccine purchased each instant. For now take Q as
given; later, we will solve for its equilibrium value using the economic model and substitute this
value back into the epidemiological model. In principle, Q could vary over time, but we omit a time
subscript anticipating that we will solve for its equilibrium value in the steady state. Let   (0, 1)
denote vaccine efficacy. Assume that vaccinations are adminstered to newborns3 and that if the
initial dose is not effective for a person, further doses will not be effective for that person either. The
mass of newborns that are immunized (i.e., successfully vaccinated) each instant is Q. The rate of
change of the immunized population, Vt /t  V    t , is


                                                   t = Q - µVt ,
                                                  V                                                                (2)


the number of newborns who are immunized minus the number of immunized individuals who die
(of causes other than the disease).
    The rate of change of the infected population is

                                               t =  It St - ( + µ)It .
                                               I                                                                   (3)


The first term captures the flow of new infections. A susceptible consumer contracts the disease
    3 Given the Poisson structure of the model, and hence the stationarity of consumers' life cycles, assuming vaccines

are adminstered only to newborns is without loss of generality; we could equivalently have assumed that the vaccine is
administered to any subset of susceptible consumers who have not yet been vaccinated.



                                                          6
from an infected consumer at rate  > 0, embodying the rate of contact between people and the
rate at which a contact leads to infection. Assuming the infection rate is linear in the number of
infected consumers, a single susceptible consumer is infected with probability  It , and the mass of
susceptibles generates  It St new infections. The mass of infected consumers is reduced by the mass
It of them who recover, where   (0, 1) denotes the recovery rate, and by the number of infected
consumers who die. Consistent with our assumption that the disease is non-fatal, the mortality rate
is the same µ for infected consumers as for other compartments.
    Assume that recovered people cannot be reinfected. Then the rate of change of the recovered
population is
                                                  t = It - µRt ,
                                                 R                                                              (4)

the number of infected people who recover that instant minus the number of recovered vaccinated
individuals who die.
    Newborns enter the population at rate as susceptibles. To maintain a stationary population size,
the birth rate must equal the mortality rate, µ. A fraction Q of newborns are immunized at birth.
Mass  It St of susceptibles become infected each instant, and a further µSt die. Thus, the rate of
change of the susceptible population is

                                            t = µ - Q -  It St - µSt .
                                           S                                                                    (5)


Because the compartment masses must sum to 1, one of the equations (2)­(5) is redundant given the
others. For instance, (5) can be derived by substituting from (1)­(4) into the derivative of (1) with
respect to t .
    That completes the specification of the SIR model. In lieu of the transmission parameter  , epi-
demiologists often work with a related parameter called the basic reproductive ratio R0 , traditionally
defined as the expected number of secondary infections generated by adding an infected individual
to a fully susceptible population.4 One can see that the disease eventually dies out in an unvaccinated
population if R0 < 1 and remains endemic if R0 > 1.
    In our model,
                                                          
                                                  R0 =       .                                                  (6)
                                                          +µ
To understand this expression, each instant the individual remains infected, he or she infects a num-
   4 The modern definition of R due to Dikemann, Heersterbeek, and Metz (1990) is the dominant eigenvalue of the
                                 0
next-generation operator in the epidemiological system. Martcheva (2015, p. 51) shows that equation (6) provides the
value of R0 implied by this definition.


                                                         7
ber of others equal to  times the size of the susceptible population, which is approximately 1 over
the period since the infected individual is introduced into a fully susceptible population. The individ-
ual remains infected for an expected duration of 1/( + µ). To see this, note that there are two com-
peting risks for exiting the infected state: recovery, which has hazard R (t ) = , and mortality, which
has hazard M (t ) = µ. The combined hazard of exiting the infected state is EI (t ) = R (t ) + M (t ).
As is well known for Poisson duration models, the duration of a spell equals the reciprocal of the
hazard, here 1/EI (t ) = 1/( + µ).
   The subsequent analysis takes R0 as the key exogenous parameter, capturing the disease's infec-
tiveness. Estimates of R0 vary considerably across disease--from 1.1 for SARS at the low end to
16­18 for measles and pertussis at the high end--as well as across time and region. A systematic
review of R0 estimates is deferred to Section 2.9, where we calibrate our results to the parameters
of a variety of actual diseases.
   Let variables without time t subscripts (S, I , R, V , Q, etc.) denote steady-state values. For
example, S = limt  St . For a given value of Q, the steady-state values of the compartments can
be found by solving the system of equations formed by setting Vt = It = Rt = S t = 0 in equations
(2)­(5). The unique stable solution is5

                                                               1
                                           S(Q) = min 1 - Q,                                        (7)
                                                           µ R0
                                                     µ        1 
                                     I (Q) = max 0,        1-    - Q                                (8)
                                                    +µ        R0 µ
                                                        
                                                R(Q) = I (Q)                                        (9)
                                                        µ
                                                         
                                                 V (Q) = Q.                                        (10)
                                                         µ

   By equation (8), if R0  1, then I = 0 for all Q  0. The disease dies out in the steady state with
or without a vaccine, confirming a claim from the previous subsection. For a non-trivial vaccine
market to exist, R0 > 1. In that case, whether the disease dies out in the steady state depends on
Q: I (Q) = 0 if and only if Q  (µ/)(1 - 1/R0 ). Combining the various cases in a way that will be
convenient for the subsequent analysis, we can rewrite
                                             
                                             0
                                                                            Q  Q0
                                   I (Q) =    µ     1                                              (11)
                                                 1-   - Q                   Q < Q0 ,
                                                    R0 µ
                                             
                                              +µ
   5A   trivial solution involving I = 0 always exists, but it is unstable when R0 > µ/(µ - Q).


                                                            8
where
                                                          µ    1
                                        Q0 = max 0,         1-                                              (12)
                                                               R0
is the threshold vaccine quantity above which the disease dies out and below which the disease
remains endemic.


2.2. Consumer Demand
Having specified the epidemiological features of the model, we next turn to economic features of
the vaccine market, starting with demand. Assume consumers are risk neutral. For now, assume in
addition that consumers are homogeneous; later sections and appendices will extend the results to
different dimensions of consumer heterogeneity. To avoid computing transition paths, focus on the
steady-state in the limiting case without discounting.
    A consumer demands the vaccine if his or her marginal private benefit MPB(Q) from the vaccine
exceeds its price. For a risk-neutral consumer, MPB(Q) = H I (Q), where efficacy parameter  is
the probability that the vaccine allows the consumer to avoid harm, H denotes the expected harm
over the infection's spell conditional on being infected, and I (Q) denotes the probability that a
susceptible person becomes infected.
    To compute H , harm measured as a stock over the infection spell, let h be flow harm to a con-
sumer each instant he or she is infected. The consumer experiences that flow harm from the initial
date of infection until he or she exits the infected state. Section 2.1 showed that the expected duration
of the infected state equals 1/( + µ). Hence,

                                                          h
                                                    H=       .                                              (13)
                                                          +µ

    To compute I (Q), consider the competing risks that can lead a susceptible to exit that state.
A susceptible consumer who has chosen not to be vaccinated faces two remaining competing risks:
infection, which has hazard I (t , Q) =  I (Q) each instant, and mortality from natural causes, which
has hazard M (t ) = µ. The combined hazard of exiting the susceptible state is ES (t , Q) = I (t , Q) +
M (t ). By standard results for competing Poisson risks, the consumer's cumulative risk of exiting
                                                     t
the susceptible state by age t is ES (t , Q) =      0 ES ( , Q)d  , probability of surviving as susceptible to
age t is e-ES (t ,Q) , and likelihood of exit   due to infection is I (t , Q) = I (t , Q)e-ES (t ,Q) . To compute
the probability that the consumer experiences an infection at some point over his or her lifetime, we




                                                         9
integrate this cause-specific likelihood:

                                                         I (Q)     ( + µ)R0 I (Q)
                     I (Q) =           I (t , Q)dt =             =                   .         (14)
                                0                       I (Q) + µ ( + µ)R0 I (Q) + µ

Substituting for I (Q) from (11) yields
                                            
                                            0
                                                                    Q  Q0
                               I (Q) =                  1                                      (15)
                                            1 -
                                                                    Q < Q0 .
                                                   (1 - Q/µ)R0

   The marginal private benefit inherits this branched structure from (Q):
                                          
                                          0
                                                                         Q  Q0
                          MPB(Q) =                          1                                  (16)
                                          H 1 -
                                                                         Q < Q0 .
                                                       (1 - Q/µ)R0

It can be verified that the second branch of MPB(Q) is strictly decreasing in Q, ensuring the demand
curve derived next is well defined and weakly downward sloping.
   Let P be the vaccine's price. Consumers strictly prefer to purchase the vaccine if P < MPB(Q).
Substituting the quantity Q = µ that results when all consumers who are eligible to purchase--all
newborns--end up purchasing into the preceding inequality, we have D(P) = µ if P < MPB(µ).
Consumers strictly prefer not to purchase if P > MPB(Q). Substituting Q = 0 into the preceding
inequality, we have D(P) = 0 if P > MPB(0). For P strictly between MPB(µ) and MPB(0), some
but not all consumers purchase. Given they are homogeneous, consumers must be indifferent be-
tween purchasing and not, implying P = MPB(Q). Given they are indifferent, any fraction of them
purchasing is an equilibrium; demand is pinned down by the value of Q satisfying (16) when the
right-hand side is set equal to P. Demand in that case is given by

                                                 µ          1
                                       d (P) =     1-              .                           (17)
                                                      (1 - P/H )R0

Combining these facts yields the demand curve
                                          
                                          0
                                                       P > MPB(0)
                              D(P) =      d (P) P  [MPB(µ), MPB(0)]                            (18)
                                          µ     P < MPB(µ).


                                                        10
Equivalently, the demand curve is given by d (P) unless this violates a boundary condition d (P) 
[0, µ], in which case demand is given by the violated boundary.
    Demand considerations alone allow us to establish that an important result due to Geoffard and
Philipson (1997)--that nontrivial equilibria cannot entail the disease's eradication in the steady
state--holds quite generally in our model as well. The result holds independent of market struc-
ture and holds whether or not the government subsidizes vaccines.

Proposition 1. Suppose that the disease is eradicated in steady-state equilibrium of a market with
or without government subsidies, i.e., I  = 0. Then either the vaccine is free to consumers (P = 0)
or no vaccine is purchased (Q = 0).

The proof is provided in Appendix A. Intuitively, if the disease is eradicated in steady-state equilib-
rium, then I (Q) = 0, implying MPB(Q) = 0. But consumers with no marginal private benefit will
not purchase the vaccine at a positive price.


2.3. Firm Supply
We analyze two different market structures in the text: perfect competition and monopoly. Ap-
pendix B provides results from a more general model of Cournot competition among N firms that
nests these extremes.
    Assume firms produce at constant marginal and average cost c > 0 per vaccine course (where
a course involves multiple doses when needed to provide immunity). Under perfect competition,
vaccine supply is perfectly elastic at price c. Under monopoly, the firm sets a price maximizing
industry profit , measured as a flow each instant in the steady state.


2.4. Normative Measures
Define the total social benefit from the vaccine in the steady state as SB(Q) = h[1 - I (Q)], the product
of flow health benefit h to an individual and the number of healthy individuals 1 - I (Q) at any instant
in steady-state equilibrium.6 Substituting from (8) yields
                                                 
                                                 ( + µ)H                      Q  Q0
                                                 
                                     SB(Q) =                                                                            (19)
                                                 ( + Q + µ/R0 )H
                                                 
                                                                              Q  Q0 .
    6 A natural alternative measure of social benefit would be SB(Q) = h[I (0) - I (Q)]. We use the maximum conceivable

infection rate 1 rather than the rate in the absence of a vaccine I (0) as the benchmark against which the equilibrium
outcome is compared to generate more natural comparative statics. The alternative measure could lead to the odd
conclusion that an increase in R0 is socially beneficial if the increase in R0 increases I (0) sufficiently to increase SB(Q).


                                                             11
    Let W (Q) denote social welfare on the vaccine market, i.e., the difference between total social
benefit and total vaccine production costs:


                                           W (Q) = SB(Q) - cQ.                                             (20)


Let MSB(Q) =  SB(Q)/ Q denote marginal social benefit from a vaccine course. Differentiating
(19),7                                               
                                                     0        Q  Q0
                                                     
                                        MSB(Q) =                                                           (21)
                                                     H        Q < Q0 .
                                                     

Let MEX(Q) = MSB(Q) - MPB(Q) denote the marginal externality from a vaccine course. Subtract-
ing the formulas provided yields
                                               
                                               0
                                                                    Q  Q0
                                 MEX(Q) =              H                                                   (22)
                                                                    Q < Q0 .
                                                  (1 - Q/µ)R0
                                               


    A comprehensive analysis of these normative measures is postponed until after we have solved
for the equilibrium value of Q, on which the measures depend. Some observations can be made even
at this preliminary stage. For Q  Q0 , enough vaccine is available to eradicate the disease in the
steady state, eliminating the marginal benefit of vaccine. Hence, MPB(Q) = MSB(Q) = MEX(Q) =
0 for Q  Q0 .
    For Q < Q0 , MSB(Q) = H , which is the expected benefit of treating the an infected person
with a drug that does not prevent disease transmission but has efficacy  in preventing harmful
symptoms. It may be at first puzzling that vaccinating an individual not certain to contract the disease
amounts to the same social benefit as treating a certainly infected individual. The puzzle is resolved
upon recognizing the positive externality associated with the vaccine's preventing a whole chain of
possible infections in the unvaccinated population. Conditional on the vaccine's being effective for
individual, an event with probability , his or her direct benefit plus the chain of expected external
benefits sum exactly to H in the model.
    Also remarkable is the fact that, for Q < Q0 , MSB(Q) is a constant that does not vary with the
infectiveness of the disease as measured by R0 . When R0 increases, the vaccinated individual's
direct benefit MPB(Q) increases; but, perhaps counterintuitively, the marginal externality MEX(Q)
   7 The derivative  SB(Q0 ) Q does not exist, but the left and right derivatives, respectively  SB(Q0 )/ Q- and
 SB(Q0 )/ Q+ , do. We set MSB(Q0 ) =  SB(Q0 )/ Q+ .


                                                      12
decreases. An individual's vaccination provides less external benefit to contacts because they are
increasingly likely to pick up the disease from someone else. The increase in MPB(Q) and decrease
in MEX(Q) exactly offset so that their sum MSB(Q) is independent of R0 .
   As a benchmark, we will characterize the first-best quantity Q , which maximizes social wel-
fare. To accommodate cases in which a possibly open set of quantities maximize social welfare,
we take Q to be the infimum of the set. Comparing the marginal social benefit of a vaccine in
(21)--which we see is either 0 or a positive constant--with its marginal social cost--given simply
by c--it is immediate that Q = 0 if c  H . To rule out this trivial case, we assume throughout the
remainder of the paper that the disease is harmful enough that the vaccine's social benefit exceeds
its cost: H > c. Rescaling cost as c
                                   ~ = c/H , the assumption can be equivalently written


                                               ~ < 1.
                                               c                                                 (23)


When (23) holds, we can see from (21) that Q = Q0 unless this entails vaccinating more than the
flow of newborns each instant, in which case Q = µ. Thus,


                                         Q = min(Q0 , µ).                                        (24)



2.5. Perfectly Competitive Equilibrium
Equilibrium values of steady-state variables will be distinguished with asterisks, with an added
                                                                         denotes the perfectly com-
subscript indicating the relevant market structure. Thus, for example, Pc
petitive equilibrium price.
                               = c. The remaining equilibrium variables can be computed using
   Under perfect competition Pc
straightforward algebra applied to the supplied formulas taking due care to ensure the appropriate
branch of each formula is used in the relevant case. The relevant cases turn out to depend on the
interval in which R0 falls.
   First consider R0  1. Infectiveness is so low in this case--labeled (LR1)--that the disease
disappears in the steady state even without a vaccine. The vaccine has no marginal social or private
value, and no vaccine is sold.
   For values of R0 just above 1, the disease is infective enough not to disappear in the steady state
but not infective enough to justify its purchase at the competitive price. Although the vaccine has a
positive marginal social and private benefit, the marginal private benefit is below c even if no other

                                                 13
consumer purchases. The upper bound on R0 for this case--labeled (LR2)--is determined by the
condition MPB(0)  c, which using (16) yields R0  1/(1 - c
                                                        ~).
    For R0 in an intermediate range--labeled case (LR3)--some but not all newborns purchase.
The interior solution for equilibrium quantity Q                                
                                                c can be found by substituting Pc = c into demand
expression (17). The values of other equilibrium variables can be found by substituting Qc into the
relevant equations--(8), (21), etc.
    For extreme values of R0 , the disease can conceivably be so infective that all µ newborns pur-
chase at the competitive price. The existence of this case requires an imperfectly effective vaccine,
 < 1. Vaccinating all consumers with a perfectly effective vaccine would eliminate the infection and
demand, which would be inconsistent with all newborns purchasing. Enough unsuccessfully vacci-
nated consumers must remain to generate an infection rate that justifies purchase at the competitive
price. The relevant condition determining this case--labeled (LR5)--is MPB(µ)  c, implying
R0  1/(1 - )(1 - c
                 ~). Since all consumers purchase in this case, there is no underconsumption
distortion; the first best is obtained.
    Table 1 reports the steady-state equilibrium values of selected variables under perfect competi-
tion as a function of R0 . See Appendix A for formal derivations of table entries. To visualize how
the variables in Table 1 vary with R0 , Figure 1 graphs a selection of them, one per panel, as func-
tions of R0 . Focus for now on the dotted curves representing equilibrium under perfect competition.
Vaccine quantity Qc , graphed in the first panel, equals 0 in case (LR1) because there is no infection
in equilibrium. It continues to be 0 in case (LR2) despite positive disease prevalence because the
prevalence is too low for any consumer to justify spending c on it. In case (LR3), we start to see a
positive vaccine quantity that increases in R0 until case (LR4) is reached and all µ purchase.
    It is unsurprising that equilibrium quantity is weakly increasing in the infectiveness of the di-
isease measured by R0 . Other equilibrium variables also display expected comparative statics in R0 .
MPBc is weakly increasing and Wc is weakly decreasing in R0 . It is noteworthy that MPBc levels
                                                                                       

off at c in case (LR3). Given that some but not all consumers purchase in this case, consumers must
                                                                                 = c must extract
be indifferent between purchasing and not, implying that the equilibrium price Pc
the entire marginal private benefit, implying MPBc = c over the whole interval.
    Other variables display interesting non-monotonicities. Initially at zero in case (LR1), disease
             begins to increase in case (LR2) due to the epidemiological effects of the higher R
prevalence Ic                                                                                   0

with no vaccine purchases in that case to offset it. In case (LR3), when consumers begin purchasing
           reverses course and begins to slope downward in R . The direct, epidemiological effect
vaccine, Ic                                                 0



                                                 14
of an increase in R0 continues to be to increase Ic
                                                   . Working in the oppositive direction is an indirect,

economic effect of an increase in R0 , inducing consumers to purchase more vaccine. In (LR3), the
                                                                          decreases in R . Mathe-
indirect effect is strong enough to dominate the direct effect, so that Ic              0

matically, to maintain the constant marginal private benefit (MPBc = c) observed throughout (LR3),
the increase in infectiveness R0 must be offset by the exact reduction in prevalence Ic
                                                                                       to maintain

                                                                               again rises with R
a constant probability of contracting the disease. In cases (LR4) and (LR5), Ic                   0

because the direct effect of an increase in infectiveness cannot be offset by an increase in Qc given
that all newborns are already purchasing in these cases.
   The marginal externality MEX                                                            
                               c also exhibits an interesting nonmonotonicity. Although MEXc
is monotonic over the subinterval (R0 > 1) for which it is positive, it is nonmonotonic over the
entire range of R0 , starting out at 0 for R0 < 1 and jumping to its highest level for R0 just above 1.
Lower levels of R0 eliminate the disease in the steady state. Higher levels of R0 than 1 increase the
infectiveness of the disease, but this leads consumers to internalize an increasing share of the social
benefit of their own vaccination.
   The next proposition, proved in Appendix A, summarizes the comparative-static effects of an
increase in R0 on the steady-state equilibrium under perfect competition observed from Figure 1.

Proposition 2. Consider the comparative-static effect of R0 on steady-state equilibrium under per-
fect competition.

    · Price and industry profit are constant for R0 > 0, with Pc
                                                                = c and  = 0.
                                                                        c

    · Qc and MPBc are weakly increasing in R0 for all R0 > 0.
                


                                                        ~/( + µ) at R0 = 1/(1 - c
        is nonmonotonic, reaching a local maximum I  = µc
    · Ic                                           c                            ~), which is a
                        ~ > 1 - .
      global maximum if c

    · Marginal social benefit is constant for all R0 > 1, with MSBc =  H.

    · The marginal externality is nonmonotonic over R0 > 0, approaching the supremum MEXc =
      H as R0  1.

    · Wc is weakly decreasing in R0 for all R0 > 0.

The weak changes in Qc , MPBc , and Wc are strict for a nonempty interval of R0 for each variable.
                                      




2.6. Monopoly Equilibrium
                                                   c = P , implying Q  Q . Thus, in cases
Since a monopolist charges a markup above cost, Pm      c            m  c
(LR1) and (LR2) in which Q                
                          c = 0, we have Qm = 0. Cases (LR1) and (LR2) are thus trivially


                                                  15
identical across perfect competition and monopoly. In the remaining cases, competitive firms are
able to make positive sales at price c. By continuity, the monopolist can make positive sales at some
small markup above c, implying Qm > 0 for R0 in case (LR3) and above.
   To solve for Qm in these other cases, it is convenient to express the monopoly's maximization
problem so that the choice variable is quantity rather than price. Letting P(Q) denote inverse de-
mand, monopoly profit can be written  = [P(Q) - c]Q = [MPB(Q) - c]Q, where the second equality
follows since the monopolist optimally charges a price extracting the private benefit of the marginal
consumer. The monopoly maximizes profit subject to the constraint that no more than the popula-
tion of newborn consumers can be served: Q  µ. Applying the Kuhn-Tucker method yields the
following solution. If R0 < 1/(1 - )2 (1 - c
                                           ~), then the constraint Q  µ does not bind, yielding
solution
                                           µ               1
                                    Qm=      1-                  .                              (25)
                                                            ~)R0
                                                       (1 - c

Otherwise, the constraint holds with equality, implying Qm = µ. For the constraint to bind requires
the vaccine to be imperfectly effective ( < 1). The monopolist would never sell a perfectly effective
vaccine to all consumers because this would eradicate the disease, leaving the monopolist with zero
steady-state profit according to Proposition 1.
   Substituting Qm into the formulas supplied for the other variables yields the entries in Table 2.
The analysis is straigthforward, so we omit formal verification.
   To visualize how the variables in Table 2 vary with R0 , focus on the solid curves in Figure
1. The two market structures overlap in cases (LR1) and (LR2), neither generating any vaccine
output. The two market structures overlap again in (LR5), both generating the first-best quantity
Q = µ. In between--in (LR3) and (LR4)--the two market structures diverge, with monopoly
generating strictly lower output. The strictly lower output under monopoly in these cases leads to a
weakly higher infection rate and marginal private benefit and weakly lower welfare under monopoly.
Perhaps counterintuitively, the marginal externality is also lower under monpoly. This follows from
                                                           
the fact that MPB                                                        
                 m  MPBc , implying MEXm = MSBm - MPBm  MSBc - MPBc = MEXc since
MSB       
   m = MSBc =  H .
   While it is not surprising that welfare is lower under monopoly than competition as this is true
in typical markets, our model shuts down the typical channel for monopoly deadweight loss by
taking consumers to be homogeneous. In our model, the epidemiological externality confers market
power: starting from a price that extracts purchasers' entire marginal private benefit, a positive
albeit reduced fraction of consumers will continue to purchase at a higher price since the reduction

                                                  16
in vaccine quantity increases their marginal private benefit through an increase in disease prevalance.
The monopolist's exercise of this market power generates deadweight loss. The large gap between
         for an intermediate range of R in the bottom panel of Figure 1 suggests that monopoly
Wc and Wm                              0

distortions may be worst for moderate levels of infectiveness. Market power generates little welfare
loss for the lowest values of R0 and--with an imperfect vaccine--for the highest values of R0 .
   Figure 1 illustrates the consequences of Proposition 1 for the market structures we study. Under
both perfect competition and monopoly, the disease has zero prevalence if and only if R0 falls in
case (LR1). Consistent with Proposition 1, no vaccine is purchased in (LR1) under both market
structures.
   The comparative statics for Q , MPB , and MEX are similar across the two market structures,
but the comparative statics for I  are considerably more complex for monopoly than perfect compe-
tition. The direct, epidemiological effect leading an increase in infectiveness R0 to increase preva-
        is still present as is the indirect, economic effect of increasing vaccine purchases. However,
lence Im
the monopolist can leverage its market power to absorb some of the indirect effect in the form of
price increases. The balance between the two forces need not tip in the same direction as under
                                                                                       is decreas-
perfect competition. As the next proposition indicates, states, for some parameters, Im
                                                              is increasing throughout (LR3) and
ing throughout cases (LR3) and (LR4); for other parameters, Im
                                                                            is nonmonotonic,
(LR4); and for yet other parameters--including those chosen for Figure 1, Im
attaining a local maximum at a point such as A in the figure.
   The graph of W  under monopoly illustrates the remarkable possibility that increasing R0 can
increase welfare. One would think that society would always be harmed by an increase in infective-
ness. While the direct, epidemiological effect of an increase in R0 harms society, the indirect effect
of increasing vaccinations can counteract the direct effect, increasing welfare over some parameter
ranges. In the bottom panel of Figure 1, we see this possibility emerging for the interval of R0 be-
tween point C and the boundary of (LR4). Under monopoly, not only do consumers fail to consider
the external benefit their vaccination provides other consumers, but the monopolist compounds this
by placing negative value on consumption to the extent it reduces others' willingness to pay for a
vaccine. Mitigating this compounded underconsumption problem via an increase in R0 can provide
such a large indirect benefit that it swamps the direct harm from an increase in R0 , leading to an
increase in social welfare.
   The next proposition, proved in Appendix A, summarizes the comparative-static effects of an
increase in R0 on the steady-state equilibrium under monopoly observed from Figure 1.


                                                  17
Proposition 3. Consider the comparative-static effect of R0 on steady-state equilibrium under
monopoly.

    · Qm , MPBm , and m are weakly increasing in R0 for all R0 > 0.
                      

                                                          is weakly increasing in R for all R > 0.
    · A sequence of equilibrium prices exists for which Pm                         0         0

         ~ < 1/2 and c
    · If c             ~  (1 - 2)/2(1 - ), then Im  is weakly increasing in R for all R > 0.
                                                                              0              0
      Otherwise, Im is nonmonotonic, reaching a local maximum at R = 1/(1 - c
                                                                            ~)  if ~
                                                                                   c  1/ 2 , which
                                                                  0
                             ~  1 - , and reaching a local maximum at R0 = 4(1 - ) if c
      is a global maximum if c                                                           ~ < 1/2,
                                   ~  (3 - 4)/4(1 - ).
      which is a global maximum if c

    · Marginal social benefit is constant for all R0 > 1, with MSBm =  H.

    · The marginal externality is nonmonotonic for R0 > 0, approaching the supremum MEXm = H
      as R0  1.

    · If   1/4, then Wm   is weakly decreasing in R for all R > 0. Otherwise, W  is nonmonotonic
                                                   0         0                   m
      in R0 , reaching a local minimum at R0 = 4/(1 - c~), which is a global minimum if   3/4.

The weak changes in Qc , MPBc , m , and Pm are strict for a nonempty interval of R0 for each
                                         

variable.

                                                                            and W  , the next
   To help parse the complicated conditions behind the nonmonotonicity of Im     m
proposition provides simple sufficient conditions for those variables to achieve local and global
interior optima. Appendix A derives these sufficient conditions as a corollary of Proposition 3.

                            reaches a local maximum and W  a local minimum over R > 0. These
Proposition 4. If  > 1/2, Im                             m                       0
local optima are global optima if  > 3/4.

                                                                               and W  attain global
According to the proposition, if the vaccine is at least 75% effective, then Im     m
optima for interior values of R0 . In practice, agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) do not typically license vaccines with efficacy below 80% (Brennan 2009). For realistic
parameter values we therefore have the surprising result that if a vaccine is sold by a monopolist
directly to consumers, disease prevalence will be greatest and social welfare lowest not for diseases
with the most extreme infectiveness as indexed by R0 but for moderate infectiveness.
   The next proposition, proved in Appendix A, measures how substantial the nonmonotonicity in
both variables can be by comparing the interior optimum to the limiting value of each.

Proposition 5. There exist values of parameters besides R0 such that the interior maximum for Im
                                                                                               

over R0 can be made arbitrarily higher in percentage terms than limR0  Im . The interior minimum
                                                                         
      over R can be up to 25% larger than lim
for Wm                                                 
             0                                  R0  Wm .




                                                 18
2.7. Government Subsidies
We have that the positive externality associated with vaccine consumption can lead to undercon-
sumption relative to the first best for both perfectly competitive and monopoly market structures.
This naturally raises the question of whether the government can intervene to correct the market fail-
ure. In this section, we characterize the optimal government subsidy and determine its comparative-
static properties.
   Assume a benevolent government with the objective of maximizing social welfare commits to
a per-dose subsidy GS  0 at the outset of the game. Adopting the accounting convention that the
subsidy is paid to firms, the subsidy is equivalent to a reduction in firms' marginal cost from c to
c - GS. Since social welfare is maximized by the first-best quantity Q , the first-best subsidy GS
is that implementing Q . To accommodate cases in which the government is indifferent among a
possibly open set of subsidies maximizing social welfare, we take GS to be the infimum of the
set. Focusing on the infimum could be justified by assuming that the government has lexicographic
preferences with economizing on the subsidy being its next priority after social welfare.
   Before analyzing particular market structures, we provide some general principles behind the
optimal subsidy that apply to any market structure, presented in the next proposition.

Proposition 6. Consider any market structure in which a subsidy increase weakly reduces the equi-
librium price induced. If R0  1, then GS = 0; the disease is eradicated in the steady state without
a vaccine or subsidy. If R0  (1, 1/(1 - )), then GS induces equilibrium quantity Q = Q0 and
price P = 0, resulting in eradication of the disease in the steady state. If R0 > 1/(1 - ), then GS
induces equilibrium quantity Q = µ and price

                                                          1
                                     P = H 1 -                 ,                                 (26)
                                                      (1 - )R0

resulting in universal vaccination but not eradication.

Appendix A provides a proof. Intuitively, the government would like to eradicate the disease in
all circumstances if this were possible. When R0  1/(1 - ), however, the disease is so infective
relative to vaccine efficacy that eradication cannot be achieved even if all newborns are vaccinated.
The government settles for the goal it can achieve, universal vaccination. Equation (26) characterizes
the highest price at which all consumers are still willing to purchase, which is associated with the
lowest subsidy required for universal vaccination under the maintained assumption that equilibrium
price is weakly decreasing in the subsidy.
   With these general principles in hand, we turn to an analysis of specific market structures. Under
perfect competition, the firms pass the subsidy directly to consumers, implying P = c - GSc and


                                                 19
        = c - P . Substituting the relevant values of P from Proposition 6 yields GS = 0 if
thus GSc                                                                            c
R0  1, GSc = c if R0  (1, 1/(1 -  )), and


                                                                     1
                                         GSc = c - H 1 -                                                          (27)
                                                                 (1 - )R0

if R0  1/(1 - ).
    For an imperfectly effective vaccine, (27) becomes negative for sufficiently large R0 . Had we not
ruled out negative subsidies by assumption, these negative values of (27) would indeed constitute
GS                                                               
  c . Given the nonnegativity constraint on subsidies, we have GSc = 0 for R0  1/(1 -  )(1 - c
                                                                                             ~).
It is no coincidence that this is same threshold for the perfectly competitive equilibrium to obtain
the first best in the absence of a subsidy. No subsidy is needed if equilibrium generates the first best
without one. For R0 strictly above this threshold, the government would like to tax vaccines since
some revenue can be raised without impairing universal vaccination. Table 3 lists these results for
reference.
                                                                                    = 0 if
    Next turn to computing the optimal subsidy under monopoly. By Proposition 6, GSm
R0  1. If R0  (1, 1/(1 - )), Proposition 6 implies Q = Q0 . Setting the quantity in (25) derived
from the monopoly's first-order condition equal to Q0 , substituting the effective marginal cost c - GS
under a subsidy for c in the formula, and rearranging yields GSm = c +  H (R0 - 1). If R0  1/(1 -  ),
calculations that are similar except that the monopoly quantity in (25) needs to equated with the
relevant first-best quantity in this case, Q = µ, yielding

                                                                     1
                                 GSm = max 0, c +  H                       -1        ,                            (28)
                                                                (1 - )2 R0

where the max operator has been added to reflect the nonnegativity constraint on subsidies. The
nonnegativity constraint binds in case (LR5)--not coincidentally the case in which the first-best
would be obtained in monopoly equilibrium without a subsidy. Table 3 reports these results for
reference, suitably rescaled.
    Figure 2 graphs GS as a function of R0 for the two market structures. As the figure documents,
the optimal subsidy is weakly lower under competition than monopoly. The optimal subsidy is not
monotonically increasing in R0 as might be inferred based solely on epidemiological considerations
but is hump shaped.8 The difficulty in addressing a disease depends not only on its infectiousness
   8 While GS has the same general hump shape in R0 as MEX , the two are not identical for several reasons. Since
consumers are homogeneous, the first best is a corner solution involving eradication or universal vaccination, which may
be achieved with a subsidy less than MEX . This point can be seen most clearly in case (LR5), in which the first best


                                                          20
but also on consumers' response to this infectiousness. Consumers respond to extremely infectious
diseases by getting vaccinated even if many others also do. Moderately infectious diseases provide
consumers more leeway to free ride on the vaccination of others.
    The next proposition catalogs relevant observations concerning GS . The proof in Appendix A
fills in the few details that cannot be directly gleaned from Table 3.

Proposition 7. The following results characterize optimal subsidies, attaining the first best at mini-
mum government expenditure.

    · GS     
        m  GSc , with strict inequality for all R0  (1, 1/(1 -  ) (1 - c
                                                                 2     ~)).

    · GS        
        c and GSm are weakly increasing in c and  .

    · GS                                                 
         c and GSm are nonmonotonic in R0 > 0. GSc reaches its global maximum, c, for all
                                          
      R0 in the interval (1, 1/(1 - )]; GSm reaches its global maximum, c + H 2 /(1 - ), for R0 =
      1/(1 - ).



2.8. Relevant Limiting Results
While Tables 1 and 2 help organize the results, they still have numerous entries, some of which
contain complex formulas. Further clarity can be obtained by taking limits of certain parameters
justified by pedagogical or practical considerations.
    For vaccine efficacy, we take the limiting case of a perfectly effective vaccine,   1. This limit
is interesting on pedagogical grounds because it allows disease eradication to be technologically
feasible. This limit is also interesting on practical grounds, reflecting the high efficacy of many
existing vaccines.9 For rescaled cost, c
                                       ~ = c/H , we take the limiting case of a costless vaccine,
~  0, reflecting the low cost c for existing vaccines, especially in comparison to the potential disease
c
harm H .10 For the recovery rate, we take the limiting case of no recovery,   0, meaning that the
is obtained without a subsidy under both market structures. Even though all consumers are vaccinated in equilibrium,
eliminating the familiar positive externality of vaccination on the unvaccinated, MEX is still positive, reflecting the
externality on those who purchased vaccine but for whom it was ineffective. Other factors can point in the opposite
direction, leading lead MEX to exceed GS . The benevolent government regards transfers as neutral, so it is willing to
pay any amount--more than MEX if need be--to increase consumption. There is no danger that exorbitant subsidies
would induce overconsumption because the first best is a corner solution. An additional wedge between the optimal
subsidy and marginal externality under monopoly is that firms with market power may only incompletely pass through
the subsidy.
    9 The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020b) report efficacies from the recommended vaccine

courses of 95% for hepatitis B and tetanus, 97% for measles and shingles, 98% for pertussis, and 99% for polio.
   10 Taking the example of a hepatitis B vaccine, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2002a) lists a

price of $25 per dose, totalling $75 for the recommended three-dose course. In the study of the cost effectiveness of a
vaccine program against the disease, Hoerger et al. (2013) estimate that 4,527 infections would be avoided, generating


                                                          21
person continues to experience harm and can transmit the disease over his or her remaining lifespan,
characteristic of diseases such as HIV, syphillis, and malaria.11
    Imposing these limits and restricting attention to R0 > 1 considerably simplifies the analysis.
Only case (LR3) remains from Tables 1 and 2 and case (LR2 ) from Table 3. The following propo-
sition is then immediate from inspection of the tables.

Proposition 8. Suppose R0 > 1 and consider the limits   1, c
                                                           ~  0, and   0.

    · Under perfect competition, Pc = MPB =  = I  = GS = 0, Q = µ(1 - 1/R ), and
                                          c       c   c     c        c         0
      MEX  c = H.
                                                                               
                         = MPB = H (1 - 1/ R ), Q = µ(1 - 1/ R ),  = µH (1 - 1/ R )2 ,
    · Under monopoly,
                       Pm        m              0   m             0   m          0
                                                      
      Im = (1/ R0 ) - (1/R0 ), MEXm = H / R0 , and GSm = H (R0 - 1).
                                   



    According to the proposition, under perfect competition, for all R0 > 1, enough consumers are
vaccinated to eradicate the disease, attaining the first best. Price, profit, and the infection rate are
all 0. Under monopoly, price, profit, and the share of consumers vaccinated approach 0 in the
limit R0  1, while price approaches 100% of the harm from contracting the disease and quantity
approaches 100% share of newborns in the limit R0  . Equilibrium prevalence is nonmonotonic in
R0 under monopoly. Maximizing the formula given for Im
                                                      , one can show that equilibrium prevalence

is greatest for a disease with R0 = 4.


2.9. Calibrations
This section provides a series of calibrations to help understand the implications of the analysis
for existing vaccines. The calibrations are meant more as illustrations than forecasts. Our present
model is too stylized on many fronts to provide accurate forecasts. We abstract from heterogeneity
in infectiousness, heterogeneity in costs of prevention among consumers, and mortality effects of
disease. Certain parameters are set to convenient limiting values rather than being estimated from
data. A host of political-economy considerations lead real-world vaccine markets to depart from our
theoretical construct of firms selling directly to individual consumers without third-party funding.
1,218 quality adjusted life years (QALYs), implying a loss per infection of 0.27 QALYs. Scaling by the $200,000 per
QALY standard for cost effectiveness advocated for U.S. health programs by Ubel, Hirth, and Chernew (2003) yields
estimate H = $54, 000 of the health benefit from avoiding the certainty of a hepatits B infection, implying c
                                                                                                            ~ = c/H =
$75/(0.95)($54, 000) = 0.0045.
   11 This normalization is not crucial but slightly simplifies one formula.




                                                         22
2.9.1. R0 Estimates

Table 4 presents estimates of R0 from the epidemiology literature that can be substituted into the
formulas in Proposition 8 to calibrate equilibrium outcomes for various diseases. As previously
noted, R0 varies considerably across diseases, from 1.1 for SARS at the low end to 16­18 for
measles and pertussis at the high end. Since estimates of R0 can also vary widely across time and
region, the table lists the relevant time period and region from which each estimate comes.

2.9.2. HIV Calibration

Our first calibration considers a disease, HIV, with a moderate R0 . Table 4 provides a range of
estimates for R0 for HIV. For convenience, we take the round number R0 = 4 from this range.
Incidentally, recall that this is the value of R0 for which disease prevalence is greatest in equilibrium
under monopoly.
   Substituting R0 = 4 into the formulas provided by Proposition 8, the model suggest that a mo-
nopolist selling an HIV vaccine to consumers would price it at half the harm from contracting the
disease. At this price, half of consumers purchase the vaccine and the other half free ride. Half of the
free riders become infected, resulting in an overall HIV prevalence rate of 1/4. This is much lower
than the 3/4 prevalence rate that would emerge in the absence of a vaccine for a disease with R0 = 4.
The monopolist captures one third of the potential social surplus from a vaccine. Consumers capture
one third, and the remaining third is lost to monopoly distortion.
   As noted in the previous subsection, for all R0 > 1, including R0 = 4 assumed here, the first best
for this essentially costless vaccine involves vaccinating enough people to eradicate the disease in the
steady state. The first best is realized under perfect competition. The minimum subsidy that would
have to be paid to the monopolist to attain the first best is GSm = 3H . In other words, the monopolist
would have to receive a per-course subsidy of at least three times the lifetime harm experienced from
certainly contracting HIV, easily running into many thousands of dollars per course. The model
abstracts from any distortion involved in raising government funds. With any deadweight loss of
taxation, such enormous subsidies would be prohibitively expensive, forcing governments to use
other instruments, such as bulk purchases, to attain the first-best level of vaccination or give up on
reaching the first best.
   The situation is brighter if the HIV vaccine were competitively supplied since, as mentioned, the
first best is obtained in the perfectly competitive equilibrium without a subsidy. Unfortunately, as
discussed in Section 2.3, it may be unrealistic to suppose that competition would emerge even in the


                                                   23
long run for high-tech product like a potential HIV vaccine that are extremely difficult for a generic
competitor to reverse engineer.
    Certain other health interventions apart from vaccines may be appropriately modeled as being
competitively supplied. Consider the use of adult male circumcision as an HIV preventive. Far
from universal adoption predicted by the model for a costless, perfectly effective intervention, in the
meta-analysis by Kennedy et al. (2020), adult circumcision rates in control samples were negligible.
Thus the assumptions of zero cost and perfect efficacy are far-fetched for circumcision and need to
be relaxed.
    Consider the introduction of a small program subsidizing costly circumcision in a country with
little current uptake.12 The relevant theoretical case is (LR2), the only case with a positive infection
rate but negligible adoption. The subsidy required to induce the initial participants in the small
program to become circumcized in case (LR2) equals c - MPBc = c -  H (1 - 1/R0 ). A planner
would be willing to provide such a subsidy up to the level of MEXc =  H /R0 . Substituting R0 = 4
assumed in this subsection for HIV,  = 0.6, the estimate of efficacy in randomized controlled trials
in several studies including Bailey et al. (2007), and H = 7, 000, the estimated lifetime cost of first-
line drug treatments for HIV (UNAIDS/WHO/SACEMA Expert Group on Modelling the Impact
and Cost of Male Circumcision for HIV Prevention 2009), a lower bound on the health benefit from
avoiding an HIV infection, yields MEXc = 1, 050, implying that the required subsidy is somewhere
between $0 and $1,050. Of the eight studies surveyed by Kennedy et al. (2020), none paid a subsidy
beyond the cost of the procedure of more than $15. While most of these studies obtained statistically
significant estimates for the effect of subsidies on circumcision, Kennedy et al. (2020, p. 11) note
that "the overall uptake . . . in these studies was low, and the absolute differences between groups
were small," suggesting that the subsidies were far below the optimum.

2.9.3. Measles Calibration

As a contrast to the HIV calibration, we next calibrate the market for a vaccine for measles, a disease
with a much higher value of R0 than HIV. For convenience, take the round number R0 = 16 from
the range offered by Table 4. The model suggests that a monopolist selling a measles vaccine to
consumers would price it at fully 75% of the harm from contracting the disease. Of consumers, 75%
purchase the vaccine, and 25% free ride. A substantial majority, 75%, of free riders contract the
  12 Since male circumcision is only relevant for half the population, analyzing a program targeting universal adoption

would require modifying the model to allow for gendered subpopulations. We avoid this complication by supposing the
program is small. Thus, instead of computing the optimal subsidy GS     c achieving universal adoption, this calibration
analyzes a subsidy provided to the initial adopter.


                                                          24
disease, resulting in an overall measles prevalence rate of about 19%, less than the 25% prevalence
calibrated for HIV--as expected given the prevalence rate is maximized at the value of R0 used in
the HIV calibration.
   The minimum subsidy required to attain the first best under monopoly is GSm = 15H . In other
words, the monopolist would have to receive a per-course subsidy of at least 15 times the life-
time harm experienced from certainly contracting measles. This enormous expense highlights even
more strongly than the HIV calibration that the optimal subsidy, while providing a useful theoretical
benchmark, would not be a realistic policy alternative in practice for diseases with estimated values
of R0 toward the higher end.

2.9.4. SARS Calibration

Just as the measles calibration provided a useful contrast to HIV, the next calibration for SARS
provides a useful contrast but in the other direction. The value R0 = 1.1 for SARS in Table 4 is
considerably lower than for the other diseases, almost lying on the boundary (R0 = 1) at which
the disease disappears in the steady state without a vaccine. The model suggests that a monopolist
selling a SARS vaccine to consumers would price it at less than 5% of the harm from contracting
the disease. Less than 5% of consumers purchase the vaccine. Almost all consumers free ride. They
have the luxury to do so since, despite the low immunization rate, the low infectiousness of SARS
means equilibrium prevalence remains low at about 4%.


3. Short-Run Analysis of Disease Outbreak
This section analyzes the market for a vaccine against a disease like Covid that rises and falls as an
epidemic in a much shorter spell than a human generation. We seek to model a campaign that rolls
out the vaccine to substantial fraction of the population quickly to mitigate the harm experienced
by the current generation rather than continued sales to each new cohort of newborns as with vac-
cines against typical childhood diseases. Future generations may be spared much damange by the
epidemic's natural decline.
   Rather than modeling a continuous flow vaccine rate each instant, in this section we take the
polar opposite approach that a stock of vaccine is administered to the population in a short span. For
pedagogical purposes, we adopt the extreme assumption that all doses of vaccine that will ever be
administered are administered in a single instant. If feasible, this would be the profit-maximizing
approach for firms selling to the single, relevant generation of consumers. It would also be the


                                                 25
welfare-maximizing approach for a social planner. Logistical constraints would prevent such rapid
vaccine rollout in practice, but the model may still be a reasonable approximation to an intensive
vaccine campaign against Covid or other epidemic disease.


3.1. Epidemiological Model
We seek to maintain as much of the machinery from the earlier analysis as possible, including the
SIR framework, adapting it to incorporate a discrete vaccination event. Continuous time indexed
by t is divided into the ex ante period, before the vaccine's arrival, and the ex post period, after the
vaccine's arrival. Fixing the arrival date at t = 0, negative values of t index time in the ex ante period,
the earlier the date, the greater the absolute value of the index. Positive values of t index time in the
ex post period.
    During the ex post period, the disease evolves according to SIR conditions similar to those laid
out in Section 2.1:


                                                St + It + Rt + Vt = 1                                            (29)
                                                       t = 0
                                                       V                                                         (30)
                                                  t =  It St - It
                                                  I                                                              (31)
                                                       t = It
                                                      R                                                          (32)
                                                    t = - It St .
                                                   S                                                             (33)


There are only two differences between these equations and the system (1)­(5) underlying the long-
run analysis. First, to reflect the short span of the epidemic, occurring within a generation, we
assume there are no births and deaths by setting µ = 0. Second, no further vaccine is administered
after the initial tranche at date T . Hence, the vaccine compartment does not change, reflected by
equation (30).13
   Let hats distinguish the compartment values during the ex ante period S ^t , I
                                                                                ^        ^t (there is no
                                                                                 t , and R

need for the compartment V ^t since there is no vaccine ex ante). Compartments follow the same SIR
dynamics ex ante as they do ex post. It remains to specify how compartments transition from the ex
ante period to determine the initial conditions for the ex post period. Letting Q denote the vaccine
  13 Epidemiology texts label the vaccination process involved in our short-run analysis "vaccination at recruitment"
(Martcheva 2015, Section 9.2.1), contrasting the process of "continuous vaccination" involved in our long-run analysis
(Martcheva 2015, Section 9.2.2).




                                                         26
quantity administered at date 0, the initial conditions for the ex post period are


                                                       V0 = Q                                                       (34)
                                                          ^0 - Q
                                                     S0 = S                                                         (35)
                                                             ^
                                                        I0 = I0                                                     (36)
                                                             ^0 - I
                                                    ^0 = 1 - S
                                               R0 = R             ^0.                                               (37)


Equation (34) implies that the mass of successfully immunized at the start of the ex post period
equals vaccine efficacy   (0, 1) times the number of courses Q purchased. Equation (35) implies
that the ex post period starts with discretely fewer susceptibles than the ex ante period ended with,
the difference given by the mass V0 = Q who are immunized at date 0. Equations (36) and (37)
imply that there are no discrete change to either the mass of infected or the mass of recovered
individuals from the ex ante to ex post period. To ensure S0  0, we must have

                                                         ^0 .
                                                        QS                                                          (38)


   We treat I ^      ^
               0 and S0 as exogenous parameters, allowing them to take on any admissible values
^
I           ^           ^ 14 As before, we will work with the basic reproductive ratio R0 instead
 0  (0, 1), S0  (0, 1 - I0 ].

of the transmission rate  . Substituting the short-run value µ = 0 into (6) yields the following
expression for the basic reproductive ratio in the short-run model:

                                                                
                                                       R0 =      .                                                  (39)
                                                                

    The short-run analysis will require some different methods than the long-run analysis, warranting
explanation given the analyses are based on similar SIR frameworks. In the long-run analysis, social
benefit was measured as SB(Q) = h[1 - I (Q)]. Recall the notational convention that dropping the
subscript t on a time-varying variables indicates its steady-state value: e.g., I (Q) = limt  It (Q).
Also notice that we have started adding argument Q to indicate variables' dependence on that key
variable, a convention that we will continue from now on.
   14 An alternative approach would treat them as endogenous and derive them from ex ante initial conditions S    ^-T and
^
I-T and the duration T of the ex ante period. Our approach has two advantages. It is more parsimonious, involving
the two parameters I  ^      ^                        ^
                       0 and S0 rather than the three I
                                                            ^
                                                       -T , S-T , and T . The parameters involved in our approach are also
easier to measure. Pinning down the exact start of an epidemic is notoriously difficult to say nothing of estimating the
proportions of susceptibles and infecteds before surveillance protocols have been instituted.



                                                           27
   A constant, positive infection could be maintained in the long-run model since it involved a
continuous flows of births and deaths. The flow harm at any instant over the long run thus constituted
a natural measure of social benefit. In the short-run analysis, with a single generation experiencing
no demographic flows, the previous measure of social benefit is not useful since, as will be seen in
Lemma 4, the disease eventually dies out in fixed population for all Q  0, i.e., I (Q) = 0. In a short-
run model, a better measure of illness is not the infection rate to which the population converges,
which is always 0 by Lemma 4, but the mass of people who contract the disease at some point
during the epidemic, captured by the limiting value of the recovered population, R(Q). The measure
of social benefit we will use in the short-run analysis is harm avoided in the population who never
contract the disease:
                                SB(Q) = H [1 - R(Q)] = H [S(Q) + Q],                                  (40)

where the second equality follows from equation (29) and Lemma 4. Besides using R(Q) in place
of I (Q), (40) differs from the previous expression for SB(Q) in that it involves the stock of harm
parameter H rather than flow h. Assuming, as we do for simplicity, that there is no discounting and
noting, by (32), that recovery follows a Poisson process, (40) properly measures the total potential
harm avoided in the population over the entire epidemic.
   The following series of lemmas characterize St (Q) and It (Q) both for finite and limiting values
of t . Appendix A provides proofs.

Lemma 1. It (Q) > 0 and St (Q) > 0.

Lemma 2. St (Q) is strictly decreasing in t.

Lemma 3. If R0 S0 (Q)  1, then It (Q) is strictly decreasing in t for all t > 0. Otherwise, It (Q) is
hump-shaped, peaking at time T > 0 satisfying ST (Q) = 1/R0 , strictly increasing for t < T , and
strictly decreasing for t > T .

Lemma 4. The limits I (Q) and S(Q) exist. In particular, I (Q) = 0 and S(Q)  (0, S0 (Q)).

Lemma 5. S(Q) < 1/R0 .

To explain the lemmas in intuitive terms, they tell us that the infection rate is always positive in finite
time because, if not increasing, infections are at worst declining at a proportional rate less than 100%
each instant, which can never force the infection rate to 0. The infection rate does asymptote to 0 as
the stock of susceptibles is depleted and recovery takes over as the dominating force, reducing the
stock of infecteds. Turning to results for the population of susceptibles, with an imperfectly effective

                                                    28
vaccine ( < 1), even a universal vaccination campaign cannot eliminate the stock of susceptibles at
date 0. The stock of susceptibles is never forced to 0 after because the proportional decline is less
than 100% each instant. The stock of susceptibles strictly decreases over time since it is subject to
outflows but not inflows.
    According to Lemma 3, there are two possible shapes for infection rate over the ex post period.
One possibility is that the infection rate continuously diminishes from its initial level. Another possi-
bility is that infections have a hump-shaped path, expanding up to a peak and declining thereafter.15
For infections to initially expand rather than contract requires both infectiveness (i.e., high R0 ) and
substantial fuel (i.e., high S0 (Q)). We will call R0 S0 (Q) > 1 the condition for epidemic expansion.
    While no closed-form solution exists for the steady-state number of susceptibles S(Q), the next
lemma, proved in Appendix A, expresses S(Q) as an implicit function of other model parameters
(though the notation continues to emphasize only the variable to be endogenized later, Q, as an
argument of S). The lemma also provides an expression for S(Q) in terms of the principal branch of
                                     ¯ .16
the Lambert W function, here denoted L

Lemma 6. S(Q) satisfies

                              ln S(Q) - R0 S(Q) = ln(S
                                                     ^0 - Q) - R0 (I
                                                                   ^    ^
                                                                    0 + S0 -  Q)                                    (41)

and can be written
                                          1 ¯       ^0 - Q)e-R0 (I
                                                                 ^   ^
                                S(Q) =       L -R0 (S             0 +S0 - Q)            .                           (42)
                                          R0
    Equations (41) and (42) can be used to derive the steady-state population of susceptibles in
the extremes of uninfective or infinitely infective diseases. If a disease cannot be transmitted, ini-
tial susceptibles never contract the disease, so remain as susceptibles in the steady state, implying
limR 0 S(Q) = S0 (Q) = S  ^Q - Q. This can be proved by substituting R0 = 0 into (41).
     0


                        ^0 - Q and limR 0 [R0 S(Q)] = 0.
Lemma 7. limR0 0 S(Q) = S              0


The second limit, recorded for reference, follows from limR0 0 [R0 S(Q)] = (S
                                                                            ^0 - Q) limR 0 R0 = 0.
                                                                                        0

    In the opposite extreme of an infinitely infective disease, all susceptibles eventually become in-
fected, implying that the steady-state susceptible population vanishes in the limit. This result can be
  15 Some   epidemiologists take the hump-shaped path as the defining feature of an epidemic.
  16 The  Lambert W function L frequently arises in epidemiological applications. By definition L(x) is the implicit
solution to the exponential equation L(x)eL(x) = x. The principal branch L ¯ is the sole solution to the implicit equation
or, if two solutions exist, the higher of the two. The lower branch L is defined when two solutions exist as the lower of
the two. Though L  ¯ and L do not have a closed-form solutions, they¯can be computed with built-in functions included in
                         ¯
Matlab, R, and other standard software packages.


                                                           29
derived formally from Lemma 5: 0  limR0  S(Q)  limR0  (1/R0 ) = 0, implying limR0  S(Q) =
0. A more subtle question regards the rate at which the steady-state susceptible population vanishes.
The next lemma, proved in Appendix A, states that S(Q) vanishes faster than R0 increases.

Lemma 8. limR0  S(Q) = limR0  [R0 S(Q)] = 0.

   Comparative-static results can be obtained by applying the Implicit Function Theorem to (41).
For instance,
                                    S(Q) S(Q) R0 S0 (Q) - 1
                                        =                    .                                       (43)
                                    Q     S0 (Q) 1 - R0 S(Q)
Since its denominator is positive by Lemma 5, the sign of (43) is determined by whether the condi-
tion for epidemic expansion holds. The immediate effect of an increase in Q is to move an individual
from the currently susceptible to the vaccinated compartment. If infections are waning, this imme-
diate effect persists as a reduction in susceptibles that remain in the steady state. If the disease meets
the condition for an epidemic, however, the reduction in current susceptibles has such a strong feed-
back effect in the form of reduced "fuel" for infections that a greater proportion of susceptibles
remain in the steady state despite the immediate reduction in susceptibles.


3.2. Consumer Demand
We maintain the assumptions about consumers made in Section 2.2 for the long-run analysis. Con-
sumers are homogeneous and risk neutral. Consistent with the present short-run perspective, assume
agents do not discount the future. Consumers suffer harm H from contracting the disease over the
expected spell before recovery.
                                                                                        ^0 , are
   Individuals in the susceptible compartment when the vaccine is introduced, numbering S
potential consumers. They make their demand decisions by comparing the vaccine's price P to their
marginal private benefit. As in the long-run analysis, MPB(Q) = H I (Q), recalling I (Q) is the
probability a susceptible contracts the disease over his or her lifespan.
   The expression for I (Q) here differs from the long-run analysis. Since there is no mortality
here, a person's lifespan is the duration of the ex post period. The probability an unvaccinated
individual does not contract the disease equals S(Q)/S0 (Q), the number of people who remain sus-
ceptible over the model's horizon divided by the number of people who are susceptible at the start
of the ex post period. The probability of infection is the complementary probability

                                                S(Q)         S(Q)
                                  I (Q) = 1 -          = 1-         ,                                (44)
                                                S0 (Q)      ^
                                                            S0 -  Q

                                                   30
which Lemma 4 guarantees is positive. Thus,

                                                               S(Q)
                             MPB(Q) = H I (Q) = H 1 -                .                        (45)
                                                              ^0 - Q
                                                              S

Differentiating, substituting from (43) and (44), and rearranging yields

                                   MPB(Q) -R0 S(Q)MPB(Q)
                                         =                     ,                              (46)
                                    Q      S0 (Q)[1 - R0 S(Q)]

which is negative by Lemma 5, confirming the intuition that vaccinating more consumers lowers
their marginal private benefit.
                                              ^0 consumers purchase the vaccine if P < MPB(S
   Proceeding to derive the demand curve, all S                                            ^0 ),
and none purchase if P > MPB(0). For P strictly between MPB(S  ^0 ) and MPB(0), some but not all
consumers purchase. Given they are homogeneous, consumers must be indifferent between purchas-
ing and not, implying P = MPB(Q). Given they are indifferent, any fraction of them purchasing is
an equilibrium; demand is pinned down by the value of Q satisfying (45) when the right-hand side is
                                                                            ^0 - Q). Substituting
set equal to P. Rearranging the resulting equation yields S(Q) = (1 - P/H )(S
this into (41) and solving for Q gives the following expression for demand when a subset purchase:

                                     1 ^ H 1            P          ^
                           d (P) =     S0 +      ln 1 -           +I0      .                  (47)
                                            P R0        H

Combining these facts yields the demand curve
                                   
                                   0
                                          P > MPB(0)
                             D(P) = d (P) P  [MPB(S^0 ), MPB(0)]                              (48)
                                   
                                    ^0            ^0 ).
                                   S      P < MPB(S

Equivalently, the demand curve is given by d (P) unless this violates a boundary condition d (P) 
    ^0 ], in which case demand is given by the violated boundary.
[0, S


3.3. Firm Supply
Firm behavior is the same as that assumed in the long-run analysis. Firms produce at constant
marginal and average cost c  (0, H ) per vaccine course. Perfectly competitive firms supply the
vaccine at price c. A monopoly sets a price maximizing industry profit, , now earned from sales
made at date 0.

                                                 31
3.4. Normative Measures
Equation (40) provided the expression for social benefit relevant for the present short-run analy-
sis. The expression for welfare in the long-run analysis given in (20) continues to be relevant for
the short-run analysis: W (Q) = SB(Q) - cQ. Marginal social benefit is the derivative MSB(Q) =
 SB(Q)/ Q. Differentiating(40), substituting from (43) and (44), and rearranging yields

                                                   H I (Q)
                                      MSB(Q) =                .                                 (49)
                                                  1 - R0 S(Q)

Substituting (45) and (49) into the definition MEX(Q) = MSB(Q) - MPB(Q) yields

                                               H I (Q)R0 S(Q)
                                  MEX(Q) =                    .                                 (50)
                                                 1 - R0 S(Q)

   Combining (44), (45), and (50) yields an equivalent expression for the marginal externality pro-
viding some useful intuition:

                                                                  S(Q)
                    MEX(Q) = R0 S(Q)MSB(Q) = R0 S0 (Q)                   MSB(Q).                (51)
                                                                  S0 (Q)

The external benefit from vaccinating individual A equals the social benefit of vaccinating everyone
who would not be infected but for their interaction with A. By definition of the basic reproductive
ratio, A causes R0 S0 (Q) direct infections in the susceptible population. However, some of those
would have been infected by someone else later; only the fraction S(Q)/S0 (Q) would have survived
as susceptibles to the end but for their interaction with A. The marginal externality equals the
marginal social benefit cumulated over these "but for" infections.
   As before, let Q denote the first-best quantity, maximizing W (Q). In the long-run analysis,
MSB(Q) was a constant, leading Q to be a corner solution, involving universal vaccination (unless
a lower quantity eradicates the disease). Here, MSB(Q) is not a constant, so Q can be an interior
value, in which case it solves the social planner's first-order condition MSB(Q ) = c.


3.5. Perfectly Competitive Equilibrium
                                                      = c and profit is  = 0. The remaining equi-
Under perfect competition, the equilibrium price is Pc                  c
librium variables can be computed using straightforward algebra applied to the supplied equations.
Table 5 reports the equilibrium values of selected variables as a function of R0 . The expressions
have been simplified and their mathematical structure clarified via the change of variables indicated


                                                 32
with tildes as described in the table notes. We again use lower-case roman numerals to identify
cases, but the cases do not correspond to the same ones as in the long-run analysis.
   Although similar in many respects to its analogue, Table 1, that lists equilibrium variables under
perfect competition for the long-run analysis, Table 5 has some notable differences. One difference
is that R               
         c rather than Ic is reported. In the short-run analysis, the disease always dies out without a
                                                                                    = 0. We track the
population inflow to sustain it within the single generation considered, implying Ic
total number of infections that ever happen, embodied in Rc . Another difference is that R0 = 1 is no
longer an important threshold determining whether the disease dies out in the steady state without a
vaccine. In the short-run analysis, as just explained, the disease always dies out in the steady state,
leaving us to track the sum of infections over the epidemic, which is positive for positive R0 no
matter how low.
   The fact that R0 = 1 is no longer an important threshold leaves three relevant intervals for R0 to
report in Table 5: case (SR1) in which R0 is so low that no consumer finds it worthwhile to purchase
the vaccine, case (SR2) in which moderate values of R0 lead some but not all of the S^0 susceptibles
to purchase, and case (SR3) in which R0 is so high that all susceptibles find purchasing the vaccine
worthwhile. The first best is obtained in this case: Q    
                                                      c =Q .
   The threshold dividing cases (SR1) and (SR2) is the value of R0 for which the interior solution
for demand in (47) equals 0 (since no consumers purchase) at the equilibrium price Pc      = c. Solving

d (c) = 0 for R0 yields R0 = | ln(1 - c    ^
                                      ~)|/(I   ~S
                                            0 +c
                                                 ^0 ), where c
                                                             ~ = c/H . Similarly, the threshold dividing
cases (SR2) and (SR3) is the value of R0 for which (47) equals S  ^0 (since all susceptibles purchase)
     = c. Solving d (c) = S
at Pc                      ^0 for R0 yields R0 = | ln(1 - c    ^
                                                          ~)|/[I0 + (1 -  )c
                                                                           ~S^0 ]. Appendix A provides
derivations of the table entries.
   The next proposition summarizes the comparative-static effects of an increase in R0 on the equi-
librium under perfect competition. Among other notable results, we have that the nonmonotonic
behavior of infections and the marginal externality uncovered in the long-run analysis persists in the
short-run analysis.

Proposition 9. Consider the comparative-static effect of R0 on equilibrium under perfect competi-
tion in the short-run analysis.
                                                     = c and  = 0.
    · Price and industry profit are constant, with Pc        c

    · Qc and MPBc are weakly increasing in R0 .
                

               
    · R c , MSBc , and MEXc are nonmonotonic in R0 . Rc attains a single interior local maximum,
                                                         

                                               ~  1 - . Each of MSB
      which is a global maximum if and only if c                                  
                                                                     c and MEXc attain no more
      than two interior local maxima, one of which is a global maximum.

                                                  33
    · Wc is weakly decreasing in R0 .
For each Qc , MPBc , and Wc , there exists a nonempty interval of R0 such that the weak change is
                           

strict.

Appendix A provides proofs for results not obvious from Table 5. The proofs for the nonmono-
tonic variables are particularly intricate since they involve characterizing complex shapes of func-
tions without closed-form solutions. Our approach uses the concavity of the sign of the function's
derivative to count the derivative's roots, coupled with an examination of the limiting value of the
derivative. Graphs of equilibrium variables closely resemble Figure 1, so for space considerations
have been relegated to an online appendix (Appendix D).


3.6. Monopoly Equilibrium
Similar insights that guided the analysis of monopoly in the long-run model guide it here in the short-
run model. It continues to be true that monopoly output is zero in any case it would be zero under
perfect competition. Case (SR1) is thus trivially identical across perfect competition and monopoly.
In the remaining cases, competitive firms are able to make positive sales at price c. It continues to
be true that, by continuity, the monopolist can make positive sales at some small markup above c,
implying Qm > 0 in cases (SR2)­(SR4).
   To solve for Qm in these other cases, we again convert the monopolist's maximization problem so
that the choice variable is quantity rather than price. The monopolist optimally sets a price to extract
the entire private benefit of the marginal consumer, leading to inverse demand P(Q) = MPB(Q). The
monopolist chooses Q to maximize [P(Q) - c]Q = [MPB(Q) - c]Q subject to Q  S        ^0 , a constrained
maximization problem which can be solved using the Kuhn-Tucker method.
   Differentiating the profit function with respect to Q yields

                                    S(Q)               QR0 S(Q)
                           H 1 -              1-                       - c.                        (52)
                                    S0 (Q)         S0 (Q)[1 - R0 S(Q)]

                     ^0 does not bind, the monopoly quantity can be found by setting (52) equal to
If the constraint Q  S
zero, which after manipulation yields

                                                                              -1
                                                        Q  m R0 S(Qm )
                                                                     
                      MPB(Q         
                           m ) = P(Qm ) = 1 -                                      c.              (53)
                                                    S0 (Qm )[1 - R0 S(Qm )]
                                                                       


Several useful insights are immediate consequences of (53). Since the expression in braces is less
                                                     = P(Q ) > c = P . If Q is an interior solution--
than 1, its reciprocal is greater than 1, implying Pm     m         c      c


                                                   34
i.e., Q       ^
       c  (0, S0 ), which is true in case (SR2) of Table 5--then the price relationship has a direct
implication for quantities, namely, Q     
                                     m < Qc .
   Equation (53) can also be used to establish the existence of parameters for which the first best
is attained under perfect competition but monopoly falls short. To see this, consider R0 on the
boundary between cases (SR2) and (SR3) in Table 1, i.e., R0 = | ln(1 - c     ^
                                                                        ~)|/[I           ^
                                                                              0 + (1 -  )S0 ]. The

                 c in Table 1 imply P(S0 ) = c at this value of R0 , but (53) implies P(Qm ) > c.
entries for MPB                       ^                                                  


            m ) > P(S0 ), implying Qm < S0 at this boundary value of R0 . By continuity, there is
Hence, P(Q           ^                   ^
a neighborhood of R0 above this boundary value for which the first best is not obtained under
monopoly but is produced under perfect competition.
   If the monopoly quantity is not an interior solution, then the constraint holds with equality,
implying Q     ^
           m = S0 . According the the Kuhn-Tucker conditions, the constraint holds with equality
when the parameters are such that the derivative (52) is nonnegative when evaluated at the constraint
                           ^0 into (52) and rearranging, this condition is
quantity. Substituting Q = S


                                 ^0 ) 1 -               R0 S(S^0 )
                              I (S                                   c
                                                                     ~.                         (54)
                                            1-        1 - R0 S(S^0 )

The left-hand side equals 1 in the limit R0   by Lemma 8, exceeding the right-hand side since
~ < 1 by assumption (23). Therefore, for sufficiently high R0 , a monopoly produces the first-best
c
quantity: Q    ^     
           m = S0 = Q .
   The values of equilibrium variables resulting from the preceding analysis are recorded in Table 6.
The results reported in the column for cases (SR2) and (SR3) are not provided in analytic form, let
alone in closed form. This need not preclude definitive comparative-statics results; one could apply
the Implicit Function Theorem to the first-order condition (52) to determine how Qm changes with
R0 in (SR2) and (SR3). However, this approach does not deliver a definitive sign. We can be sure
that Qm increases in R0 for some R0 in (SR2) and (SR3)--since Qm must rise from 0 to the first-
                                                                   

              ^0 somewhere in that set by continuity--but we cannot rule out the possibility that the
best quantity S
monopolist responds to an increase in R0 in some subintervals by reducing output in order to extract
an even larger price increase than otherwise.
   Despite these challenges, we are able to derive definitive comparative-statics results for m by
the envelope theorem. In addition, we are able to show that the nonmonotonic behavior of R , MSB ,
and MEX extends from perfect competition to monopoly. The key insight behind the proof is that
perfect competition and monopoly generate the same output at both extremes of the lowest and


                                                 35
the highest values of R0 . Certain nonmonotonicies can be inferred from the behavior of variables
in those extremes, already characterized in the analysis of perfect competition. We report these
comparative-statics results in the next proposition, proved in Appendix A.

Proposition 10. Consider the comparative-static effect of R0 on equilibrium under monopoly in the
short-run analysis.

      m = 0 for R0  | ln(1 - c                m is positive and strictly increasing for higher R0 .
    ·                             ^
                             ~)|/(I   ~S
                                   0 +c
                                        ^0 ); 

         ~  1 -  , R
    · If c          c is nonmonotonic in R0 and attains an interior global maximum.

    · MSB         
         c and MEXc are nonmonotonic, attaining interior global maxima.




3.7. Government Subsidies
As in Section 2.7, define GS as the infimum of the set of government subsidies implementing the
first best quantity Q in equilibrium. We continue to constrain GS to be nonnegative.
   It is easy to establish some broad results for any market structure. Since MEX(Q)  0, equilib-
rium output cannot exceed the first best: Q  Q . If, in addition, Q = 0, then 0  Q  Q = 0,
implying Q = Q , in turn implying GS = 0 since the first best can be achieved without a subsidy.
The proof of the next proposition shows that Q = 0 for all R0 in a neighborhood above 0. For
sufficiently small R0 , then, GS = 0 for any market structure.
  We can also draw broad conclusions about the optimal subsidy for high values of R0 . Suppose
monopoly output is the corner solution Q    ^         ^              ^0            
                                        m = S0 . Then S0 = Qm  Q  S , implying Qm = Q , in
                                                                                          

turn implying GS = 0 since the first best can be achieved without a subsidy under monopoly. By
Table 6, monopoly attains the first best for all R0 in case (SR4), which the text argued includes an
interval of sufficiently high values of R0 . We conclude that for sufficiently high R0 , GSm = 0. This
result also immediately extends to perfect competition or any market structure involving weakly
higher output than monopoly.
   Having established that GS = 0 for intervals of low and high values of R0 for general market
structures, if it can be shown that GS > 0 for some intermediate value of R0 , it is immediate that
GS is nonmonotonic, attaining a maximum for some interior R0  (0, ) as the next proposition
states. The proof provided in Appendix A fills in this and other omitted details.

Proposition 11. For monopoly--or any market structure involving weakly lower output including
perfect competition--GS is nonmonotonic in R0 , equaling 0 for sufficiently low and sufficiently
high R0 , and attaining a positive maximum for some R0  (0, ).


                                                 36
   Turn to a more precise characterization of the optimal subsidy under perfect competition. Sup-
                                                                   ^0 ). Then Q must satisfy the first-
pose the first best is given by an interior solution, i.e., Q  (0, S
order condition for welfare maximization MSB(Q ) = c, implying MPB(Q ) + MEX(Q ) = c, in
                = MPB(Q ) = c - MEX(Q ). Since competitive firms pass the subsidy through
turn implying Pc
                = c - GS . Combining the preceding equations yields GS = MEX(Q ), the
to consumers, Pc        c                                             c
familiar result that setting the subsidy equal to the marginal externality is optimal. If Q is a corner
but Q                        ^                                                    ^
      c is not, i.e., Qc < S0 = Q , then the highest price at which output S0 is purchased satis-
       = MPB(S
fies Pc                                                          = c - GS , we have GS =
                 ^0 ). Combined with competitive pass through, Pc        c            c
        ^                     ^                                         
c - MPB(S0 ). If Qc = Q = S0 , then the preceding proposition implies GSc = 0. The various
                ^0 can be nested as GS
results for Q = S                                        ^
                                      c = max[0, c - MPB(S0 )].
   Next, turn to a more precise characterization of the optimal subsidy under monopoly. The
monopolist regards the subsidy as a reduction in marginal cost, maximizing [P(Q) - c + GS]Q =
[MPB(Q) - c + GS]Q. To generate the first best, the optimal subsidy GSm must force the monopoly's
first-order condition to be satisfied by Q :

                                                              
                                                         MPB(Q )
                            MPB(Q      ) - c + GSm + Q                   = 0.                      (55)
                                                             Q

                                                                               = c - GS =
             ^0 ), then the analysis of perfect competition showed MPB(Q ) = Pc
   If Q  (0, S                                                                         c
c - MEX(Q ). Substituting into (55) yields, after rearranging,

                                                            ^0
                                                            S
                                  GS         
                                    m = MEX(Q )                      .                             (56)
                                                        ^0 - Q
                                                        S

Equation (56) also uses the fact that  MPB(Q)/ Q = -MEX(Q)/S0 (Q) for all Q, as can be seen
by combining (46) and (50). Equation (56) shows that the monopoly subsidy is proportional to the
marginal externality, scaled up by the factor in parentheses, which adjusts for the monopoly markup.
This scale factor grows without bound as the first best approaches successful vaccination of all initial
susceptibles. Equation (56) also implies that GS                     
                                                 m > GSc since GSc = MEX(Q ).
                                                                                   

   If Q = S   ^0 , then GSm must force (55) to hold at that corner value of quantity. The next propo-
sition summarizes the analysis for the two market structures.

Proposition 12. If Q = 0, then GS                       ^                     
                                 c = GSm = 0. If Q  (0, S0 ), then GSc = MEX(Q ) and
GS              ^    ^0               ^                             ^
  m = MEX(Q )S0 /(S -  Q ). If Q = S0 , then GSc = max[0, c - MPB(S0 )] and

                                                            
                         GS                   ^
                           m = max 0, c - MPB(S0 ) +
                                                                  ^0 ) .
                                                              MEX(S                                (57)
                                                           1-

                                                  37
Across all cases, GS                                                ^
                    m  GSc with strict inequality if Q > 0 and Qm < S0 .




3.8. Increasing Social Returns
Typical products exhibit concave social benefits. The underlying logic is that initial units provide
higher marginal social benefits than subsequent units since highest-value uses are served first, with
subsequent units allocated to lower-value uses. Epidemiological externalities may lead this logic to
fail with vaccines. Vaccinating a few individuals may do little to slow the spread of an epidemic
if susceptibles are likely contract the disease from the many remaining unvaccinated people in any
event. Doubling coverage may more than double the social benefit if the additional coverage is
needed to make a dent in the infection rate.
   In this section, we analyze conditions under which vaccines exhibit increasing rather than dimin-
ishing social returns. This issue is particularly relevant to the short-run analysis. For simplicity, the
model assumes that any amount of vaccine can be produced at the constant marginal cost c, while
in reality, capacity constraints may prevent production up to the point that marginal social bene-
fit equals production cost. Rationing may be required. With the population divided into regional
subunits experiencing relatively independent epidemiological processes because of restricted travel
flows, it is natural to ask whether vaccine should be spread across regions in proportion to their pop-
ulations (as considerations of fairness or heterogeneity in value within each region might dictate)
or whether the benefits would be larger if vaccine were concentrated in fewer regions (chosen by
lottery if urgency of need in certain regions does not provide sufficient reason for concentrating vac-
cine there). Capacity constraints and rationing were not as relevant to the long-run analysis because
the long run presumably provides sufficient time to overcome capacity constraints.
   Formally, a vaccine exhibits increasing social returns if MSB(Q) is increasing in Q. Differenti-
ating (49), substituting from (43), and rearranging yields

                    MSB(Q) 2 H R0 S(Q)S0 (Q)I (Q)
                          =                       {R0 [S0 (Q) + S(Q)] - 2} .                        (58)
                     Q          [1 - R0 S(Q)]3

By Lemma 5, all the factors on the right-hand side are definitively positive except for the last. Thus,
the sign of the last factor in braces determines whether the vaccine exhibits increasing social returns.
Rearranging gives the following proposition.




                                                   38
Proposition 13. The Qth unit of vaccine exhibits increasing social returns if and only if

                                            S0 (Q) + S(Q)
                                       R0                 > 1.                                     (59)
                                                  2

   Earlier, we identified the inequality R0 S0 (Q) > 1 as the condition for epidemic expansion, re-
quiring a combination of sufficient infectiveness, R0 , and sufficient fuel, S0 (Q), for the disease to
spread. Condition (59) is more stringent, requiring that the product of R0 --not with the initial num-
ber of susceptibles--but with the average of the initial and eventual number of susceptibles exceed
1. One can see this is more stringent since S(Q) < S0 (Q) by Lemma 4. Proposition 13 can thus be
interpreted as saying that unit Q of the vaccine exhibits increasing social returns if the potential for
epidemic expansion is sufficiently high at the current output level.
   The next proposition provides simpler sufficient conditions for the vaccine to exhibit increas-
ing social returns at initial output levels and at all output levels. It is proved in Appendix A as a
straightforward corollary of Proposition 13.

Proposition 14. The vaccine exhibits initial increasing social returns (i.e., at an output level of
Q = 0) if R0 S
             ^0  2. The vaccine exhibits everywhere increasing social returns (i.e., at all output
levels Q  (0, S^0 )) if R0 S
                           ^0  2/(1 - ).

   According to Proposition 14, if a federal authority only has access to a small stockpile of a vac-
cine to allocate across several similar states with independent epidemiological processes, allocating
the entire stockpile to one state would produce more social benefit than spreading it evenly across
them if R0 S^0 > 2. If, for example, S
                                     ^0 = 0.8 in each state, then concentrating the vaccine would be
efficient for any R0 > 2.5. If the more stringent condition R0 S
                                                               ^0 > 2/(1 - ) holds, then even a starker
form of concentration is efficient: not just for very small stockpiles but for any size, the federal au-
thorities should vaccinate all susceptibles in one state before moving to the next. The starkness of the
policy hinges on the modeled consumer homogeneity: if each state has some vulnerable consumers
with a high benefit from vaccinating, a higher bar on R0 would need to be cleared for concentrating
vaccines in one state to be more efficient than serving high-value consumers everywhere first.
   Proposition 14 hints that efficacy  plays a role in determining whether social returns are every-
where increasing. The next proposition, also proved in Appendix A as a straightforward corollary
of Proposition 13, draws a clearer connection.

Proposition 15. A perfectly effective vaccine ( = 1) cannot exhibit everywhere increasing social
returns.



                                                  39
The result is intuitive. Protecting all but the last consumer with a perfectly effective vaccine elim-
inates the externality from vaccinating the marginal consumer, the force behind increasing social
returns. Thus, social returns must start to diminish with a perfectly effective at some point before
universal vaccination is reached.
   Proposition 15 does not automatically imply that a vaccine with  < 1 should be spread across
regions. Marginal social benefits may be diminishing in a region yet still be above that in other
regions not yet receiving a vaccine.


3.9. Relevant Limiting Results
This section undertakes the same exercise as undertaken in Section 2.8 for the long-run analysis:
examining limits of certain parameters to clarify the results. We take the same limits as before for
the subset of parameters carried over from the long-run analysis:   1 and c  0. Taking these limits
simplifies the results considerably. Only cases (SR3) and (SR4) remain from Tables 5 and 6, and
analytic expressions can be obtained for table entries only defined implicitly for general parameters.
   It is immediate that the first best is always obtained under perfect competition for the limits
considered here since the first best is obtained in (SR3) and (SR4) in Table 5, and these are the
only cases remaining in the limits considered here. Under monopoly, the first best is obtained if
and only if condition (54) holds. We show in the proof of the next proposition that (54) holds for a
disconnected set of the highest and lowest values of R0 :

                                          ¯ (-I
                                         |L   ^   ^
                                               0 /S0 )|
                                                                   ^
                                                               |L(-I   ^
                                                                    0 /S0 )|
                            R0      0,                          ¯            , ,                    (60)
                                              I^0                  I^0


where L ¯ is the principal branch of the Lambert W function and L is the lower branch (see footnote 16
                                                                    ¯
for definitions). It is no surprise that the first best is obtained under monopoly for sufficiently high
R0 ; we argued this above for general parameters. The surprise in (60) is that for the limiting value
of parameters considered here, the first best is also obtained for sufficiently low R0 . Intuitively, for
sufficiently low R0 , the disease is not infective enough to break out into an epidemic no matter how
many susceptibles are left unvaccinated to fuel the epidemic. The disease peters out with just a few
susceptibles mostly catching the disease from the stock of infected individuals at the date of vaccine
introduction. With no complicated epidemiological factors at play, the monopolist maximizes profit
by vaccinating all the susceptibles. If susceptibles were heterogeneous, the monopolist would raise
price by restricting output, but they are homogenous in the model. If the monopolist faced substantial


                                                          40
costs, consumers' willingness to pay for a vaccine against such a low-R0 disease would not cover
costs; but here in the limiting case of costless production the monopolist earns a profit (however
slight) by producing.
   If (60) does not hold, then output is positive under monopoly but less than the first best. We are
able to derive an analytical expression for output and other variables stated in the next proposition.

Proposition 16. Suppose R0 > 1 and consider the limits   1 and c  0.
                                                                       =  = GS = 0, Q = µ,
    · Under perfect competition, the first best is obtained. We have Pc  c    c      c
      MPB   = MSB  
                     = H (1 - e-R0 I
                                   ^0 ), and MEX = 0.
          c        c                             c

    · Under monopoly, if (60) holds, the first best is obtained, delivering the same outcomes as
      those listed for perfect comeptition, except the monopoly charges a higher price Pm  = MPB =
                                                                                                   m
      H (1 - e-R0 I0 ). Otherwise, monopoly falls short of the first best, with Pm
                  ^                                                               = H (R S
                                                                                         ^
                                                                                        0 0 - 1)/R   ^
                                                                                                   0 S0 ,

                                           µ[R0 (I
                                                 ^0 + S0 ) - 1 - ln(R0 S0 )]
                                                      ^                ^
                                    Qm=                                      ,                      (61)
                                                      R0 S^0 - 1

      GSm  , and closed-form expressions for other equilibrium variables provided in Appendix A.


   As before in the long-run analysis, perfect competition delivers the first best when the vaccine is
costless here in the short-run analysis. In contrast, monopoly can now also deliver the first best, and
as explained does so for both very low and very high R0 . Even if all other susceptibles purchase a
perfectly effective vaccine, the marginal susceptible is induced to purchase by the threat of contract-
ing the disease from those who were infected before the vaccine was introduced. That group is not
a source of infections in the long-run analysis because they exit the population by time steady-state
sales are being made.
   Extreme nonmonotonicity emerges for GSm . For the lowest and highest values of R0 , (60) holds,
implying that monopoly obtains the first best and hence that GSm = 0. For intermediate values of
R0 , GS approaches infinity. Thus, as R0 increases on (0, ), GSm gyrates from its lowest possible
value to its highest possible value back to its lowest possible value.


3.10. COVID Calibration
This section provides an illustrative calibration using parameters drawn from the current COVID-
19. Section 2.9 issues a number of caveats about using the calibrations as a forecast, and the same
caveats apply here.



                                                   41
    Taking limits   1 and c  0 from the previous section leaves three important model parameters
to be filled in: R0 , I
                      ^        ^
                       0 , and S0 . We will take current estimates of those parameters, calibrating the

counterfactual effect of the arrival of a vaccine at the present moment. We use estimates from U.K.
government agencies, which provide some of the best estimates for a developed country currently
available. Based on U.K. Government Office for Science (2020), we set R0 = 1.5. Based on U.K.
                                                                                          ^
Office for National Statistics (2020), we take the proportion of currently infected to be I0 = 0.19%
                                                          ^0 = 1 - I
                                      ^0 = 6.2%, implying S
and the proportion of recovered to be R                            ^    ^
                                                                    0 - R0 = 93.61%.

   Substituting these parameters into the formulas in Proposition 16, we have that the first best is
obtained under perfect competition. Universal vaccination results in all current susceptibles being
protected through the end of the pandemic. The condition (60) ensuring that monopoly attains the
first best reduces to R0 < 1.1 or R0 > 4, 378, which for practical purposes can be further reduced
to R0 < 1.1 since the upper interval is outlandishly high. Since the observed value R0 = 1.5 > 1.1,
monopoly does not attain the first best in this calibration. Instead, the monopoly price is set to 41%
of harm of contracting the disease. At this price, only 29% of susceptible consumers buy, generating
welfare equal to 68% of the available health benefit. The calibrated parameters are in the range in
which, according to Proposition 16, it is impossible to induce the first best under monopoly with a
finite subsidy.
    Since R0 S^0 = 1.9, the simple necessary condition for initially increasing social returns given in
Proposition 14, R0 S
                   ^0 > 2, is not met. However, the more complicated but weaker condition (59)
provided by Proposition 13 does indicate initially increasing returns, as R0 [S
                                                                              ^0 + S(0)]/2 = 1.16 > 1.
Examing (59) for a range of quantities shows that increasing returns persists through output equal
to 36% of the susceptible population. Supposing that a stockpile has to be allocated to two identical
states with independent epidemiological processes, concentrating the entire stockpile in one state
generates higher welfare than dividing equally until the stockpile exceeds 46% of the population of
one state. Larger stockpiles than this are more efficiently divided equally between the states.


4. Consumer Heterogeneity
The models used in the long- and short-run analyses thus far have assumed that consumers are
homogeneous. This section introduces consumer heterogeneity. The next subsection demonstrates
that key results continue to hold when consumers experience heterogeneous benefits from a vaccine.
Subsequent subsections discuss issues including the importance of targeting subsidies and biases
in the naïve estimation of the average marginal externality when aggregate data masks underlying

                                                  42
consumer heterogeneity.


4.1. Heterogeneity in Benefits
For concreteness, assume consumers, indexed by i, differ in disease harm, Hi . Similar analysis
applies if consumers experience different efficacies i or have different lifespans.17 Denote the
probability density function (pdf) by f (Hi ), the cumulative distribution function (cdf) by F (Hi ), and
the complementary cdf by F  ¯(Hi ) = 1 - F (Hi ), and the expected value by E (Hi ) =  Hi f (Hi )dHi .
                                                                                                     0
Assume Hi has full support on (0, ).
    Assume further that the population distribution of Hi is common knowledge but the specific
realization of Hi is consumer i's private information. The model requires consumers to be aware of
their heterogeneity, for example, differences in income leading to different willingnesses to pay to
avoid harm, or a family history of disease. Undiagnosed conditions that lead harm to vary but are
unknown to the consumer are better accommodated in the homogeneous-harm model.
    In both long- and short-run analyses with homogeneous consumers, we wrote the marginal
private benefit as MPB(Q) = H I (Q), the product of efficacy, harm, and probability of con-
tracting the disease. With consumer heterogeneity, consumer i's marginal private benefit becomes
MPBi (Q) = Hi I (Q).
    Incorporating heterogeneity in some of the normative measures requires additional work to keep
track of the high-value consumers who end up purchasing. We have

                                          ^
                                          H                                            
      SB(Q) = C         1 - I (Q)             Hi f (Hi )dHi + 1 - I (Q) - I (Q)           Hi f (Hi )dHi .         (62)
                                      0                                               ^
                                                                                      H


The first integral reflects the expected health experienced by those whose harm is below the thresh-
    ^ for purchase. With no vaccine to protect them, consumer i in this group obtains Hi with
old H
probability 1 - I (Q). The second integral reflects the expected health experienced by those who
purchase. Consumer i in this group obtains Hi if either they would not have been infected anyway
(probability 1 - I (Q)) or would have been infected without a vaccine but receive the vaccine pro-
tection (probability I (Q)). The leading factor C allows the per-consumer surplus given by the
integrals to be scaled up to the population of potential consumers: C = µ in the long-run analysis
  17 We conjecture that the analysis is also similar if consumers contract the disease at different rates, but modeling
heterogeneity in that dimension requires delicacy to avoid changing the epidemiological process.




                                                          43
        ^0 in the short-run analysis. Differentiating (62) yields
and C = S

                              I (Q)                                                  ^
                                                                                 ^ ) H
                                                   
           MSB(Q) = C -             E (Hi ) -                               ^ f (H
                                                       Hi f (Hi )dHi + I (Q)H              .       (63)
                              Q                   ^
                                                  H                                  Q

To compute  H^ / Q, note threshold consumer type H       ^ is given as an implicit function of Q by
     ¯(H
Q = CF ^ ). Totally differentiating this identity with respect to Q and rearranging yields  H
                                                                                            ^ / Q =
       ^ ). After substituting this derivative into (63), we see that the last term equals H
1/C f (H                                                                                   ^ I (Q). This
is the private benefit of the threshold consumer, equal to MPB when evaluated at the equilibrium
Q . Subtracting to compute MEX = MSB - MPB leaves just the first term of (63), as stated in the
following lemma.

Lemma 9. In the model with heterogeneity in consumer harm Hi , the marginal externality in both
the long- and short-run analyses equals

                                    I (Q )                 
                       MEX = -             E (Hi ) -               Hi f (Hi )dHi C.                (64)
                                    Q                     ^ (Q )
                                                          H

   Intuitively, Lemma 9 says that the marginal externality is proportional to - I (Q )/ Q, the
decline in the equilibrium probability of infection for an unvaccinated individual when one addi-
tional susceptible is vaccinated. The proof of the next proposition shows that that leading factor
approaches 0 as R0  0 in both long- and short-run analyses since a noninfectious disease presents
no danger of infection in either analysis. The factor also approaches 0 as R0   in both analyses
since the individual will almost certainly contract the infinitely infectious disease in any event--
from someone who was vaccinated but for whom the vaccine was ineffective if no one else. The
remaining factors are obviously positive and finite for all R0 . Thus, MEX approaches 0 for extreme
values of R0 , implying it is nonmonotonic in R0 , as the following proposition states. The proof in
Appendix A fills in omitted details.

Proposition 17. In the model with heterogeneity in consumer harm Hi , MEX is nonmonotonic in
both the long- and short-run analyses, under both perfect competition and monopoly.



4.2. Targeting Subsidies
While various forms of consumer heterogeneity raise common issues, they can have subtle differ-
ences. When consumers differ in benefits obtained from a purchased product, the support of het-
erogeneity is bounded between zero and the threshold benefit for the marginal purchaser. A modest

                                                  44
subsidy covering purchase price may be sufficient to induce universal consumption. When con-
sumers differ in personal costs of mitigation measures, non-adopters may have unboundedly high
personal costs, requiring an inordinate subsidy to induce consumption. Targeting and other measures
may help restrain program expenditures.
    Consider an example in which vaccines are supplied for free by perfectly competitive firms
producing at zero marginal cost. The only remaining cost is a personal cost ci of receiving a vacci-
nation. Such heterogeneity is plausible. The average cost of receiving a polio vaccine, for instance,
is probably low; but for those remaining unvaccinated, since they decline the vaccine despite severe
disease consequences, revealed preference suggests ci may be high, perhaps reflecting travel diffi-
culties, low tolerance for pain, or "anti-vax" sentiment. Using a uniform subsidy to induce more
of these high-cost consumers to become vaccinated could require paying a high subsidy to infra-
marginal consumers, amplifying program expense, perhaps explaining the reluctance of authorities
to endorse this approach more widely. In our model, the subsidy should be provided regardless of
program expense as long as it moves quantity in the direction of the first best. In practical settings,
authorities may face unmodeled frictions in raising or dispersing public funds making program ex-
penses a relevant consideration.
    While heterogeneity in ci combined with practical program frictions could weaken the case for
subsidies, it seems unlikely to overturn it. Calibration suggests that subsidies would be warranted,
if they could be targeted, even very imprecisely, to people or areas with low vaccine take-up. Con-
sider a "lentils for vaccination" program along the lines studied in India by Banerjee et al. (2010),
here calibrated with conservative, round numbers for parameters for ease of analysis. Suppose the
program provides $10 worth of lentils per child immunized (much more than the amount actually
provided in India). Suppose that for every marginal child immunized, nine inframarginal children
receive the subsidy and that either this subsidy is a pure social cost or that an additional dollar of
deadweight loss is incurred for every dollar of lentils distributed. Thus, $100 of subsidy must be
paid out for each new immunization induced. Even in this case, the program would still be justified
as long as the social benefit of vaccination exceeds $100 (plus several dollars of marginal manufac-
turing and delivery costs of the vaccine plus any disutility of vaccination). Vaccine campaigns can
be so cost effective that they remain so even if their costs are magnified, as one can argue in the
case of the rollout of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in countries eligible for support from GAVI
(formerly the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations).18 Similar exercises could be con-
  18 Sinhaet al. (2007) put the purchase and program administration cost of a three-dose course of a 13-valent pneumo-
coccal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) at $18 per course. They estimate a total cost in the 72 GAVI-eligible countries, after


                                                          45
ducted to determine the acceptable "leakage" rate in programs subsidizing mosquito nets or chlorine
for water purification.


4.3. Aggregation Estimation on Heterogeneous Groups
This section discusses conditions under which a naïve estimate that does not take into account pop-
ulation heterogeneity can recover the population means of the marginal externality and other equi-
librium variables.
    To derive formal results, consider a simple setting of a population consisting of epidemiologi-
cally distinct subgroups indexed by g  G. Assume the subgroups sharing all parameters in common
except for subgroup size, denoted wg , with gG wg = 1, and disease transmissibility g , generating
different values of the basic reproductive ratio, R0g according to the relevant formula in the long- or
short-run analysis. A researcher, unaware of the subgroup heterogeneity, seeks to estimate R0 and
MEX using aggregate data. Assume no vaccine is yet available--skirting a potentially awkward sit-
uation in which the expert knows less about the disease than ordinary consumers, who are required
to by our economic model to have rational expectations about the epidemiology of the disease when
making their consumption decisions. The researcher seeks an estimate of the externality associated
with a first dose of possible vaccine to be developed.
    In the long-run variant of the analysis, the researcher estimates R0 --in what would be a model-
consistent way absent consumer heterogeneity--by substituting an observation of aggregate, steady-
state disease prevalence I and known values of parameters besides R0 into equation (8) and solving
for R0 . In the short-run variant of the analysis, the researcher derives their estimating equation from
(31), which upon rearranging and substituting t = Q = 0 yields

                                                        1           0
                                                                    I
                                           R0 =    = 1+                .                                         (65)
                                                        ^0
                                                        S           I0

In this case, the research estimates R0 by substituting an observation of the percentage change in
prevalence shortly after date 0, along with known values of parameters  and S    ^0 , into (65). The
estimates of R0 can be translated into an estimate of MEX using the formulas from relevant tables.
netting out estimated $1.22 billion savings in averted medical costs, of $9.16 billion. The program would save 119.6
million disability adjusted life years (DALYs) at a cost of $77 per DALY (see their Table 5). After adding $100 to the
cost of each course from an imperfectly targeted vaccines-for-lentils program, one can show the cost per DALY is $558
per DALY, about a quarter of the World Health Organization (WHO) threshold for highly cost effective intervention (as
outlined in Marseille et al. 2015, one times per capita GDP, currently about $2,000 in India) and a tenth of the WHO
threshold for a cost effective intervention (three times per capita GDP).



                                                         46
    We relegate the analysis to Appendix C. Among other details, to isolate the effect of consumer
heterogeneity, the original epidemiological model needs to be normalized to avoid the outcome that
separation itself--even of a homogeneous population--has real effects on R0 . If the per-capita
contact rate is not adjusted, a reduction in the size of the interacting population in an SIR model
reduces per-capita contacts.
    To summarize the results, the researcher obtains an estimate of the mean of MEX across groups
in both long- and short-run analysis with some caveats. In the long-run analysis, the researcher
obtains an unbiased estimate of the weighted arithmetic mean of MEX across groups but only if
R0g > 1 for all g  G. If R0g < 1 for some g, then the researcher will overestimate mean MEX.
The discontinuity in the functional relationship between R0g and MEXg at R0g = 1 throws off the
calculation of the mean. Appendix C relates the overestimate to the share of the population in
subgroups g with R0g  1, providing a simple bias correction if that share is known.
    In the short-run analysis, the researcher obtains an unbiased estimate of the weighted mean of
MEXg with no restrictions on R0g . However, the relevant mean is not the arithmetic mean of MEXg
but the harmonic mean.


5. Vaccines Versus Drugs
Commentators on the pharmaceutical industry frequently suggest that firms are biased in favor of de-
veloping drugs rather than vaccines. Kremer and Snyder (2016) list a variety of reasons for this bias,
ranging from vaccines' complexity relative to drug molecules, to the scale often needed for vaccine
clinical trials, to the evaporation of consumers' private disease-risk information when making drug
purchases (that paper's focus).
    The epidemiological externality analyzed in this paper provides another rationale. By preventing
individuals from becoming infected, vaccines curtail their transmission of the disease to others. The
reduction in others' disease risk is a public good that reduces others' willingness to pay for a vac-
cine. This public-good feature distinguishes vaccines from some drugs that treat symptoms without
curing the underlying disease or inhibiting transmission. Firms would have more of incentive to de-
velop a drug that does not have this demand-reducing public-good feature than a similarly effective
vaccine.19
  19 Ifone takes the focus on steady states in the long-run analysis as literally implying that the discount rate is zero,
then there would not be any bias in development decisions. All products producing any positive flow profit would be
developed regardless of how large is the up-front development cost; the flow always swamps the up-front cost at a zero
discount rate. We are taking the steady-state profit and welfare differentials as approximations of the present discounted



                                                           47
    To quantify a monopoly's bias toward a drug and against a vaccine, consider a drug that is
similar in all ways to the vaccine analyzed to this point except that the drug does not reduce disease
transmission. Finding the right normalization to make drug and vaccine costs equivalent is somewhat
delicate since at equal marginal production costs c the total cost of serving a population with a drug
is lower if it only needs to be administered to infected consumers rather than the whole population
in advance as with a vaccine. We finesse this normalization issue by assuming both products are
costless to produce and administer, i.e., c = 0. Assume the drug is effective with probability .
Efficacy for the drug means it eliminates any harm from the symptoms experienced by infected
individuals but does not prevent them from transmitting the disease to susceptible individuals. One
course of the drug is sufficient to eliminate symptoms for the rest of the consumer's life. If this first
course is ineffective for an individual, further courses will be ineffective for that individual as well.
    We start by computing monopoly profit and welfare from a drug, respectively         
                                                                                md and Wmd , in
steady-state equilibrium in the long-run analysis. If R0  1, the disease naturally dies out in the
steady-state, implying Qmd = md = 0. If R0 > 1, the monopolist can charge Pmd =  H for the
                                                                           

drug to all newly infected consumers each instant. According to equation (3), new infections,  IS,
                                                                                            = 0 in
and removals from the infected population, ( + µ)I , must balance each instant to maintain I
the steady state. Hence, we can compute new infections as ( + µ)I (0), where the argument added
to I (0) indicates that the drug does nothing to curtail infections, as in the vaccine model with no
vaccine sales. Equilibrium drug quantity is thus Qmd = ( + µ)I (0) = µ(1 - 1/R0 ) by (8). Given
production is costless,
                                                                1
                                                 
                                       md = Pmd Qmd = µ H 1 -      .                                 (66)
                                                                R0
Welfare is
                                                                            1
                        Wmd = h[1 - I (0) + I (0)] = H  + µ - µ(1 - ) 1 -          .                 (67)
                                                                            R0
Comparing these expressions against the analogous entries in Table 2 for a vaccine leads to the next
proposition. The proposition uses the notation                             
                                               m = md - mv and Wm = Wmd - Wmv for dif-
ferences between equilibrium variables for the two products and W  = Wd
                                                                       - W  for difference
                                                                          v
between first-best welfare.

Proposition 18. Consider the long-run analysis with c = 0. For all R0 > 0, W   0 and         m  0,
with strict inequality if and only if R0 > 1. m is quasiconcave in R0 , with limR0 0 
                                                   
                                                                                                m =
limR0          = inf      = 0 , reaching an maximum of  2 H /(1 -  ) at R = (1 +  )2 . W  < 0 if and
             m      R0 >0                                                0              m
only if R0 > [/(1 - )]2 .
value of streams with a positive discount rate.


                                                   48
   The proposition states that the monopoly prefers to develop the drug over the vaccine as long
as there is a nontrival market for the products (R0 > 1). However, if R0 > [/(1 - )]2 , social
welfare is higher with a vaccine, implying that the monopoly is biased toward the "wrong" product
for sufficiently high R0 . While the drug has the advantage that the monopolist sells the first-best
quantity in equilibrium, a drug dose is socially inferior to a vaccine dose because the drug offers no
positive externality. Like other variables studied so far that capture the impact of the epidemiological
externality on economic outcomes (including the marginal externality and government subsidy),
here the magnitude of the monopoly's bias toward the "wrong" product, as quantified by m , is
nonmonotonic in R0 , greatest for some interior value. The externality disappears if the disease is
noninfective and is swallowed by consumers' private benefit if the disease is infinitely infective.
    Moving to the short-run analysis, for all R0 > 0, the drug monopoly can charge Pm   =  H to the

^
I                                                                          ^
 0 individuals infected at the moment the drug is developed as well as the S0 - S(0) individuals who

become infected at some point afterwards, yielding drug profit


                                             ^ ^
                                     md =  H I0 + S0 - S(0) .                                      (68)


To compute equilibrium welfare with a drug, the I     ^0 individuals infected initially along with the
^0 - S(0) infected later obtain health benefit H with probability  from the drug. The S(0) remaining
S
susceptibles are never infected and obtain health benefit H with certainty, yielding the following
expression for equilibrium welfare after rearranging:

                                                       ^    ^
                                 Wmd = H (1 - )S(0) + (I0 + S0 ) .                                 (69)


Comparing these expressions against the analogous entries in Table 6 for a vaccine leads to the
next proposition. Details are provided in the proof of this and the previous proposition, provided in
Appendix A.

Proposition 19. Consider the short-run analysis with c = 0. For all R0 > 0,    m > 0. m
                                                                                           

is nonmonotonic in R0 , with limR0 0                                   ^
                                      m = limR0  m = infR0 >0 =  H I0 . For all parameters
besides R0 , limR0 0 Wm > 0 and limR0  Wm > 0. There there exist parameters including R0 for
                                         

which Wm < 0.


   According to the proposition, many of the points of comparison between a drug and vaccine
from the long-run analysis carry over to the short-run analysis. The monopoly is biased toward the
drug for all parameters, and this bias leads the firm to choose the socially inferior product for some


                                                  49
parameters.
    A new feature of the short-run analysis is that equilibrium welfare never falls below H I   ^0 for

a drug monopoly, even for extreme values of R0 . Administering a drug to the I  ^0 initially infected

provides a social benefit even if R0 is so low that the infection does not spread to others. A vaccine
cannot provide this social benefit because it is useless unless administered prior to infection in the
model. Thus, equilibrium welfare is higher with a drug than vaccine in the limit R0  0. Equilibrium
welfare is also higher with a drug than vaccine in the limit R0  . The externality associated with
vaccine disappears because susceptibles are certain to contract the disease, if no one else, from an
unsuccessfully vaccinated person with an infinitely infective disease. Hence, apart from the drug's
                                         ^
remaining social benefit of treating the I0 initially infected, the drug and vaccine provide equal

welfare in the limit R0  . The opposing welfare factors--the drug helps initially infected but
the vaccine reduces subsequent spread to others--prevent many firm conclusions from being drawn
about the sign of the equilibrium or first-best welfare differentials.


6. Conclusion
We analyzed the market for technologies preventing individuals from contracting a disease. Such
products are interesting since, by preventing the consumer from contracting a disease, they exert
a positive externality, reducing the spread to others. Though the analysis applies to a variety of
technologies such as circumcision, bed nets, or social distancing, the discussion focused on vaccines
for concreteness. Vaccines (and other aforementioned technologies) are not pure public goods since
they are physical products that exhibit rivalry and excludability in consumption, yet they share with
public goods the feature that one's consumption reduces others' demand for that product, a feature
that can potentially lead to large distortions in firms' supply decisions.
   Such distortions and policy correctives were the focus of this paper. To study them, we con-
structed and analyzed a theoretical model of the vaccine market involving economic agents that
base their consumption and production decisions on rational expectations of the disease's evolution
consistent with a standard SIR epidemiological model. We provided two separate analyses. Our
long-run analysis studied of the steady-state equilibrium for an endemic disease such as HIV. Our
short-run analysis studied a vaccine campaign launched at one point in time along the path of an
epidemic disease such as Covid-19 that is expected to wane before population turnover becomes a
relevant issue. We sought to provide a comprehensive account of equilibrium variables such as price,
quantity, profit, and welfare across a variety of market structures ranging from perfect competition

                                                   50
to Cournot to monopoly and to study how those variables changed in response to parameter changes.
   A key variable was the equilibrium marginal externality. We consistently found--across both
long- and short-run analyses, across a range of market structures, and across models with either
homogeneous or heterogeneous consumers--that the equilibrium marginal externality is nonmono-
tonic in the infectiousness of the disease as measured by R0 . For low levels of R0 , one consumer's
vaccination provides little benefit to others because there is little chance the consumer would have
infected them anyway. For high levels of R0 , one consumer's vaccination provides little benefit to
others because they will most likely contract it from a different source anyway. The marginal exter-
nality is greatest for intermediate values of R0 . This nonmonotonicity carries over to other outcome
variables such as GS (the minimal subsidy necessary to obtain the first-best vaccine quantity) and
m (the difference between monopoly profit from a drug that does not exert the epidemiological
externality and from a vaccine that does). Diseases with moderate infectiousness may exhibit the
greatest distortions and be prime targets for subsidy.
   In calibrations, we found that strong cases can be made for subsidizing competitively supplied
technologies such as the example of circumcisions to prevent HIV. However, with a monopoly sup-
plier, the per-unit subsidy needed to obtain the first best can be prohibitively expensive. For example,
in a calibration of the long-run analysis to measles, we found that the subsidy required to obtain the
first best would be fifteen times the harm from certainly contracting the disease. With even a small
deadweight loss of taxation, such a subsidy would fail a cost-benefit test. In the short-run analysis,
Proposition 16 showed that in the limit of a costless and perfectly effective vaccine, if a monopo-
list would not produce the first best in equilibrium without government intervention, it cannot be
induced to produce the first best by any finite per-unit subsidy. Our analysis thus suggests that, in
many cases, governments may either need to give up on the first best as a feasible target for a per-unit
subsidy or need to consider other policies such as purchasing vaccines in bulk at a negotiated price
building in a lump-sum subsidy.
   If the negotiated price reflects the threat point of decentralized vaccine sales to individuals on
the private market, our results on the relative profitability of vaccines versus drugs gain relevance.
If the positive epidemiological externality causes a vaccine to be less lucrative than a drug lacking
that externality, the monopoly's threat point may be worse with a vaccine, implying that the hold-up
problem and consequent underinvestment may be worse with a vaccine than a drug. To address
the hold-up problem, governments may have to consider negotiating with vaccine manufacturers ex
ante, prior to substantial investment in R&D and production capacity.


                                                  51
   While the long- and short-run analyses shared many key qualitative findings, there were points of
                                                                                ^
contrast. Many of these points of contract can be traced to the presence of the I0 infected individuals

had yet recovered at vaccine rollout and thus capable of transmitting disease to unvaccinated. This
group is irrelevant in the long-run analysis because recovery and population turnover removes them
from the steady state. The presence of this group leads to the possibility that universal vaccination
of susceptibles with a perfectly effective vaccine can be a viable business strategy. Indeed, in the
limiting case of a costless vaccine, Proposition 16 showed this strategy is optimal for a monopoly for
both sufficiently low and sufficiently high R0 . The presence of this group raises the possibility that
a vaccine with a positive epidemiological externality can be welfare-dominated by a drug without
                                                                                                    ^
it: if the externality is small, welfare may be driven by the advantage of the drug in treating the I0

infecteds for whom the vaccine arrives too late to help, assuming the vaccine must be administered
prior to infection to be effective.
   The short-run analysis provides fertile ground for understanding when vaccination exhibits in-
creasing social returns. According to Proposition 13, a vaccine exhibits initially increasing social
returns if R0 S
              ^0  2 and everywhere increasing social returns if R0 S
                                                                   ^0  2/(1 - ). If the first condi-
tion holds, a small capacity should be concentrated in a single region; and if the second condition
holds, a first region should be completely served before moving to a second regardless of capacity
size. These stark implications for concentrating supplies hinge on the homogeneity of consumers in
the model but raise the possibility o equitable allocation leading to inefficiency.
   In our calibration to a Covid-19 vaccine, we found that the first best would be approached by
a competitively supplied vaccine but a monopoly (selling to individuals on the private market, not
bulk sales to governments) would set such a high price that only 29% of susceptibles would buy.
A vaccine would have increasing social returns not everywhere but through 36% of the susceptible
population. The presence of increasing social returns argues for subsidizing aggressive investment
to boost capacity beyond this point if concentrating supplies in few countries is either unpalatable
or outweighed in by the benefit of vaccinating vulnerable subpopulations in every country.




                                                  52
Appendix A. Proofs
This appendix supplies proofs not included in the text.

Proof of Proposition 1
Suppose I  = 0 and Q > 0. We will show P = 0. Substituting I  = 0 into (8) and rearranging yields
Q  (µ/)(1 - 1/R0 ). This inequality together with Q > 0 implies Q  Q0 by (12), implying
MPB = 0 by (16). Since MPB(Q) is weakly decreasing in Q, MPB(µ)  MPB = 0. Then Q =
D(P ) cannot be determined by the third branch of equation (18); if it were, P < MPB(µ) = 0,
violating the nonnegativity of prices. Since Q > 0, Q cannot be determined by the first branch of
(18) either. Therefore,
                                              µ           1
                               Q = d (P ) =     1-                .                         (A1)
                                                    (1 - P/H )R0
Since 0 = MPB = MPB(Q ), we have

                                                  µ    1
                                      Q  Q 0        1-    ,                                       (A2)
                                                       R0

where the first inequality follows from equation (16) and the second from (12). Combining (A1)
with (A2) and rearranging yields P  0, implying P = 0 by the nonnegativity of prices. Q.E.D.

Verification of Table 1 Entries
As a preliminary step, we will verify that the intervals in the column headings are ordered as given.
The fact that c > 0 implies c  ~ > 0. Assumption (23) implies c    ~ < 1. Hence c  ~  (0, 1), implying
1/(1 - c~) > 1, implying the case (LR2) interval for R0 is to the right of the case (LR1) interval. The
ordering of the cases is obvious if  < 1. If  = 1, then cases (LR4) and (LR5) fail to exist.
    Turning to the individual cases, in case (LR1), R0  1 implies Q0 = 0 by equation (12). Hence,
MPB(Q) = MSB(Q) = MEX(Q) = 0 for all Q  0 by equations (16), (21), and (22). The fact
that MPB(Q) = 0 for all Q  0 implies Q      c = D(c) = 0 for c > 0 by (18). Equilibrium welfare is
                 
Wc = SBc - cQc = ( + µ)H by (19).
    In case (LR2), R0 > 1 implies Q0 > 0 by (12). Thus, by (16),

                                MPB(0) = H (1 - 1/R0 ) < H c
                                                           ~ = c,                                 (A3)

where the inequality follows from R0 < 1/(1 - c ~). We can verify the claim in the text that MPB(Q)
is weakly decreasing in Q by differentiating (16):
                                                          -2
                                           2 H     Q
                                       -        1-             < 0,                               (A4)
                                           µR 0    µ

implying that MPB(Q) is weakly decreasing in Q. Therefore, MPB(Q)  MPB(0) < c, implying
Q c = D(c) = 0 by (18).
    Skipping over case (LR3) to cases (LR4) and (LR5), assume  < 1, so that these cases exist. We



                                                  53
have
                                  R0 > 1/(1 - )(1 - c
                                                    ~) > 1/(1 - c
                                                                ~),                                (A5)
implying Q0 > µ by (12). Since Q  µ < Q0 , MPB(Q) is given by the second branch in (16),
implying
                                               1
               MPB(Q)  MPB(µ)  H 1 -                 H [1 - (1 - c
                                                                 ~)] = c,          (A6)
                                           (1 - )R0
where the first step follows from the fact that MPB(Q) is weakly decreasing, the second from sub-
stituting Q = µ into (16), the third step from (A5), and the last from of c~ = c/H . Thus, Q c = µ by
(18). Since Q < Q0 , the relevant branch in equations (19)­(22) for SB(Q), MSB(Q), and MEX(Q) is
                                                                        
the second. Substituting Q                                                         
                             c = µ into these equations gives SBc , MSBc , and MEXc . Substituting Qc
                                                                                                     

and SB                                      
        c into the welfare formula gives Wc .
    In case (LR3), R0  1/(1 - c    ~) implies MPB(0)  c by (A3). Further, R0  1/(1 - )(1 - c        ~)
                                                    
implies MPB(µ)  c by (A6). Hence, by (18), Qc = d (c). Substituting c into (17) yields the table
entry for Q  c . Using (12), one can show Qc < Q0 , implying that the relevant branch in equations
                                              

(19)­(22) for SB(Q), MSB(Q), and MEX(Q) is the second. The equilibrium value of the remaining
variables can be derived as in the previous paragraph.
    Since Pc  = c in all cases,  = 0 in all cases. Q.E.D.
                                 c


Proof of Proposition 2
The proof for variables Pc   ,  , and MSB , which are constant over relevant intervals of R , are
                                 c           c                                                   0
obvious from Table 1.
    The reader can verify that Q   c is continuous at the boundaries between cases in Table 1. The
                    
table entries for Qc are constant for all cases except (LR3). In this non-empty case, Q    c is strictly
increasing in R0 . Variables MPB   c and W c
                                             are analyzed similarly.

    The reader can verify that Ic is continuous at the boundary between cases in the table and further
              is constant in R in case (LR1), increasing in case (LR2), decreasing in case (LR3), and
verify that Ic                 0
increasing in cases (LR4) and (LR5). A local optimum is thus attained at the boundary between cases
(LR2) and (LR3). Substituting R0 = 1/(1 - c                                             =c
                                               ~) in the case (LR2) table entry yields Ic  ~µ/( + µ).
The only other candidate for a global maximum is

                                                     (1 - )µ
                                          lim Ic =           .                                     (A7)
                                          R0          +µ

This is less than the local optimum on the boundary between cases (LR2) and (LR3) if and only if
~ > 1 - .
c
   The reader can verify that MEX  c is continous at the case (LR2)­(LR3) boundary and at the case
(LR3)­(LR4) boundary and further verify that MEX    c is decreasing or constant in R0 in cases (LR2)­
(LR5). Hence, MEXc approaches its supremum limR0 1 MEX
                      
                                                               c = 1 at the boundary between cases
(LR1) and (LR2). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3
Preliminaries: The proof for MSB m , which is constant within relevant intervals of R0 , is obvious
from Table 2. We omit the comparative-static analysis of Q                                  
                                                          m as it is similar to that for Qc in the


                                                  54
previous proof. We also omit the comparative-static analysis of MPB           
                                                                     m and m , which are similar
                                                                    
to that for Qm . We also omit the comparative-static analysis of MEXm , which is similar to that for
MEX  c in the previous proof.


Results for Pm : Form a price function out of the correspondence in Table 2 by taking the determi-

nate prices in cases (LR3)­(LR5) and extending this function by taking Pm       = c in cases (LR1) and

(LR2) in which the equilibrium monopoly price is indeterminate. One can then proceed to analyze
the comparative statics of this price function in a similar way to variables in the preceding paragraph.

              : The reader can verify that I  is continuous at the boundary between cases in Table 2
Results for Im                              m
                          is constant in R in case (LR1), increasing in case (LR2), and increasing
and further verify that Im                0
in case (LR5). This leaves cases (LR3) and (LR4). Differentiating the table entry for those cases,

                                   
                                  Im    µ                   1   R0
                                     =                 1-            .                             (A8)
                                  R0 ( + µ)R2
                                            0               2   1-c~

Equation (A8) is decreasing in R0 . It is negative for all R0 in cases (LR3) and (LR4) if it is nonpos-
itive at the lower boundary of case (LR3). Evaluating (A8) at this lower boundary R0 = 1/(1 - c      ~),
we see it is nonpositive if and only if c ~  1/2. But then Im is nonmonotonic, for it is increasing in

case (LR2) and decreasing in cases (LR3) and (LR4). It reaches a local maximum of c      ~µ/( + µ) at
the boundary between cases (LR2) and (LR3). This weakly exceeds limR0  Im          = (1 -  )µ/( + µ)

   ~  1 - , in which case the local maximum is a global maximum.
if c
     Assume c  ~ < 1/2. Then (A8) is nonnegative for all R0 in cases (LR3) and (LR4) if and only if
(A8) is nonnegative at the upper boundary of case (LR4). Evaluating (A8) at this upper boundary
R0 = 1/(1 - )2 (1 - c  ~), we see it is nonnegative if and only if c~  (1 - 2)/2(1 - ). Under these
conditions, Im is nondecreasing in R0 for all R0 > 0.
              

     For the remaining parameters, Im   reaches a local maximum in the interior of cases (LR3) and

(LR4). Setting (A8) to 0 and solving implies that the local maximum is at R0 = 4(1 - c         ~). This
local maximum equals µ/4( + µ)(1 - c       ~), which exceeds limR0  Im  = (1 -  )µ/( + µ) if c  ~  (3 -
4)/4(1 - ), in which case the local maximum is a global maximum.

Results for Wm  : The reader can verify that W  is continuous at the boundary between cases in
                                                m
                                  is constant in R in case (LR1), decreasing in case (LR2), and
Table 2 and further verify that Wm                0
decreasing in case (LR5). This leaves cases (LR3) and (LR4). Differentiating the table entry for
those cases,
                                 Wm     µH 1
                                     = 2               ~)R0 - 1 .
                                                  (1 - c                                   (A9)
                                  R0    R0 2
The sign of (A9) depends on the factor in parentheses, which is increasing in R0 . It is nonpositive
for all R0 in cases (LR3) and (LR4) if and only if it is nonpositive at the upper boundary of case
(LR4). Evaluating (A8) at this upper boundary R0 = 1/(1 - )2 (1 - c~), we see it is nonpositive if and
                               
only if   1/4. Otherwise, Wm reaches a local minimum in the interior of cases (LR3) and (LR4).
Setting (A9) to 0 and solving yields a local minimum at R0 = 4/(1 - c~). This local minimum equals
H [ + (3/4)(1 - c                                      
                 ~)µ], which weakly exceeds limR0  Wm = H [ + µ(1 - c    ~)] if   3/4, in which case
the local minimum is a global minimum. Q.E.D.


                                                  55
Proof of Proposition 4
Suppose c  ~  1/2. Then Im  achieves an interior maximum regardless of  by Proposition 3. So sup-

pose c~ < 1/2. Then Proposition 3 states that Im achieves an interior maximum if c ~ > (1 - 2)/2(1 - ),
or rearranging,  > (1 - 2c  ~)/2(1 - c
                                     ~). The right-hand side of this last inequality is decreasing in c ~.
Substituting c                                                     
               ~ = 0 gives the sufficient condition  > 1/2 for Im to achieve an interior maximum.
Proposition 3 states that  > 1/4 is sufficient for Wm  to achieve an interior minimum. Thus,  > 1/2
                                 
is sufficient for both Im and Wm to achieve interior optima.
    Suppose c  ~  1/2. Proposition 3 states that Im  achieves a interior global maximum if c   ~  1 - ,
or rearraning, if   1 - c  ~  1/2. Suppose instead that c   ~ < 1/2. Proposition 3 then states that Im  

achieves an interior global optimum if c  ~  (3 - 4)/4(1 - ), or rearranging, if   (3 - 4c   ~)/4(1 - c
                                                                                                      ~).
The right-hand side of this last inequality is decreasing in c                ~ = 0 gives the sufficient
                                                              ~. Substituting c
condition  > 3/4 for Im   to achieve an interior global maximum in this case. Combining the sufficient

condition derived supposing c   ~  1/2 with that derived supposing c   ~ < 1/2,   3/4 is a sufficient
                 
condition for Im to attain an interior global maximum. By Proposition 3,   3/4 is also sufficient
for Wm to achieve an interior global minimum. Q.E.D.



Proof of Proposition 5
The proof of Proposition 3 showed that when c                                           over R
                                              ~ < 1/4, the interior global maximum of Im       0
equals µ/4( + µ)(1 - c                                          
                       ~). The proof also showed that limR0  Im = (1 - )µ/( + µ). Dividing the
two expressions yields the ratio
                                             1           1
                                                              ,                                    (A10)
                                       4(1 - )(1 - c
                                                   ~) 4(1 - )

which grows arbitrarily high as   1.
                                                                           over R equals
   The proof of Proposition 3 showed that the interior global minimum of Wm      0

                                         H [ + (3/4)µ(1 - c
                                                          ~)].                                     (A11)

The proof also showed
                                           
                                      lim Wm = H [ + µ(1 - c
                                                           ~)].                                    (A12)
                                      R0 

Dividing (A11) by (A12) yields the ratio

                                             + (3/4)µ(1 - c
                                                          ~)
                                                             .                                     (A13)
                                              + µ(1 - c~)

Equation (A13) is minimized over   [0, 1] by setting  = 1. After substituting  = 1, the resulting
                                       ~ and decreasing in . It is thus minimized for c
ratio can be shown to be increasing in c                                               ~ = 0 and
minimized over   (0, 1] for  = 1. Substituting these values into (A13), the minimized ratio
reduces to 3/4. Q.E.D.




                                                   56
Proof of Proposition 6
Suppose R0  1. Then Q = min(Q0 , µ) = min(0, µ) = 0, where the first equality follows from
equation (24), the second from substituting R0  1 into (12), and the third from µ > 0. No subsidy
is needed to generate zero quantity, implying GS = 0.
     Suppose 1 < R0 < 1/(1 - ). Substituting 1 < R0 into (12) yields Q0 > 0, implying Q =
min(Q0 , µ) > 0. Substituting R0 < 1/(1 - ) into (12) yields Q0 < µ, implying Q = min(Q0 , µ) =
Q0 , in turn implying I  = 0 by (8). By Proposition 1, I  = 0 and Q > 0 imply P = 0.
     Suppose R0  1/(1 - ). Then Q0  µ by (12), implying Q = min(Q0 , µ) = µ. To find the
lowest subsidy delivering Q = µ, we need to find the highest P satisfying D(P ) = µ since the
equilibrium price is weakly decreasing in the subsidy.
     Consider a price P such that P > MPB(µ). Then D(P )  d (P ) since only the first two branches
of (18) are relevant in the computation of D(P ). Combining the inequality

                                                  H      1
                                P > MPB(µ) =         1--                                      (A14)
                                                  1-     R0

with (17) yields d (P ) < µ. Thus, D(P )  d (P ) < µ = Q = D(P ), implying P = P . But
since P was an arbitrary price greater than MPB(µ), we have P  MPB(µ). The highest price
satisfying P  MPB(µ) is P = MPB(µ). To verify that this price yields the desired quantity, we
have µ = d (MPB(µ)) = D(MPB(µ)) = D(P ), where the first equality follows from substituting
from (A14) into (17) and the second equality from the fact that only the middle branch is relevant in
(18) at a price of MPB(µ).
    The previous paragraph shows d (P ) = d (MPB(µ)) = µ, implying P = d -1 (µ). Inverting (17)
yields equation (26). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 7
We will prove the second bullet point regarding comparative statics of GS in c and . Gleaning
the remaining results from Table 3 is relatively straightforward. In case (LR1) of the table, GSc =
   
GSm = 0, in which case the comparative statics hold trivially. The remaining cases can be combined
in a single expression for each market structure,

                                                    1
                   GSc = min c, max 0, c +  H            -1                                   (A15)
                                                (1 - )R0
                                                            1
                   GSm = min c + R0 - 1, max 0, c +  H            -1              ,           (A16)
                                                       (1 - )2 R0

which are obviously weakly increasing in c and . Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 1
We begin by proving the claims about It (Q). Substituting (39) into (31) yields

                                   t (Q) = 1 It (Q)[R0 St (Q) - 1],
                                   I                                                          (A17)
                                           


                                                 57
or, rearranging,
                                                  t (Q) 1
                                                  I
                                                        = [R0 St (Q) - 1].                       (A18)
                                                  It (Q) 
Recognizing the left-hand side as  ln It (Q)/t and integrating yields
                                  t        ln I (Q)                 t   1
                                                    d =                   [R0 S (Q) - 1]d  .     (A19)
                              0                                 0       
Invoking the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, taking exponentials, and rearranging yields, for all
t  0,
                                               t 1
                         It (Q) = I0 (Q) exp       [R0 S (Q) - 1]d  .                      (A20)
                                             0 
               ^
Since I0 (Q) = I0 > 0 by assumption, It (Q) is the product of two positive factors.
    Turn next to proving the claims about St (Q). Rearranging (32), It (Q) = R   t (Q)/. Substituting
into (33) and rearranging yields S t (Q)/St (Q) = -( /)R    t (Q) = -R0 R t (Q) by (39). Recognizing
 
St (Q)/St (Q) =  ln St (Q)/t and integrating between t  0 and t  t yields
                                          t     ln S (Q)                      t   1
                                                         d = -                     R (Q)d  .     (A21)
                                      t                                   t       
Invoking the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, taking exponentials, and rearranging yields

                                              St (Q) = St (Q)eR0 [Rt (Q)-Rt           (Q)]
                                                                                             .   (A22)

Substituting t = 0 and t = t into (A22) yields

                                               St (Q) = S0 (Q)eR0 [R0 (Q)-Rt (Q)] .              (A23)

Now S0 (Q) = S^0 - Q > S   ^0 - Q  0, where the first step holds by (35), the second by  < 1, and the
                ^
third by Q  [0, S0 ]. The right-hand side of (A23) is thus the product of two positive factors. Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 2
Substituting It (Q) > 0 into (32) yields R  t (Q) > 0, implying Rt (Q) > Rt (Q) for t > t , implying
 R [R
e 0 t (Q)- Rt (Q )] < 1. Since St (Q) > 0 by Lemma 1, St (Q)  St (Q) by (A22). Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 3
Since It (Q) > 0 by Lemma 1, by (A17), the sign of I    t (Q) is determined by the value of R0 St (Q)
relative to 1.
    First, suppose R0 S0 (Q)  1. Consider any t > 0. Lemma 2 implies St (Q) < S0 (Q), in turn
implying R0 St (Q) < R0 S0 (Q)  1. Substituting R0 St (Q) < 1 into (A17) implies I t (Q) < 0.
    Next, suppose R0 S0 (Q) > 1. Substititing into (A17) for t = 0 implies I0 (Q) > 0. By Martcheva
                                                                           
(2015, p. 13), I (Q) = 0. Therefore, we must have I t (Q) < 0 for some t > 0. Thus, by continuinity,
T (Q) = 0 for some T > 0. Since St (Q) is strictly decreasing by Lemma 1, T is unique, given by
I
the value of t for which (A17) equals 0, implying T satisfies ST (Q) = 1/R0 . Since St (Q) is strictly

                                                               58
decreasing we have I t (Q) > 0 for all t  [0, T ), I
                                                   t (Q) < 0 for all t > T , and IT (Q) is the maximum
infection rate. Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 4
See Martcheva (2015, p. 13) for a proof that I (Q) = 0. Martcheva (2015, p. 12) argues that the fact
that St (Q) is positive and montone implies that the limit S(Q) exists.
    To prove the remaining claim in the lemma, take the limit t   in (A23):

                                    S(Q) = S0 (Q)eR0 [R0 (Q)-R(Q)] .                           (A24)

By Lemma 1, S0 (Q) > 0. The proof of Lemma 2 showed that Rt (Q) is strictly increasing in t . Thus
R(Q) > R0 (Q), implying S(Q) < S0 (Q) by (A24). Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 5
First, suppose S0 (Q)  1/R0 . Then S(Q) < 1/R0 because St (Q) is strictly decreasing in t by
Lemma 2.
    Next, suppose S0 (Q) > 1/R0 . In the last paragraph of the proof of Lemma 3, we proved the
existence of T > 0 such that ST (Q) = 1/R0 . Since St (Q) is strictly decreasing by Lemma 2, we
have S(Q) < ST (Q) = 1/R0 . Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 6
Substituting (33) and (39) into (31) yields
                                             
                                     t (Q) = St (Q) - S
                                     I                 t (Q).                                  (A25)
                                            R0 St (Q)

Integrating (A25) over t  [0, ) and applying the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus,

                                          1
                       I (Q) - I0 (Q) =      [ln S(Q) - ln S0 (Q)] - S(Q) + S0 (Q).            (A26)
                                          R0
                      ^
Substituting I0 (Q) = I0 by (36), noting I (Q) = 0 by Lemma 4, and rearranging yields

                           ln S(Q) - R0 S(Q) = ln S0 (Q) - R0 [I
                                                               ^0 + S0 (Q)].                   (A27)
                              ^0 - Q from (35) yields (41).
Further substituting S0 (Q) = S
   To derive (42), exponentiating both sides of (A27) and rearranging yields

                               S(Q) = S0 (Q)e-R0 [I0 +S0 (Q)] eR0 S(Q) ,
                                                         ^
                                                                                               (A28)

or, equivalently,
                                                 x = beax ,                                    (A29)



                                                    59
where x = S(Q), a = R0 , and b = S0 (Q)e-R0 [I0 +S0 (Q)] . It is well-known that (A29) has solution
                                                   ^

x = -L¯ (-ab)/a = |L¯ (-ab)|/a, where the second equality holds if a, b > 0 implying L     ¯ (-ab) < 0.
                                                                                            ^0 - Q from
Substituting the values of x, a, and b into this solution and further substituting S0 (Q) = S
(35) yields (42).
   Equation (A29) also has a solution in terms of the lower branch of the Lambert W function,
x = -L(-ab)/a. We reject this solution because it exceeds 1, which is out of bounds for S(Q).
      ¯
Q.E.D.

Proof of Lemma 8
We will prove limR0  [R0 S(Q)] = 0. The claim that limR0  S(Q) = 0 follows as a direct conse-
quence (and a separate proof was also proved in the text). We have

                       lim [R0 S(S                       ^0 e-R0 [I
                                             ¯ -R0 (1 - )S
                                 ^0 )] = lim L                    ^        ^
                                                                   0 +(1- )S0 ]                  (A30)
                       R0                R0 

                                                 ^0 lim
                                        ¯ -(1 - )S                 R0
                                      = L                                                        (A31)
                                                        R0  eR0 [I0 +(1-)S
                                                                 ^       ^0 ]
                                         ¯ (0)|.
                                      = |L                                                       (A32)

Equation (A30) follows by taking limits in (42), (A31) is a simple rearrangement, and (A32) follows
from application of l'Hôpital's Rule. Standard results for the Lambert W function imply L¯ (0) = 0.
Q.E.D.

Verification of Table 5 Entries
The equilibrium condition is Pc     = c. Firms earn no profit under perfect competition:  = 0. No
                                                                                              c
consumers purchase in case (SR1), implying Q         c =  0.  All susceptibles  purchase  in case (SR3),
                   ^                                                     
implying Qc = S0 . In case (SR2), Qc can be found by substituting Pc = c in equation (47).
     To find R                                                                                
              c , note Rc = 1 - Ic - Sc -  Qc = 1 - S(Qc ) -  Qc since Ic = 0. Substituting Qc = 0 gives
the entry for R                                          ^                       
                 c in case (SR1), and substituting Qc = S0 gives the entry for Rc in case (SR3). To find
R                                    
  c in case (SR2), set c = MPB(Qc ) in equation (45) and rearrange, yielding

                                      S(Qc ) = (1 - c
                                                       ^0 - Q
                                                    ~)(S     c)                                  (A33)

Substituting (A33) into R                                                   
                           c = 1 - S(Qc ) -  Qc and rearranging yields Rc = 1 - (1 - c
                                                                                       ^0 - c
                                                                                     ~)S    ~Q  c . Sub-
                                     
stituting from the table entry for Qc = S ^0 Q                               
                                             ~ c yields the table entry for Rc .
    Substituting Q                                                                     ^
                    c = 0 in (45) gives MPBc in case (SR1), and substituting Qc = S0 in (45) gives
MPB   c in case (SR3). For some but not all consumers to purchase in case (SR2) requires MPBc = c.
                                                                                                  
                                                                                       ^0 in (49) gives
    Substituting Qc = 0 in (49) gives MSBc in case (SR1), and substituting Qc = S
                                                                         
MSBc in case (SR3). Substituting from (A33) into (49) yields MSBc in case (SR2).
                                                                                                     
    The table entries for MEX                                                              
                                c can be obtained by subtracting other table entries: MEXc = MSBc -
                                                                               
MPB                                                                                                   
      c . To derive the table table entries for Wc , by definition Wc = SBc - cQc = H (1 - Rc ) - cQc ,
where the second equation follows from (40). Substituting other table entries into this equation gives
the table entries for Wc . Q.E.D.



                                                   60
Proof of Proposition 9
Preliminaries: For conciseness, let R0 denote the boundary value of R0 between cases (SR1) and
(SR2) and R0 between cases (SR2) and (SR3), i.e.,

                                              | ln(1 - c ~)|
                                         R0 =                                                   (A34)
                                                 ^
                                                 I0+c
                                                        ^0
                                                       ~S
                                                  | ln(1 - c
                                                           ~)|
                                         R0 =                                                   (A35)
                                              ^
                                              I0 + (1 -  )c
                                                              ^0
                                                             ~S

    The results for Pc  and  are obvious from Table 5. To show Q is weakly increasing, it can be
                               c                                       c
verified that it is continuous at thresholds R0 and R0 . In case (SR2),  Qc / R0 = - ln(1 - c  ~R2
                                                                                            ~)/c 0>
0. Hence, Qc is weakly increasing in R0 for all R0 > 0 and strictly increasing for R0 in the interior
              

of case (SR2).

Results for MPB               
               c : To show MPBc is weakly increasing, start with case (SR1). Differentiating the
table entry,
                               MPB   c       H  S(0)
                                       =-                 .                               (A36)
                                  R0          ^0
                                              S      R0
Applying the Implicit Function Theorem to (41) yields derivative

                               S(Q)      -S(Q) ^
                                    =             [I0 + S0 (Q) - S(Q)].                         (A37)
                               R0     1 - R0 S(Q)

The first factor is negative by Lemma 5. The factor in square brackets is positive since I^0 + S0 (Q) -
                                                                   ^
S(Q) > S0 (Q) - S(Q) > 0, where the first inequality follows from I0 > 0 and the second by Lemma 4.
Since equation (A37) is negative for all Q  [0, S  ^0 ], including Qc = 0, (A36) is positive. In case
             
(SR2), MPBc is constant. Differentiating the table entry in cases (SR3) and (SR4),

                                   MPB c       H        ^0 )
                                                      S(S
                                         =-                  ,                                  (A38)
                                    R0            ^0  R0
                                            (1 - )S

                                                         ^0 ], including Q
which is negative since (A37) is negative for all Q  [0, S                    ^
                                                                          c = S0 .
                                                           
    The last step in deriving comparative statics for MPBc is to show it is continuous at both end-
points of case (SR2). Now MPB(Q) is continuous in Q because it is differentiable in Q by (46).
Further, MPB(Q) is continuous in R0 because S(Q) is differentiable in R0 by (A37). Since Q      c is
continuous at both endpoints of case (SR2) as argued in the first paragraph of this proof, we have
that MPB  c is continous at R0 and R0 .


Results for R                                            
              c : To derive the comparative statics for Rc , combining the table entries with (A37)
shows R c is increasing in R0 in case (SR1) as well as cases (SR3) and (SR4). The table entry is
obviously decreasing in R0 in case (SR2). We thus have that R  c attains a local maximum at R0 if we




                                                   61
can establish that Rc is continuous at R0 . Using the table entry for Rc in case (SR1),
                                                                       


                                                                MPB
                 lim Rc = 1 - lim S(0) = 1 - 1 - lim
                                                                    c      ^0 = 1 - (1 - c
                                                                           S               ^0 .
                                                                                         ~)S          (A39)
                R0 R0              R0 R0                   R0 R0  H


The second equality follows from the table entry for MPB                                 
                                                                c in case (SR1): MPBc =  H I (0) =
                                                                                     c at R0 , allowing us
H [1 - S(0)/S  ^0 ] by (44). The third equality follows from the continuity of MPB
to substitute the table entry for MPB   c = c in case (SR2). Using  the table entry for R c in case (SR2),

                                                     1
                            lim R        ^ ^
                                 c = 1 - S0 - I0 +               ~)| = 1 - (1 - c
                                                        | ln(1 - c                ^0 .
                                                                                ~)S                   (A40)
                           R0 R0                     R0

The equality between (A39) and (A40) proves the continuity of R  c at R0 .
   Since Rc is increasing in R0 in cases (SR3) and (SR4), the other candidate for a supremum is
           


                                             lim R         ^
                                                  c = 1 -  S0 .                                       (A41)
                                            R0 

This equality follows from taking the limit R0   of the table entry in cases (SR3) and (SR4) and
noting that limR0  S(S ^0 ) = 0 by Lemma 8. The local maximum is thus a global maximum if and
only if 1 - (1 - c ^0  1 - S
                 ~)S         ^0 . Rearranging gives c
                                                    ~  1 - .

Results for MSB                                                                               
                    c : To provide a roadmap for the comparative-statics analysis of MSBc , we first
look at cases (SR1) and (SR2) and show that MSB          c has a unique local maximum over R0  R0 .
Furthermore, this restricted local maximum is the restricted global maximum over R0  R0 . We then
look at cases (SR3) and (SR4) and show that MSB        c has at most one restricted local maximum over
R0 > R0 . If no restricted local maximum exists there, then we show that the restricted maximum
over R0  R0 is the global maximum over all R0 > 0. If a restricted local maximum exists in
cases (SR3) and (SR4), then either it or the restricted local maximum over R0  R0 is the global
maximum. This establishes, in sum, that MSB       c has at most two local maxima, one of which is the
global maximum.
    To prove that MSB     c has a unique local restricted maximum over R0  R0 , we will show that
MSB   c is increasing  in a neighborhood around 0, quasiconcave for all R0  (0, R0 ], continuous at
R0 , and decreasing for all R0  (R0 , R0 ). The arguments are made in reverse order. It is clear from
inspection of Table 5 that MSB                                                         
                                   c is decreasing for R0  (R0 , R0 ). To show MSBc is continuous at
R0 , using the table entry for MSB   c in case (SR1),

                                    limR0 R0 MPBc                         H c    ^
                                                                               ~(I0+c~S^0 )
        lim    MSBc   =                                        =                                  .   (A42)
       R0 R0              1 - R0 (1 - limR0 R0 MPB       ^
                                                  c / H )S0
                                                                   ^
                                                                   I   ~S
                                                                    0 +c
                                                                         ^0 + (1 - c ^0 ln(1 - c
                                                                                   ~)S         ~)

The first equality follows from substituting the table entry for MPB     c in case (SR1) directly as well
                                                                ^0 (1 - MPB
as substituting the implication of that table entry that S(0) = S            c / H ). The second equality
                              
follows from limR0 R0 MPBc = c by continuity and from substituting from (A34). Using the table




                                                      62
entry for MSBc in case (SR2),

                                          H c ~2                     H c    ^
                                                                          ~(I0 +c~S^0 )
               lim MSBc =                                    =                                .   (A43)
              R0 R0           c                  ~) + R0 I
                                       ~)[ln(1 - c
                              ~ + (1 - c                 ^0]   ^
                                                               I  ~S
                                                                0+c
                                                                    ^0 + (1 - c  ^0 ln(1 - c
                                                                               ~)S         ~)

The equality of (A42) and (A43) proves the continuity of MSB   c at R0 .
                        
    We next show MSBc is quasiconcave for all R0 in case (SR1). Differentiating the relevant table
entry, substituting from (A37), and eliminating positive constants shows that  MSB c / R0 has the
same sign as
                         S^0 - S(0) 1 - R0 S(0) + I
                                                  ^0 + S0 - S(0) 1 - R0 S0 .
                                                       ^                 ^                 (A44)
The second derivative of (A44) with respect to R0 --after substituting from (A37), and rearranging
considerably--can be shown to equal

                                             S(0) ^ ^
                                        2         I0 + S0 - S(0) ,                                (A45)
                                             R0
which is negative--as can be shown using arguments similar to those used to prove (A37) is neg-
ative. Hence, (A44) is concave. In the limit R0  0, (A44) approaches 2[S      ^0 - S(0)] + I^0 , which is
                            ^
positive by Lemma 4 and I0 > 0. Having established that (A44) is concave throughout (SR1) and
initially positive, we have that (A44) can change sign at most once. Therefore,  MSB       c / R0 is ei-
ther nonnegative throughout case (i) or positive then negative. In either event, this proves that MSB   c
is quasiconcave in (SR1). We have already established MSB       c is increasing in a neighborhood of
R0 above 0, the last step needed to prove that MSB    c has a unique restricted local maximum over
R0  R0 , which is a global maximum on that restricted set.
    We next look at the behavior of MSB     c in cases (SR3) and (SR4), showing it has a most one
restricted local maximum over R0 > R0 . Similar calculations used in the previous paragraph can be
used here to establish the concavity of the following function,
                           ^0 ) 1 - R0 S(S
                    ^0 - S(S
              (1 - )S                    ^0 ) + I
                                                ^0 + (1 -  )S0 - S(S0 ) 1 - (1 -  )R0 S0 ,
                                                            ^      ^                  ^           (A46)

which determines the sign of  MSB   c / R0 in (SR3) and (SR4). Thus, (A46) has at most two roots in
those cases, which cannot both be local maxima, implying that MSB c has at most one local maximum
over R0 > R0 . The limit as R0   of (A46) equals

                            0 + 2(1 -  )S0 - (1 -  )S0 [I0 + (1 -  )S0 ] lim R0
                           ^
                           I            ^           ^ ^             ^                             (A47)
                                                                       R0 


after substituting limR0  S(S     ^0 ) = limR  [R0 S(S
                                                     ^0 )] = 0 by Lemma 8. Expression (A47) approaches
                                             0
- since it involves R0 multiplied by negative constant. Since the limit R0   cannot produce a
restricted supremum over R0 > R0 , the restricted supremum is either the lower boundary of (SR3),
i.e., R0 , or is the interior restricted maximum. If R0 provides the restricted supremum over R0 > R0 ,
this cannot be a global maximum since MSB         c is decreasing in (SR2); the restricted maximum over
R0  R0 must then be the global maximum.

Results for MEX                                                                        
                c : We use the same roadmap for the comparative-statics analysis of MEXc as
        
for MSBc . We begin by proving that MEXc has a unique local restricted maximum over R0  R0 .


                                                    63
We do this by showing that MEX      c is increasing in a neighborhood around 0, quasiconcave for all
R0  (0, R0 ], continuous at R0 , and decreasing for all R0  (R0 , R0 ). The arguments are made in
reverse order. Differentiating the table entry for case (SR2) yields

                                MEX c          -H c  ~2 (1 - c ^
                                                             ~)I0
                                      =                                        ,                        (A48)
                                 R0     ~ + (1 - c
                                                 ~)[ln(1 - c
                                        c                   ~) + R0 I
                                                                    ^0]
                                                                           2


                                                                                       
which is negative. The proof that MEX  c is continuous at R0 is similar to that for MSBc and omitted.
    We next show MEX    c is quasiconcave for all R0 in case (SR1). Differentiating the relevant table
entry, substituting from equation (A37), and eliminating positive constants shows that  MEX    c / R0
has the same sign as
                   ^0 - S(0) 1 - R0 (I
                   S                 ^0 + S0 ) + R0 S(0) 1 - R0 S(0) I0 + S0 - S(0) .
                                          ^                          ^ ^                                (A49)

All of the factors in (A49) are definitively positive except for 1 - R0 (I
                                                                         ^    ^
                                                                          0 + S0 ). If this is also nonneg-
ative, then  MEXc / R0 is positive in (SR1), implying MEXc is quasiconcave in (SR1), as desired.
                                                               

    So suppose instead that
                                            R0 (I
                                                ^    ^
                                                 0 + S0 ) > 1.                                        (A50)
We will show that (A50) implies that (A49) is concave. The second derivative of (A49) with respect
to R0 --after substituting from (A37), rearranging considerably, and removing positive factors--can
be shown to have the same sign as

  S(0) 1 - R0 (I
               ^0 + S0 ) - [1 - R0 S(0) (I0 + S0 ) - S(0) 2(I0 + S0 ) - S(0)
                    ^                    ^ ^                ^ ^

                                               - S(0) 1 - R0 I
                                                             ^    ^
                                                              0 + S0 - S(0)
                                                                                       ^
                                                                                       I    ^
                                                                                        0 + S0 - 2S(0) . (A51)


By (A50) and familiar arguments, all the terms in (A51) are negative except possibly the last. If the
last term is also nonpositive, the whole expression is negative, establishing (A49) is concave. So
suppose instead that the last term is positive. For this to be the case, one of its last two factors must
be positive and the other negative. That is, one of the following two sets of conditions must hold:

                           1 - R0 I
                                  ^    ^
                                   0 + S0 - S(0) > 0,
                                                             ^
                                                             I    ^
                                                              0 + S0 - 2S(0) < 0                        (A52)

                           1 - R0 I
                                  ^    ^
                                   0 + S0 - S(0) < 0,
                                                             ^
                                                             I    ^
                                                              0 + S0 - 2S(0) > 0                        (A53)
Suppose (A52) holds. Then

                        0 + S0 ) - S(0) - S(0) 1 - R0 I0 + S0 - S(0)
                       ^
       (A51) < -S(0) 2(I    ^                         ^ ^                          ^
                                                                                   I    ^
                                                                                    0 + S0 - 2S(0)      (A54)
              < -S(0) 2(I^    ^                  ^ ^
                          0 + S0 ) - S(0) - S(0) I0 + S0 - 2S(0)                                        (A55)
                       ^
              = -3S(0) I     ^
                        0 + S0 - S(0) .                                                                 (A56)

Equation (A54) follows from eliminating the first two negative terms of (A51). Equation (A55)
follows from substituting 1, which is greater than the factor in braces, for the factor in braces. The
fact that this substitution results in an increase in (A55) follows from (A52). Straightforward algebra
yields (A56), which is negative by familiar arguments.


                                                     64
   Suppose (A53) holds. Then

        (A51) < S(0) 1 - R0 (I
                             ^0 + S0 ) - S(0) 1 - R0 I0 + S0 - S(0)
                                  ^                  ^ ^                  ^
                                                                          I    ^
                                                                           0 + S0 - 2S(0)          (A57)

               < S(0) 1 - R0 (I
                              ^0 + S0 ) - S(0) 1 - R0 I0 + S0 - S(0)
                                   ^                  ^ ^                                          (A58)
               = -R0 S(0)2 .                                                                       (A59)

Equation (A57) follows from eliminating the second and third two negative terms from (A51). Equa-
tion (A58) follows from substituting 1 for the last factor, I^    ^
                                                              0 + S0 - 2S(0). To see that this increases
                     ^
the expression, note I    ^             ^ ^
                      0 + S0 - 2S(0) < I0 + S0  1, where the last inequality holds since the size of
the infected and susceptible subpopulations at date 0, I ^     ^
                                                          0 + S0 , cannot exceed the size of the entire
population, normalized to 1. The fact that substituting 1 for I ^    ^
                                                                 0 + S0 - 2S(0) increases (A57) follows
from (A53). Straightforward algebra yields (A59), which is obviously negative.
    In sum, we have shown (A51) is negative for R0 < R0 , implying (A49) is concave. In the limit
R0  0, (A49) approaches S   ^0 - S(0), which is positive by Lemma 4. These facts are sufficient to
                                                                                                
establish that MEX c is quasiconcave in case (SR1) by the same arguments used for MSBc above.
                                                     
These are all the facts needed to prove that MEXc has a unique restricted local maximum over
R0  R0 , which is a global maximum on that restricted set.
    We next investigate the behavior of MEX    c in (SR3) and (SR4). Calculations similar to those
used above can be used to show a function determining the sign of  MEX        c / R0 in cases (SR3) and
(SR4),
          ^0 - S(0) 1 - R0 [I
    (1 - )S                 ^0 + (1 -  )S0 ] + R0 S(S0 ) 1 - R0 S(S0 ) I0 + (1 -  )S0 - S(S0 ) .
                                        ^           ^             ^    ^           ^      ^        (A60)

is concave. Thus, (A60) has at most two roots in cases (SR3) and (SR4), at most one of which is a
local maximum for MEX                                                    
                          c . Taking the limit of the table entry for MEXc in cases (SR3) and (SR4) and
substituting the limit limR0  S(S ^0 ) = limR  [R0 S(S   ^0 )] = 0 by Lemma 8 yields limR  MEX   c = 0.
                                              0                                          0
Since the limit R0   produces an infimum for MEXc , not a supremum, the restricted supremum of
                                                          

MEX   c over R0 > R0 is either the lower boundary of case (SR3), i.e., R0 , or the interior restricted
maximum. If R0 provides the restricted supremum over R0 > R0 , this cannot be a global maximum
since MSB  c is decreasing in case (SR2); the restricted maximum over R0  R0 must then be the
global maximum.

Final Results:    The comparative statics for Wc are obvious from inspection of the table in view of
(A37). Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 10
Results for m : The result is a consequence of the Envelope Theorem. Monopoly profit can be
written
                                             S(Q  m)
                                 m = H 1 -        
                                                       ~ Q
                                                      -c  m.                          (A61)
                                             S0 (Qm )
This is a function of R0 indirectly through its dependence on Q  m , which in turns depends on R0 . It
also depends on R0 because S(Q) is a function of R0 (although the argument is omitted for brevity).
If Qm is an interior solution, as in case (SR2) and (SR3), the first-order condition ensures that the


                                                   65
indirect effect of R0 on            
                         m through Qm equals 0. Only the direct effect remains. Hence,

                                        m   -HQ         
                                                  m  S(Qm )
                                          =                 ,                                 (A62)
                                       R0   S0 (Qm)   R0

which is positive since the derivative on the right-hand side is negative by (A37).

Results for R     Since Rm = Rc for all R0 in case (SR1),
                              
             m:

                                    lim R         
                                         m = lim Rc = 1 - (1 - c
                                                                 ^0 ,
                                                               ~)S                            (A63)
                                R0 R0           R0 R0

where the first equality follows by continuity since R0 is the upper bound on case (SR1) by (A34)
and the second equality follows from (A39).
   We proceed to compare (A63) to the limits of R   m for extreme values of R0 . We have

                             lim R                                ^
                                  m = lim Rc = 1 - lim S(0) = 1 - S0 ,                        (A64)
                             R0 0        R0 0            R0 0

where the first equality follows since Rm = Rc for all R0 in case (SR1), the second equality follows
                                             

from the entry for R   c in case (SR1) in Table 5, and the third equality follows from Lemma 7.
Equation (A64) is less than (A63). At the other extreme,

                                      lim R                  ^
                                           m = lim Rc = 1 -  S0 ,                             (A65)
                                      R0          R0 

where the first equality follows by continuity since R m = Rc for all R0 in case (SR4), the second
                                                             

equality follows from the entry for R c in cases (SR3) and (SR4) in Table 5, and the third equality
follows from (A41). Equation (A65) is weakly less than (A63) if c   ~  1 - . Since Rm is greater at
the interior R0 than at extreme values of R0 , Rm must have an interior maximum.
                                                



Results for MSB                                     
                  m : We show that the limits of MSBm for extreme values of R0 are exceed by
interior values. We have

                                                        1                   ^0
                                                                            S
               lim MSB           
                      m = lim MSBc =  H 1 -                lim S(0) = H 1 -       = 0,        (A66)
               R0 0          R0 0                       ^0 R0 0
                                                        S                   ^0
                                                                            S

where the first equality follows since MSB             
                                              m = MSBc for all R0 in case (SR1), the second equality
follows from the entry for MSB     c in case (SR1) in Table 5, and the third equality follows from
Lemma 7. To examine the upper limit, the proof of Proposition 9 showed that MSB          c asymptotes
downward toward limR0  MSB       c  =  1.  Since  MSB  
                                                       m =  MSB c
                                                                
                                                                   in case (SR4), and all R0 above a
                                                              
sufficiently high value are contained in case (SR4), MSBm must also slope downward toward its
asymptote. Thus MSB    m is higher at interior values of R0 than the extremes.


Results for MEX     m : Arguments similar to the preceding can be used to show limR0 0 MEXm =
                                                                                             

limR0  MEX    c = 0. Hence, MEXm is higher for interior values of R0 than extreme values and thus
                                

attains an interior maximum. Q.E.D.


                                                    66
Proof of Proposition 11
The sketch of the proof in the text omitted two details filled in here. We first prove Q for R0 in a
neighborhood above 0. Taking limits in (49),

                                                         S0 (Q)
                                lim MSB(Q) = H 1 -              = 0.                           (A67)
                                R0 0                     S0 (Q)

Hence, there exists R0 in a neighborhood above 0 and  (0, c) such that MSB(Q) < . For R0 in
                               Q
this neighborhood, W (Q) = 0     [MSB(x) - c]dx < ( - c)Q < 0 = W (0). Thus, Q = 0 for R0 in this
neighborhood.
     We next prove GS > 0 for some R0  (0, ). Since Q = 0 for all R0 in neighborhood of
0, Q  Q = 0 implies Q = 0 for all R0 in a neighborhood of 0. The text argued Q              ^
                                                                                      m = S0 for
sufficiently high R0 , implying S^0 = Q   m  Q  hS0 , implying Q = S0 for sufficiently high R0 .
                                                                         ^
By the Theorem of the Maximum, since Q is a maximizer of continuous function W (Q), Q is
                                              

continuous, implying the existence of R0  (0, ) such that Q  (0, S   ^0 ). This Q must satisfy the
first-order condition MSB(Q ) = c, implying MPB(Q ) + MEX(Q ) = c, implying MPB(Q ) < c
                                                                  

since MEX(Q) > 0 for all Q  (0, S   ^0 ) by (50). Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 14
Suppose R0 S ^0 > 2. Then 1 < R0 S  ^0 /2 < R0 [S^0 + S(0)]/2 = R0 [S0 (0) + S(0)]/2, where the second
step follows from S(0) > 0 by Lemma 4. This chain of inequalities implies that (59) holds at Q = 0
and thus that the vaccine exhibits initially increasing social returns.
    At a general output level Q  (0, S ^0 ),

                 S0 (Q) + S(Q)      S0 (Q)                ^0 - Q
                                                          S                       ^0
                                                                            (1 - )S
            R0                 > R0               = R0               R0                 .      (A68)
                       2               2                     2                  2

If R0 S
      ^0  2/(1 - ), then the last expression weakly exceeds 1, implying (59) holds for all feasible
Q, implying the vaccine exhibits everywhere increasing social returns. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 15
Universal vaccination with a perfectly effective vaccine implies S0 (S^0 ) = (1 - )S
                                                                                   ^0 = 0. We thus
have
                                    ^0 ) + S(S
                                S0 (S        ^0 )          ^0 )
                                                         S(S         1
                           R0                     = R0           < .                        (A69)
                                        2                  2         2
                                  ^0 , implying the vaccine does not exhibit increasing social returns
Hence, (59) does not hold for Q = S
        ^0 by Proposition 13. Q.E.D.
for Q = S

Proof of Proposition 16
Results for Perfect Competition: As noted in the text, after substituting c = 0 (implying c   ~ = 0)
into the intervals of R0 determining cases, only cases (SR3) and (SR4) in the last column of Table 5

                                                 67
remain. Many of these entries involve S(S^0 ). To compute lim1 S(S
                                                                 ^0 ), note 0  S(S
                                                                                 ^0 ) < S0 (S^0 ) =
      ^0 where the inequality follows from Lemma 4. Thus, 0  lim1 S(S
(1 - )S                                                                 ^0 )  lim1 (1 - )S^0 = 0,
implying
                                          lim S(S^0 ) = 0.                                  (A70)
                                                      1

   The limits of some table entries follow from direct substitution of (A70). This is not the case for
MPB  c since the limit involves a 0/0 form. We will compute this limit with the aid of (A24). We
have
                             S(S^0 )
                                      = eR0 [R0 -R(S0 )] = e-R0 [I0 +(1-)S0 -S(S0 )] .
                                                   ^             ^       ^     ^
                                                                                                (A71)
                            S0 (S^0 )

The first equality follows from rearranging (A24) and substituting Q = S  ^0 . The second equality
                                                     ^0 ) from the entry for R
follows from substituting for R0 from (37) and for R(S                         c in Table 5. Taking
the limit of (A71) using (A70) gives

                                                     S(S ^0 )
                                                              = e-R0 I0 ,
                                                                     ^
                                               lim                                                     (A72)
                                                1         ^
                                                     S0 (S0 )

implying lim1 MPB             -R0 I0 ). The limit of MSB can then be computed as
                                           ^
                 c =  H (1 - e                          c

                            1                                1
                                                                H 1 - e-R0 I0 = H 1 - e-R0 I0 .
                                                                           ^               ^
  lim MSBc = lim                      lim MPBc =                                                       (A73)
    1           1     1 - R0 S(S
                               ^0 )    1                    1-0
                                      
Subtracting, show lim1 MEX                        
                          c = lim1 MSBc - lim1 MPBc = 0.


Condition for First Best under Monopoly: Monopoly attains the first best if and only if (54)
holds. Substituting c = 0 and taking the limit   1 using (A70) and (A72), the condition becomes

                                                                         ^0 )
                                                                       S(S
                                      1 - e-R0 I0
                                                ^
                                                       1 - R0 lim              0.                      (A74)
                                                                   1   1-

The limit on the left-hand side can be computed using (A72). Noting S0 (S             ^0 ) = (1 - )S ^0 in the
denominator of (A72), we have lim1 [S(S       ^0 )/(1 - )S^0 ] = e-R0 I0 , implying lim1 [S(S
                                                                      ^                        ^0 )/(1 - )] =
^0 e-R0 I
S
        ^0 . Substituting into (A74), the limiting condition for first best under monopoly becomes



                                       1 - e-R0 I0               ^0 e-R0 I
                                                ^                        ^
                                                          1 - R0 S        0  0.                        (A75)

The first factor is positive for all R0 > 0. Hence, (A75) is nonnegative if and only if the second
factor is nonnegative, which upon manipulating is equivalent to

                                                      -R0 I0  ^        ^
                                                                       I0
                                               -R0 I
                                                   ^0e       -            .                            (A76)
                                                                       ^
                                                                       S0
We have manipulated the condition to facilitate application of Lambert W function. The principal
branch of the Lambert W function is increasing, so applying it to both sides of (A76) does not change


                                                            68
the direction of the inequality:
                                          -R0 I
                                              ^   ¯ ^ ^
                                               0  L(-I0 /S0 ),                                     (A77)
equivalent to R0  |L  ¯ (-I
                          ^   ^     ^
                           0 /S0 )|/I0 . The lower branch of the Lambert W function is decreasing, so
applying it to both sides of (A76) changes the direction of the inequality:

                                          -R0 I
                                              ^      ^ ^
                                               0  L(-I0 /S0 ),                                     (A78)
                                                  ¯
R0  |L(-I
        ^0 /S0 )|/I0 . Combining these two inequalities in R0 gives (60).
            ^     ^
     ¯
Interior Monopoly Optimum: If (60) does not hold, then Q           m is the interior solution to (53).
Equation (53) can only hold for positive price at the limiting value c = 0 if and only if the factor in
braces equals 0. Setting that factor equal to 0 and solving for S(Qm ) yields

                                                      S0 (Qm)
                                      S(Qm) =                       .                              (A79)
                                                 R0 [Qm + S0 (Q
                                                      
                                                               m )]

Taking the limit   1 and simplifying,
                                                       ^0 - Q
                                                       S
                                           S(Qm) =
                                                              m
                                                                .                                  (A80)
                                                        R0 S0
                                                            ^

Substituting from (42) and simplifying,
                                                                  ^ - Q
                                                                  S
                                   ^0 - Q
                            ¯ -R0 (S         -R0 (I
                                                  ^   ^    
                                                   0 +S0 -Qm ) = - 0    m
                            L            m )e                             ,                        (A81)
                                                                     ^
                                                                     S0
which implies, by definition of the Lambert W function,
                                                               ^0 - Q
                                                               S
                              ^0 - Q    -R0 (I0 +S0 -Qm )
                                             ^ ^                         ^      ^
                         -R0 (S     m )e                  =-         m -(S
                                                                      e 0 -Qm )/S0 .               (A82)
                                                                  ^
                                                                  S0
Solving,
                                        ^0
                                        S
                              Qm=             [R (I  ^ ) - 1 - ln(R0 S
                                                  ^ +S               ^0 )].                        (A83)
                                        ^0 - 1 0 0 0
                                     R0 S
  Substituting from (A79) into the relevant entries in the middle column of Table 6 yields Pm   =

    m =  H (R0 S0 - 1)/R0 S0 . Implicit in this expression is a necessary condition for an interior
MPB             ^         ^
monopoly solution:
                                            R0 S
                                               ^0 > 1.                                       (A84)
It can be shown that (A84) holds if (60) is violated, which must be the case for an interior monopoly
optimum. If (60) does not hold, then R0  |L       ¯ (-I
                                                      ^0 /S0 )|/I0 , implying -R0 I0  L(I0 /S0 ), implying
                                                          ^     ^                 ^    ¯ ^ ^
-R0 I   -R0 I
            ^                               -R0 I
                                                ^
                  0 /S0 , implying R0 S0  e
     ^0e
                 ^
             0  -I   ^                ^          0 > 1.

    Other equilibrium variables can be computed by substituting for Q                            
                                                                               m and Pm = MPBm into the




                                                    69
other relevant table entries and further substituting for S(Qm ) from (A79). We have

                                                            1
                                              ^ ^ ^
                           m = Pm Qm =  H S0 I0 + S0 -         [1 + ln(R0 S ^0 )]               (A85)
                                                           R0
                                    MPB  m                H (R0 S  ^0 - 1)2
                     MSBm =                   =                                                 (A86)
                                1 - R0 S(Q m)      ^0 [R0 (I
                                                R0 S       ^0 + S0 ) - 1 - ln(R0 S0 )]
                                                                ^                  ^
                                                R0 S
                                                   ^0 - 1         ln(R0 S ^0 ) - R0 I
                                                                                    ^0
                 MEXm = R 0 S (Q m
                                 
                                   )MSB  m
                                         
                                           =  H                                             .   (A87)
                                                 R0 S^0     R0 (I^0 + S0 ) - 1 - ln(R0 S0 )
                                                                      ^                ^

             ^0 in the limiting case under consideration, by Proposition 12,
   Since Q = S

                                                             
                          lim GS            ^
                                m = c - MPB(S0 ) + lim
                                                                   ^0 ) = .
                                                               MEX(S                            (A88)
                          1                           1     1-

Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 17
It remains to show that the limits of  I (Q )/ Q as R0 approaches either extreme equal 0--and to
show this for both market structures and for both long- and short-run analyses.

Completing Proof for Long-Run Analysis: Return for the moment to the model with homoge-
neous consumers in which H I (Q) = MPB(Q), implying I (Q) = MPB(Q)/H . By equation
(16),                            
                                 0                   Q  Q0
                         I (Q) =           1                                      (A89)
                                 1 -                 Q < Q0 .
                                      (1 - Q/µ)R0
The same expression could have been obtained (with more work) by direct computation in the
model with heterogeneous consumers. For R0  1, Q0 = 0, implying (Q) = 0 for all Q, implying
 I (Q)/ Q = 0 for all Q, implying limR0 0  I (Q )/ Q = 0 for both Q = Q        
                                                                       c and Q = Qm .
                                                                                     

   For R0  , Q0 = µ/ > µ for  < 1, implying the second branch of (A89) is the relevant one.
Differentiating,
                                  I (Q)           
                                         =                .                          (A90)
                                    Q      µR0 (1 - Q/µ)2
Since Q  [0, µ],
                                           I (Q)       
                                                              .                                 (A91)
                                     µR0   Q      µR0 (1 - )2
Taking limits,
                                            I (Q)          
                              lim      lim         lim             .                            (A92)
                              R0  µR0 R0   Q      R0  µR0 (1 -  )2

The limits on the far left and far right-hand sides of (A92) equal 0, implying limR0   I (Q)/ Q = 0
for all Q  [0, µ], including Q = Q                
                                      c and Q = Qm .




                                                     70
Completing Proof for Short-Run Analysis:           Differentiating (44) and substituting from (43) yields

                                      I (Q)    -I (Q)R0 S(Q)
                                            =                     .                                  (A93)
                                      Q       S0 (Q)[1 - R0 S(Q)]

Lemma 7 states limR0 0 [R0 S(Q)] = 0, implying limR0 0  I (Q)/ Q = 0 by (A93). Lemma 8 states
limR0 0 [R0 S(Q)] = 0, implying limR0   I (Q)/ Q = 0 by (A93). These limits both hold for all Q,
including Q = Q              
                 c and Q = Qm . Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 18
Suppose R0  1. Then Q                                                          
                        md = Qmv = 0, implying md = mv = 0 and Wmd = Wmv = Wd = Wd =
                                                                                             

( + µ)H , implying m = Wm = W = 0. The fact that m = 0 for all R0 < 1 implies
                                                                   

limR0 0    m = 0.
   Suppose R0 > 1. The assumption c = 0 implies c
                                                ~ = 0, leaving two cases in Table 1: (LR3)­(LR4)
and (LR5). In case (LR3)­(LR4), defined by

                                                        1
                                          R 0  1,            ,                                       (A94)
                                                     (1 - )2

substituting from (66) for                                       
                               md and from the table entry for mv yields, after rearranging,
                                         
                                            R0 - 1
                                 m =               1 +  - (1 - ) R0 .                             (A95)
                                            R0
                                                                                     
The first factor is positive since R0 > 1 by (A94); the second is positive since R0 (1 - ) < 1 by
(A94). In case (LR5),        m =  /(1 -  )R0 , implying limR0  m = 0. Combined with the results
                                                                     

for R0  1, we have that        m  0 for all R0 > 0 with strict inequality if and only if R0 > 1. Further,
infR0 >0 = 0.
    To verify the quasiconcavity of              
                                          m , m is a constant 0 in (LR1). In case (LR3)­(LR4),

                                            H
                                         m
                                           = 2 1+-              R0 ,                                 (A96)
                                       R0   R0

implying that      m is first increasing, reaches a critical point at R0 = (1 +  ) , and then is decreasing.
                                                                                  2

One can verify that the critical point is in the interior of case (LR3)­(LR4), as (1 + )2 < 1/(1 - )2 .
At the boundary of (LR5),           m is continuous and continues to decline throughout case (LR5),
proving      m is quasiconcave    for all R0 > 0.
                    
    Turning to Wm , in case (LR5), substituting from (67) for Wmd       and from the relevant table entry

for Wmv yields Wm = -h/R0 , which is negative. In case (LR3)­(LR4), substituting the relevant
                     
                   in case (LR3)­(LR4) yields
table entry for Wmv

                                         h
                               Wm =         ( - 1)( R0 )2 +        R0 -  .                           (A97)
                                         R0
                                                                           
The sign is determined  by the factor in brackets, a quadratic equation in R0 , which
                                                                                  is negative if
 R0 lies outside the roots 1 and /(1 - ). Since R0 > 1, the relevant condition is R0 > /(1 - ),

                                                    71
implying R0 > [/(1 - )]2 , the stated condition for Wm    < 0.
                    
    Turning to W , the first-best quantity is sold in equilibrium with a drug, implying Wd = W  .
                                                                                               md
By (24), the first-best vaccine quantity is Q = Q0 = (µ/)(1 - 1/R0 ) if R0  (1, 1/(1 - )] and
Q = µ if R0 > 1/(1 - ). Suppose R0  (1, 1/(1 - )]. Then Wv = ( + µ)H . Substituting this
value along with the value of Wd    = W  from (67) and rearranging yields W  = W  - W  =
                                         d                                              d    v
-µH (1 - )(1 - 1/R0 ) < 0. Next, suppose R0 > 1/(1 - ). Then, according to the case (LR5) entry
                   ~ = 0, Wv = H ( + µ + µ/R0 ). Substituting this value along with the value of
in Table 2 setting c
Wd  = W  from (67) and rearranging yields W  = W  - W  = -µH /R . Thus, W   0 for
        d                                               d      v             0
all R0 > 0 with strict inequality for R0 > 1. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 19
The assumption c = 0 implies c
                             ~ = 0, leaving two cases in Table 1: (SR2)­(SR3) and (SR4). Nesting
those cases, we can write

                                     ^ ^                     
                              m =  H I0 + S0 I (0) - Qmv I (Qmv ) ,                                 (A98)

where Q   mv solves maxQ[0,S
                                                                                                  ^
                                ^0 ] QI (Q). Since Qmv > 0, we have Qmv I (Qmv ) < Qmv I (0)  S0 I (0),
where the first inquality follows from  I (Q)/ Q < 0 by (A93) and the second inequality from
Q          ^                                                                            ^
  mv  [0, S0 ]. Substituting the preceding inequality into (A98) yields m >  H I0 . Thus, m > 0
                                                                                                     

for all R0 > 0.
    To derive the results on limits of        m , we have that limR0 0 I (Q) = limR0 0 [1 - S(Q)/S0 (Q)] =
1 for all Q  [0, S^0 ] since limR 0 S(Q) = S  ^0 - Q = S0 (Q) by Lemma 7. Hence, limR 0                 ^
                                                                                                m =  H I0 .
                                    0                                                     0
For all Q  [0, S ^0 ], limR  I (Q) = 1 since limR  S(Q) = 0 by Lemma 8. Hence,
                            0                          0



         lim Q       
              mv I (Qmv ) = lim        max QI (Q)                            ^0 · 1.
                                                         = max Q lim I (Q) = S                      (A99)
        R0                    R0     R0 [0,S
                                           ^0 ]                 ^0 ]
                                                            Q[0,S      R0 


from (A99) into (A98) along with limR0  I (0) = 1 yields limR0                        ^
                                                                            m =  H I0 . Now m >
                                                                                                     

     0 for all R0 > 0 implies  H I0  infR0 >0 m  limR0 0 m =  H I0 , which in turn implies
H I ^                               ^                                       ^
             
infR0 >0 m = H I      ^0.
    Combining the results from the previous paragraph, limR0 0                           
                                                                      m = limR0  m = infR0 >0 =
     0 . But the first paragraph showed m >  H I0 . Hence, m must be nonmonotonic in R0 ,
H I ^                                                  ^            

higher in the interior than for either limiting value of R0 .
    Turning to limiting values of Wm      as R  0 and R  , one can show that (54) holds in these
                                               0          0
limits. Thus, the relevant case for computing Wmv  is (SR4). Substituting c
                                                                          ~ = 0 into the relevant entry
                                    ^                                
of Table 6 and multiplying by H S0 to reverse the rescaling yields Wmv = H [S(S ^0 ) + S^0 ]. Subtracting
from (69) and rearranging yields

                                        ^                    ^
                                 Wm = H I0 + (1 -  )S(0) - S(S0 ) .                                (A100)

By Lemma 7, limR0 0 [(1 - )S(0)] = (1 - )S      ^0 . The lemma also implies limR 0 S(S
                                                                                     ^0 ) = (1 - )S
                                                                                                  ^0 .
                                                                                0
                                                            
Substituting these limits into (A100) yields limR0 0 Wm = H I       ^0 . By Lemma 8, limR0  S(0) =
limR0  S(S ^0 ) = 0. Substituting these limits into (A100) yields limR 0 Wm    = H I^0.
                                                                        0


                                                    72
     The final step is to provide parameters for which Wm         < 0. Using Matlab, we verified that

for R0 = 2,  = 0.5, I   ^         ^
                         0 = 0.1, S0 = 0.8, (54) holds, implying that the vaccine monopolist supplies
                    ^
first-best quantity S0 , putting us in case (SR4). Subtracting the relevant Table 6 entry from (69)
and simplifying yields Wm      = H [(1 -  )S(0) +  I
                                                   ^      ^
                                                    0 - S(S0 )], which Matlab calculations show equals
-0.09 for the specified parameters. Q.E.D.


Appendix B. Cournot Competition
This appendix provides further details behind the analysis under Cournot competition. Under this
market structure, the vaccine is manufactured by n  1 homogeneous Cournot firms, which choose
quantities each period simultaneously.

B1. Long-Run Analysis
Cases (LR1) and (LR2) from Table 1, which involved no sales under perfect competition, will also
involve no sales under Cournot since firms mark up marginal costs. Thus the entries in cases (LR1)
and (LR2) from both Tables 1 and 2 will also apply to Cournot.
     For the remainder of this section, suppose R0 > 1/(1 - c      ~). Letting qi denote firm i's output and
Q-i is the output of i's rivals, i's profit equals [P(qi + Q-i ) - c]qi = [MPB(qi + Q-i ) - c]qi . Taking the
first-order condition with respect to qi and then imposing symmetry by substituting q                
                                                                                              i = Q /n and
                
Q-i = (n - 1)Q /n yields equilibrium market output

                                              µ               
                                       Qn=      1-                  ,                                  (B1)
                                                               ~)R0
                                                          (1 - c

where
                                                                             2
                                (n - 1)2                      2n(1 - c~)R0
                             = 2           1+              1+                    .                     (B2)
                                      ~)R0
                              4n (1 - c                         (n - 1)2
Substituting Qn for Q in the relevant equations yields


                                                                  1-c
                                                                    ~
                                    Pn = MPBn = H 1 -                                                  (B3)
                                                                   R0

                                            µ                   1
                                     In =                     -                                        (B4)
                                            +µ            ~)R0 R0
                                                     (1 - c

                              µH (1 - c
                                      ~)              1                      
                       n=                1-                        1-                                  (B5)
                                                        ~)R0
                                                   (1 - c                     ~)R0
                                                                         (1 - c

                                                             1-c
                                                               ~
                                            MEXn = µH                                                  (B6)
                                                              R0

                                                           1       1-c
                                                                     ~
                               Wn = H +µ 1-c
                                           ~+                 -              .                         (B7)
                                                           R0       R0

                                                     73
    The preceding analysis is valid if
                                                        
                                           R0                     .                                      (B8)
                                                  (1 - )2 (1 - c
                                                               ~)

Otherwise, Q                    
                n > µ for the Qn in (B1). Producing more than the number of consumers would result
in a market price of zero and zero profits for all firms. Instead, firms produce an equal share of
industry output Q    n = µ. The rest of the equilibrium variables have the same formula as in case
(LR5) of Table 2. Note that the threshold between cases (LR4) and (LR5) is different, given by the
right-hand side of (B8).
    It is easily seen that  = 1 for n = 1, and thus that the preceding expressions for the equilibrium
variables collapse to their monopoly values given in Table 2. It is also easily seen that limn  =
1/(1 - c ~)R0 , and thus that the preceding expressions for the equilibrium variables collapse to their
values under perfect competition given in Table 1.

B2. Short-Run Analysis
Case (SR1) from Table 5, which involved no sales under perfect competition, will also involve no
sales under Cournot since firms mark up marginal costs. Thus the entries in case (SR1) from both
Tables 5 and 6 will also apply to Cournot.
    For the remainder of this section, suppose R0 > | ln(1 - c  ~)|/(I ^   ~S
                                                                        0 +c
                                                                             ^0 ). As in the long-run analysis,
firm i's profit equals [P(qi + Q-i ) - c]qi = [MPB(qi + Q-i ) - c]qi . Taking the first-order condition with
respect to qi and then imposing symmetry by substituting q                   
                                                                     i = Q /n yields an equation for the
interior equilibrium market output analogous to (53) for a monopoly:
                                                                                  -1
                                                            Q n R0 S(Qn )
                                                                       
                        MPB(Q         
                             n ) = P(Qn ) =        1-                                  c.                (B9)
                                                      nS0 (Qn )[1 - R0 S(Qn )]
                                                                          


The only difference is the appearance of n in the denominator of the factor in curly braces. One can
see this nests monopoly, setting n = 1, and perfect competition, taking the limit n  .
    This interior solution is the equilibrium market output under Cournot if Q         ^
                                                                                   n < S0 . Otherwise,
  
Qn = S ^0 , and all firms produce an equal share qn = S
                                                      ^0 /n in the symmetric equilibrium.


Appendix C. Consumer-Group Heterogeneity
This appendix provides the formal analysis behind the results in Section 4.3 on the conditions under
which the researcher recovers an unbiased estimate of mean MEX using aggregate data and which
mean (arithmetic or harmonic) if so. The the long- and short-run analyses are divided into two
subsections.

C1. Long-Run Analysis
We begin by discussing the renormalization of the SIR model to ensure that mere separation of a
population into subgroups does not drive a change in R0 or MEX. Consider a subgroup g  G having
a population of size wg  1. Modify SIR equations (1)­(5) determining disease epidemiology within


                                                      74
the subgroup as follows:

                                          Stg + Itg + Rtg = wg                                      (C1)
                                       tg = g Itg Stg - ( + µ)Itg
                                       I                                                            (C2)
                                                wg
                                            tg = Itg - µRtg
                                           R                                                        (C3)
                                      tg = wg µ - g Itg Stg - µStg .
                                     S                                                              (C4)
                                                    wg

This system of equations exhibits several differences from the original. First, the compartments
evolve independently for each group so are indexed by the group g. Group size wg and disease
transmissibility g are also indexed by g. The remaining parameters (µ, ) are common across
groups so not subscripted. Another difference is that there is no vaccine in this thought experiement,
so Q = Vt = 0. Another difference is that the population size on the right-hand side of (C1) is wg ,
not 1. This shows up again in (C4) in that the inflow of newborn susceptibles is wg µ not µ as before.
The key difference is the division of the g Itg Stg term by wg in (C2) and (C4), in effect increasing the
per-person contact rate in a smaller population so that total contacts remains constant for a person
separated from a larger population into a subgroup.
    Let R0g = g /( + µ). Setting I  tg = R tg = S  tg = 0 in (C1)­(C4) and solving for the steady-state
infection rate yields
                                                   µ          1
                                 Ig = max 0,             1-         wg ,                            (C5)
                                                 +µ         R0g
implying
                                               wg µ     1
                                        Ig =        1-                                              (C6)
                                               +µ      R0g
if R0g > 1.
    Tables 1 and 2 state that MEX = H /R0 under both perfect competition and monopoly for
R0  (1, 1/(1 - c ~)]. In fact, one can show that the different values MEX takes on for yet higher
R0 are due to changes in vaccine consumption behavior at higher R0 , not the increase in R0 itself.
Constraining Q = 0, which shuts down changes in consumer behavior, one can show via direct
calculation that MEX(0) = H /R0 for all R0 > 1. This relationship can also be shown to hold at the
group level. Hence, for all R0g > 1,
                                                      H
                                          MEXg (0) =       .                                 (C7)
                                                      R0g
    The researcher believes (C5) applies to the population as a whole with a homogeneous basic
reproductive ratio R0 . Dropping the group subscript, setting wg = 1, and assuming that the research
observes a positive aggregate infection rate gives the following estimating equation for R0 :
                                                                  -1
                                             +µ
                                    R0 = 1 -               Ig          .                            (C8)
                                             µ            gG

Combining this with the relationship MEX(0) = H /R0 that the researcher believes applies at the



                                                   75
aggregate level yields the following estimating equation for the aggregate marginal externality:

                                   +µ                                H
             MEX(0) = H 1 -                 Ig     =            wg           =    wgMEXg(0).    (C9)
                                   µ      gG           gG            R0g         gG

The second equality follows from substituting from (C6), and the last equality follows from sub-
stituting from (C7). Thus, if R0g > 1 for all g  G, the naïve estimate of aggregate MEX(0) is the
weighted arithmetic mean of MEXg (0).
    Suppose R0g  1 for g  G and R0g > 1 for g  G , where G , G = 0.      / Then Ig = 0 for g  G ,
implying (C9) becomes

                                                  +µ
                           MEX(0) = H 1 -                            Ig                        (C10)
                                                  µ         gG

                                                                  1
                                    = H 1 -            wg 1 -                                  (C11)
                                               gG
                                                                 R0g

                                    = H 1 -            wg +               MEXg (0)             (C12)
                                                gG              gG
                                    = H    wg +  MEXg(0).                                      (C13)
                                          gG         gG

Equation (C13) shows that the researcher's estimate of MEX(0) is biased upward by a term propor-
tional to the share of the population in groups with R0g  1. Implicit in the researcher's ability to
compute MEX(0) from an estimate of R0 is knowledge of H . If the researcher also knows gG wg ,
an unbiased estimate of gG MEXg (0) can be computed simply by subtracting H gG wg from
the naïve estimator MEX(0).

C2. Short-Run Analysis
For the short-run analysis, we again need to renormalize the basic SIR model to ensure that mere
separation of a population into subgroups does not drive a change in R0 or MEX. Modify the relevant
SIR equations (29)­(33) as follows:

                                         Stg + Itg + Rtg = wg                                  (C14)
                                        tg = g Itg Stg - Itg
                                        I                                                      (C15)
                                                   wg
                                               tg = Itg
                                              R                                                (C16)
                                           tg = - g Itg Stg .
                                          S                                                    (C17)
                                                    wg

These are similar to (C1)­(C4) except that terms involving µ capturing births and deaths are omitted
from short-run model. See the previous section for an explanation of how the original system of
equations maps into the renormalized system. Since Q = 0 because there is no vaccine in this
thought experiment, we have S0g = S  ^0g . Consistent with our approach in the long-run analysis,


                                                  76
where we assumed all parameters were common across groups but g , here assume the initial share
                                                        ^0g = wg S
of susceptibles and infecteds are common across groups: S        ^0 and I0g = I ^        ^
                                                                                 0g = wg I0 = wg I0 .
    For the short-run analysis, redefine R0g = g /. Since Q = 0, S0g = S   ^0g . Substituting these
equations into (C15) expressed at t = 0 yields

                                      0g
                                      I           R0g S
                                                      ^0g
                                          =               -1 ,                                        (C18)
                                      I0g          wg

approximated by the discrete change in Itg over the short interval from t = 0 to t = 1 by

                                    I1g - I0g          R0g S
                                                           ^0g
                                              =                -1 .                                   (C19)
                                       I0g              wg

Substituting I0g = wg I0 and rearranging yields

                                    I1g = wg I0 (1 -  + R0g S
                                                            ^0 ).                                     (C20)

The same argument used to show that (C7) holds in the long-run analysis can be used to show it
holds in the short-run analysis as well.
    The researcher believes (C19) applies to the population as a whole with a homogeneous basic
reproductive ratio R0 . Dropping the group subscript, setting wg = 1, and rearranging gives the
following estimating equation for R0 :

                                           1     1          I1 - I0
                                    R0 =      1+                        .                             (C21)
                                           ^0
                                           S                   I0

Combining this with the relationship MEX(0) = H /R0 that the researcher believes, in accordance
with (C7), applies at the aggregate level yields the following estimating equation for the aggregate
marginal externality:

                                                  -1                                         -1
                       ^0 1 + 1
            MEX(0) = H S
                                       I1 - I0             ^0
                                                       = H S          1+
                                                                         1   1
                                                                                   I1g - 1        .   (C22)
                                          I0                                 I0 gG

Substituting from (C20) and rearranging yields
                                                       -1                        -1
                                           R0g                     wg
                        MEX(0) =        wg H                =                         ,               (C23)
                                      gG                      gG MEXg (0)

where the second equality follows from substituting from (C7). This last expression is the weighted
harmonic mean of MEXg (0).




                                                  77
References
Ahituv, Avner, V. Joseph Holz, and Tomas Philipson. (1996) "The Responsiveness of the Demand
    for Condoms to the Local Prevalence of AIDS," Journal of Human Resources 31(4): 869­897.

Althouse, Benjamin M., Theodore C. Bergstrom, and Carl T. Bergstrom. (2010) "A Public Choice
    Framework for Controlling Transmissible and Evolving Diseases," Proceedings of the Na-
    tional Academy of Sciences 107(1): 1696.

Anderson, Roy and Robert May. (1991) Infectious Diseases of Humans. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
    sity Press.

Bailey, Norman. (1975) The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases and Its Application.
     London: Griffen.

Bailey, Robert C., Stephen Moses, Corette B. Parker, Kawango Agot, Kian Maclean, John N.
     Krieger, Carolyn F. M. Williams, Richard T. Campbell, and Jeckoniah O. Ndinya-Achola.
     (2007) "Male Circumcision for HIV Prevention in Young Men in Kisumu, Kenya: A Ran-
     domised Controlled Trial," Lancet 369: 643­656.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Dhruva Kothari (2010) "Improving Im-
    munization Coverage in Rural India: A Clustered Randomized Controlled Evaluation of Im-
    munization Campaigns with and without Incentives," British Medical Journal 340.

Bauch, Chris T., and David J. D. Earn. (2004) "Vaccination and the Theory of Games," Proceedings
    of the National Academy of Sciences 101(36): 13391-13394

Berndt, Ernst, Rachel Glennerster, Michael Kremer, Jean Lee, Ruth Levine, Georg Weisacker,
    and Heidi Williams. (2007) "Advance Market Commitments for Vaccines Against Neglected
    Diseases: Estimating Costs and Effectiveness," Health Economics 16: 491­511.

Bethune, Zachary and Anton Korinek (2020) "Covid-19 Infection Externalities: Trading Off Lives
    vs. Livelihoods," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. (No. w27009).

Boulier, Bryan, Tejwant Datta, and Robert Goldfarb. (2007) "Vaccination Externalities," The B.E.
    Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7: www.bepress.com/bejeap/vol7/iss1/art23.

Brennan, Michael J. (2009) "The US Food and Drug Administration Provides a Pathway for Li-
    censing Vaccines for Global Diseases," PLoS Medicine 6(7): e1000095.

Brito, Dagobert L., Eytan Sheshinski, and Michael D. Intrilligator. (1991) "Externalities and Com-
     pulsory Vaccination," Journal of Public Economics 45: 69­90.

Chen, Frederick and Flavio Toxvaerd. (2014) "The Economics of Vaccination," Journal of Theo-
    retical Biology 363: 105­117.

Chowell, Gerardo, Paul W. Fenimore, Melissa A. Castillo-Garsow, and Carlos Castillo-Chavez.
   (2003) "SARS Outbreaks in Ontario, Hong Kong and Singapore: The Role of Diagnosis and
   Isolation As a Control Mechanism," Journal of Theoretical Biology 224: 1­8.


                                               78
Cook, Joseph, Marc Jeuland, Brian Maskery, Donald Lauria, Dipika Sur, John Clemens, and Dale
    Whittington. (2009) "Using Private Demand Studies to Calculate Socially Optimal Caccine
    Subsidies in Developing Countries," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 28 (1): 6­
    28.

Diekmann, O. , J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and J. A. J. Metz. (1990) "On the Definition and the Compu-
    tation of the Basic Reproduction Ratio R0 in Models for Infections Diseases in Heterogeneous
    Populations," Journal of Mathematical Biology 28: 365­382.

Enayati, Shakiba and Osman Y. ´'Ozaltin. (2020) "Optimal Influenza Vaccine Distribution with
    Equity," European Journal of Operational Research 283: 714­725.

Francis, Peter J. (1997) "Dynamic Epidemiology and the Market for Vaccinations," Journal of
    Public Economics 63: 383­406.

Funk, Sebastian, Marcel Salathé, and Vincent A. A. Jansen. (2010) "Modelling the Influence of
    Human Behaviour on the Spread of Infectious Diseases: A Review," Journal of The Royal
    Society Interface 7 (50): 1247­56.

Galeotti, Andrea, and Brian W. Rogers. (2013) "Strategic Immunization and Group Structure,"
    American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5(2): 1­32.

Geoffard, Pierre-Yves and Tomas Philipson. (1997) "Disease Eradication: Public vs. Private
    Vaccination," American Economic Review 87: 222­230.

Gersovitz, Mark (2003) "Births, Recoveries, Vaccinations, and Externalities," in R. Arnott (ed.)
    Economics for an Imperfect World: Essays in Honor of Joseph E. Stiglitz, pp. 469­483.

Gersovitz, Mark and Jeffrey S. Hammer. (2004) "The Economical Control of Infectious Diseases,"
    Economic Journal 114: 1­27.

Gersovitz, Mark and Jeffrey S. Hammer. (2005) "Tax/Subsidy Policy Toward Vector-Borne Infec-
    tious Diseases," Journal of Public Economics 89: 647­674.

Hoerger, Thomas J., Sarah Schillie, John S. Wittenborn, Christina L. Bradley, Fangjun Zhou, Kathy
    Byrd, and Trudy V. Murphy. (2013) "Cost Effectiveness of Hepatitis B Vaccination in Adults
    with Diagnosed Diabetes," Diabetes Care 36: 63­69.

Keeling, Matt J. and J. V. Ross. (2015) "Optimal Prophylactic Vaccination in Segregated Popula-
    tions: When Can We Improve on the Equalising Strategy?" Epidemics 11: 7­13.

Keeling, Matt J. and Andrew Shattock. (2012) "Optimal but Inequitable Prophylactic Distribution
    of Vaccine," Epidemic 4: 78­85.

Kennedy, Caitlin E., Ping T. Yeh, Kaitlyn Atkins, Virginia A. Fonner, Michael D. Sweat, Kevin R.
    O'Reilly, George W. Rutherford, Rachel Baggaley, and Jluia Samuelson. (2020) "Economic
    Compensation Interventions to Increase Uptake of Voluntary Medical Male Circumcision for
    HIV Prevention: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," PLoS ONE 15(1): e0227623.



                                              79
Kermack, William O. and A. G. McKendrick. (1927) "A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory
    of Epidemics," Proceedings of the Royal Society A (Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
    Sciences) 115: 700­721.
Kissler, Stephen M., Christine Tedijanto, Edward Goldstein, Yonatan H. Grad, and Marc Lipsitch.
     (2020) "Projecting the Transmission Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 Through the Postpandemic
     Period" Science 368(6493): 860­868.
Kremer, Michael. (1996) "Integrating Behavioral Choice into Epidemiological Models of AIDS,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 549­573.
Kremer, Michael and Christopher M. Snyder. (2015) "Preventives vs. Treatments," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics130(3): 1167­1239
Kremer, Michael and Christopher M. Snyder. (2018) "Preventives versus Treatments Redux:
    Tighter bounds on Distortions in Innovation Incentives with an Application to the Global
    Demand for HIV Pharmaceuticals," Review of Industrial Organization 53 (1): 235­273
Manfredi, Piero, and Alberto D'Onofrio (ed.) (2013) Modeling the Interplay Between Human
   Behavior and the Spread of Infectious Diseases. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Manski, Charles F. (2017) "Mandating Vaccination with Unknown Indirect Effects," Journal of
   Public Economic Theory 19: 603­619.
Marseille Elliott, Bruce Larson, Dhruv S. Kazi, James G. Kahn, and Sydney Rosen. (2015)
    "Thresholds for the Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions: Alternative Approaches," Bulletin
    of the World Health Organization 93: 118--124.
Martcheva, Maia. (2015) An Introduction to Mathematical Epidemiology. New York: Springer.
May, Robert. (2000) "Simple Rules with Complex Dynamics," Science 287(5453): 601­602.
Mechoulan, Stéphane. (2007) "Market Structure and Communicable Diseases," Canadian Journal
   of Economics 40: 468­492.
Nguyen, Chantal and Jean M. Carlson. (2016) `Optimizing Real-Time Vaccine Allocation in a
   Stochastic SIR Model," PLoS One 11(4): e0152950.
Philipson, Tomas. (2000) "Economic Epidemiology and Infectious Disease," in J. Newhouse and
     T. Culyer (ed.) Handbook of Health Economics, Volume IB: 443­465.
Tasslimi, Azadeh, Mari M. Nakamura, Orin Levine, Maria D. Knoll, Louise B. Russell, and
     Anushua Sinha. (2011) "Cost Effectiveness of Child Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccination
     in GAVI-Eligible Countries," International Health 3: 259­269.
Thomas, Patricia. (2002) "The Economics of Vaccines," Harvard Medical International (HMI)
   World. September/October.
Ubel, Peter A., Richard A. Hirth, and Michael E. Chernew. (2003) "What is the Price of Life
    and Why Doesn't It Increase at the Rate of Inflation?" Archives of Internal Medicine 163:
    1637­1641.

                                             80
U.K. Government Office for Science. (2020) "The R Number and Growth Rate in the UK." [Inter-
    net.] Downloaded September 28, 2020 from https://www.gov.uk/guidance/the-r-number-in-
    the-uk#latest-r-number-and-growth-rate.

U.K. Office for National Statistics. (2020) "Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey Pilot: Eng-
    land, Wales and Northern Ireland, 25 September 2020." [Internet.] Downloaded September
    28, 2020 from https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/
    conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/englandwalesandno
    rthernireland25september2020#number-of-people-in-england-who-had-covid-19.

UNAIDS/WHO/SACEMA Expert Group on Modelling the Impact and Cost of Male Circumcision
   for HIV Prevention. (2009) "Male Circumcision for HIV Prevention in High HIV Preva-
   lence Settings: What Can Mathematical Modelling Contribute to Informed Decision Mak-
   ing?" PLoS Medicine 6(9): e1000109.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020a) "CDC Vaccine Price List." [Internet.]
     Downloaded October 8, 2020 from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/v
     accine-management/price-list/index.html.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020b) "Vaccines and Preventable Diseases:
     Vaccines by Disease." [Internet.] Vaccine efficacies downloaded August 28, 2020 from https:
     //www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/hepb.html for hepatitis B, from https://www.
     cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/mmr/public/index.html for measles, from https://www.cdc.gov/
     vaccines/vpd/dtap-tdap-td/hcp/about-vaccine.html for pertussis and tetanus, from https:
     //www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/polio/index.html for polio, and from from https://www.cdc.gov/
     vaccines/vpd/shingles/index.html for shingles.

U.S. General Accounting Office. (2002) "Childhood Vaccines: Ensuring an Adequate Supply
    Poses Continuing Challenges," Report no. GAO-02-987.




                                              81
      Table 1: Long-Run Equilibrium Variables under Perfect Competition as Functions of R0

                                                               Case

                  (LR1)                 (LR2)                       (LR3)                      (LR4), (LR5)

 Variable       R0  [0, 1]          R0  1, 11
                                            -c~            R0        1
                                                                    1-c
                                                                              1
                                                                       ~ , (1-)(1-c
                                                                                  ~)       R0         1
                                                                                                          ~) , 
                                                                                                   (1-)(1-c


 Pc                  c                    c                            c                              c
                                                               µ
 Qc                  0                    0                    
                                                                          1
                                                                   1 - (1-c
                                                                          ~)R0                       µ

 c                   0                    0                            0                              0

                                    µ        1                 µ         ~
                                                                         c                    µ         1
 Ic                  0              +µ    1- R 0               +µ        ~)R0
                                                                      (1-c                    +µ    1-- R 0


 MPBc                0                    1
                                    H 1 - R 0
                                                                       c                      H 1 - (1-1
                                                                                                        )R0

 MSBc                0                   H                            H                              H

 MEXc                0                    H
                                          R0                       H (1 - c
                                                                          ~)                         H
                                                                                                   (1-)R0

                                         µ                                                                µ
 Wc             H ( + µ)             H + R 0
                                                                          ~)]
                                                              H [ + µ(1 - c                          ~) + R
                                                                                          H  + µ(1 - c      0



Notes: The distinction between cases (LR4) and (LR5) in the last column, relevant for monopoly in the next table, is
irrelevant for perfect competition here.




                                                        82
            Table 2: Long-Run Equilibrium Variables under Monopoly as Functions of R0

                                                                 Case

                (LR1)              (LR2)                         (LR3), (LR4)                       (LR5)

 Variable    R0  [0, 1]        R0  1, 11
                                       -c~              R0          1
                                                                   1-c
                                                                              1
                                                                      ~ , (1-)2 (1-c
                                                                                   ~)
                                                                                             R0         1
                                                                                                    (1-)2 (1-c
                                                                                                             ~)
                                                                                                                ,


  
 Pm                                                          H 1 -            ~
                                                                            1-c
                                                                                               H 1 - (1-1
                                                                            R0                           )R0

                                                             µ
 Qm               0                  0                            1-      1
                                                                                                      µ
                                                                        (1-c~)R0
                                                                                        2
                                                       µH (1-c
                                                             ~)
 m                0                  0                              1-       1
                                                                                             µH 1 - c
                                                                                                    ~ - (1-1
                                                                                                            )R0
                                                                           (1-c~)R0

                               µ        1                µ            1          1             µ        1
 Im               0            +µ    1- R                +µ                     -R             +µ   1-- R
                                          0                         (1-c~)R0       0                      0


 MPBm             0                  1
                               H 1 - R 0
                                                             H 1 -          R0
                                                                              ~
                                                                            1-c
                                                                                               H 1 - (1-1
                                                                                                         )R0

 MSBm             0                 H                                 H                              H

 MEXm             0                  H
                                     R0                           H         ~
                                                                          1-c
                                                                          R0
                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                    (1-)R0

                                    µ                        1                         1-c
                                                                                         ~                   µ
 Wm           H ( + µ)          H + R 0
                                                   H +µ 1-c
                                                          ~+ R 0
                                                                 -                     R0               ~) + R
                                                                                             H  + µ(1 - c      0



Notes: The distinction between cases (LR3) and (LR4) in the penultimate column, relevant for perfect competition in
                                                               c is consistent with zero sales in equilibrium.
previous table, is irrelevant for monopoly here.  Any value Pm




                                                        83
                                                Table 3: Long-Run Optimal Subsidy GS as a Function of R0

                                                                                               Case

                        (LR1)                  (LR2 )                         (LR3 )                              (LR4)                              (LR5)

                                                   1                          1      1                          1            1                           1
      Variable        R0  [0, 1]           R0  1, 1-                R0                   ~)
                                                                             1- , (1-)(1-c            R0     (1-)(1-c             ~)
                                                                                                                    ~) , (1-)2 (1-c          R0               ~)
                                                                                                                                                     (1-)2 (1-c
                                                                                                                                                                 ,




84
                                                                                  1
      GSc                  0                      c                   c + H    (1-)R0     -1                        0                                   0

                                                                                  1                                  1
      GSm                  0               c + H (R0 - 1)            c + H     (1-)2 R0
                                                                                          -1              c + H   (1-)2 R0
                                                                                                                             -1                         0


     Notes: Cases (LR1), (LR4), and (LR5) are identical to those in Tables 1 and 2. Cases (LR2 ) and (LR3 ) differ from (LR2) and (LR3) in the previous tables in that
     the boundary between (LR2 ) and (LR3 ) is 1/(1 - ) rather than 1/(1 - c~).
                      Table 4: Estimates of R0 from the Epidemiology Literature

 Disease            Time period               Location                 R0                      Source

 SARS                   2002                Singapore                 1.1             Chowell et al. (2003)
 HIV                  1981­85             United Kingdom              2­5           Anderson and May (1991)
 Rubella              1960­70             United Kingdom              6­7           Anderson and May (1991)
 Chicken pox          1944­68             United Kingdom             10­12          Anderson and May (1991)
 Mumps                1960­80             United Kingdom             11­14          Anderson and May (1991)
 Measles              1950­68             United Kingdom             16­18          Anderson and May (1991)
 Pertussis            1944­78             United Kingdom             16­18          Anderson and May (1991)

Notes: All Anderson and May (1991) estimates are from their Table 4.1, reporting estimates from studies of England
and Wales within the United Kingdom. The HIV estimate is for Type 1 in the subpopulation of men who have sex with
men (MSM).




                                                       85
      Table 5: Short-Run-Equilibrium Variables under Perfect Competition as Functions of R0

                                                                          Case

                          (SR1)                                     (SR2)                            (SR3), (SR4)

 Variable          R0  0, | ln (1-c
                             ^ +c ^
                                   ~)|
                                                     R0        | ln(1-c
                                                                  ^
                                                                         ~)| | ln(1-c
                                                                        ^0 , I
                                                                             ^
                                                                                     ~)|
                                                                                        ^0       R0       ^
                                                                                                                   ~)|
                                                                                                            | ln(1-c
                                                                                                                      ^0 , 
                            I    ~S
                                 0   0                           I    ~S
                                                                   0 +c       0 +(1- )c
                                                                                      ~S                  I0 +(1- )c ~S


 Pc                          c                                           c                                   c

 Q                           0                      1    ^0 + 1
                                                         S          1
                                                                         ln(1 - c    ^
                                                                                ~) + I                      ^0
                                                                                                            S
  c                                                           ~
                                                              c     R0                0

 c                           0                                           0                                   0

 Rc                      1 - S(0)                         ^0 - I
                                                        1-S    ^    1
                                                                0 + R0 | ln(1 - c
                                                                                ~)|                       ^0 ) - S
                                                                                                                 ^0
                                                                                                    1 - S(S

 MPBc                   H I (0)                                          c                                  ^0 )
                                                                                                       H I (S
                         H I (0)                                       ~2                               H I (S ^0 )
 MSBc                    1-R0 S(0)
                                                                   H c
                                                                ~)[ln(1-c
                                                           ~+(1-c         ~)+R0 I
                                                                                ^                       1-R0 S(S
                                                                                                               ^0 )
                                                           c                     0]

                       H I (0)R0 S(0)                     H c             ~)|-R0 I
                                                                ~)[| ln(1-c
                                                            ~(1-c                ^ 0]
                                                                                                          ^0 )R0 S(S
                                                                                                     H I (S         ^0 )
 MEXc                    1-R0 S(0)                        ~+(1-c~)[ln(1-c~)+R0 I
                                                                               ^                       1-R0 S(S^0 )
                                                          c                     0]


 Wc                       HS(0)                                    ^0 (1 - c
                                                                  HS       ~)                     ^0 (1 - c
                                                                                                H S              ^0 )
                                                                                                          ~) + S(S


Notes: Computable expressions for S(0) and S(S    ^0 ) can be derived from equation (42): defining ^I = e-R0 I   ^0 and ^ =
                                                                                                                         S
e- R0
      ^
      S0 , we have S(0) = |L(-R0 S0^I ^S )|/R0 and S(S0 ) = |L(-R0 (1 - )S0^I ^S )|/R0 . Infection probabilities can be
                           ¯     ^                     ^       ¯             ^      1- 

computed using (44): I (0) = 1 - S(0)/S    ^0 and I (S^0 ) = 1 - S(S
                                                                   ^0 )/(1 - )S^0 . The distinction between cases (SR3) and
(SR4) in the last column, relevant for monopoly in the next table, is irrelevant for perfect competition here.




                                                             86
            Table 6: Short-Run-Equilibrium Variables under Monopoly as Functions of R0

                                                                       Case

                           (SR1)                             (SR2), (SR3)                                  (SR4)

                    R0  0, | ln
                             I
                                (1-c
                              ^ +c ^
                                  ~S
                                    ~)|
                                                      R0 > | ln(1 - c    ^
                                                                    ~)|/(I   ~S
                                                                          0 +c
                                                                               ^0 )                 R0 satisfies (54)
                                  0   0
 Variable                                               but does satisfy (54)

                                                                   S(Qm )                                  S(S0 )  ^
 Pm                                                         H 1 - S
                                                                  ^ -Q                              H 1 - (1-)S ^
                                                                          0          m                                 0

 Qm                           0                                                                              ^0
                                                                                                             S
                                                               S(Qm )                                            ^0 )
                              0                         H 1 - S       ~ Q                        H (1 - c ^0 - S(S
                                                                                                        ~)S
 m                                                            ^ -Q - c
                                                                   0
                                                                         m
                                                                              m
                                                                                                               (1-)

 Rc                       1 - S(0)                          1 - S(Q        
                                                                   m ) -  Qm
                                                                                                           ^0 ) - S
                                                                                                     1 - S(S      ^0

 MPBm                    H I (0)                               H I (Qm)
                                                                                                             ^0 )
                                                                                                        H I (S
                          H I (0)                                H I (Q  m)                              H I (S ^0 )
 MSBm                     1-R0 S(0)                              1-R0 S(Q                                1-R0 S(S
                                                                                                                ^0 )
                                                                         m)

                        H I (0)R0 S(0)                            m )R0 S(Qm )
                                                            H I (Q                                         ^0 )R0 S(S
                                                                                                      H I (S         ^0 )
 MEXm                     1-R0 S(0)                           1-R0 S(Q   )                              1-R0 S(S^0 )
                                                                       m

  
 Wm                        HS(0)                       H (1 - c
                                                              ~)Q
                                                                ~       
                                                                 m + S(Qm )
                                                                                                   ^0 (1 - c
                                                                                                 H S              ^0 )
                                                                                                           ~) + S(S


Notes: Equation (42) provides a formula for computing S(Q                     
                                                                   m ) given Qm , and the previous table provides simpler
expressions for computing S(0) and S(S  ^0 ). Infection probabilities can be computed using (44): I (0) = 1 - S(0)/S    ^0 ,
I (S^0 ) = 1 - S(S          ^0 , and I (Q
                 ^0 )/(1 - )S            m ) =  1 - S (Q m
                                                             ^
                                                          )/(S
                                                               0 -  Q  ). The distinction between cases (SR2) and (SR3)
                                                                      m
in the middle column, relevant for perfect competition in previous table, is irrelevant for monopoly here. The set of
R0 satisfying equation (54) need not form an interval.  Any value Pm       c is consistent with zero sales in equilibrium.
 Entry is the Q solving (53).
                m




                                                            87
                Figure 1: Graphs of Long-Run Equilibrium Variables as Functions of R0
                               (LR2)
                  Q*
                                                                    Competition

                                                                     Monopoly



                           (LR1)            (LR3)                      (LR4)                     (LR5)
                                                                                                         R0
                  I*
                                                              A ·    Monopoly


                                                                    Competition


                                                    ·B                                                   R0
              MPB*
                                                                     Monopoly


                                                                    Competition


                                                                                                         R0
              MEX*

                                                                    Competition

                                                                     Monopoly

                                                                                                         R0
                 W*


                                                                    Competition

                                                                       C
                                                                      ·
                                                                     Monopoly
                       0                                                                                 R0
                                                    -




                                                                                              -




                                   1    1          1                                           1
                                       1-       (1-)(1-)                                   (1-)2 (1-)

Notes: Graph of formulas provided in Tables 1 and 2, illustrated for specific parameter values ( = 0.6,  = 0, µ = 1,
c = 0.1, H = 1). Where the dotted and solid curves overlap, the solid curve represents both industry structures. Panel
illustrating equilibrium prices omitted since Pm = MPB in all cases in which the monopolist serves some consumers
                                                        m
             
and since Pc = c does not require illustration. Also omitted is a panel illustrating equilibrium profit since the graph for
                                                 
   m resembles that for Qm or MPBm and since c = 0 does not require illustration.

                                                           88
                Figure 2: Graphs of Long-Run Optimal Subsidy GS as Function of R0

                                             (LR3')
        GS**       (LR1)          (LR2')      ·
                                              A
                                                                      (LR4)                          (LR5)



                                                                   Monopoly

                                      B                     Competition
                                                                                                             R0
                                                                                                  -
                           -




               0                                                                               
                            1                     ()()                                       () ()


Notes: Graph of formulas provided in Table 3, illustrated for the specific parameter values indicated in previous figure.




                                                           89
Online Appendix D: Supplementary Figures

              Figure D1: Graphs of Short-Run Equilibrium Variables as Functions of R0

                 Q*                                      Competition


                                                             Monopoly


                          (SR1)          (SR2)                            (SR3)               (SR4)
                                                                                                          R0

                  R*
                                                             Monopoly




                                                         Competition

                                                                                                          R0

              MPB*
                                                             Monopoly


                                                         Competition


                                                                                                          R0

              MEX*                                Monopoly



                                                 Competition


                                                                                                          R0

                 W*


                                                 Competition

                                                  Monopoly
                                                                                                          R0
                                  -


                                                  -




                                                                                           -




                                ln 1-         ln 1-               Eq. (53) not satisfied      Eq. (53)
                                 0 +
                                     0      0 + 1- 
                                                    0                                         satisfied

Notes: Graph of formulas provided in Tables 5 and 6, illustrated for specific parameter values ( = 0.7,  = µ = 0,
c = 0.3, H = 1, I^         ^
                  0 = 0.1, S0 = 0.8). Where the dotted and solid curves overlap, the solid curve represents both industry
structures. See Figure 1 for additional notes.


                                                             90
