                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GOING-CONCERN DEBT OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES

                                             Yueran Ma
                                         José A. Scheinkman

                                        Working Paper 28088
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28088


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2020




We thank Felipe de Souza Netto and Ammon Lam for excellent research assistance. We thank Jason
Donaldson, Martin Oehmke, Giorgia Piacentino, Yao Zeng, seminar participants at Columbia and
New York Fed, and conference participants at SED and AEA for helpful comments. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Yueran Ma and José A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Going-Concern Debt of Financial Intermediaries
Yueran Ma and José A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 28088
November 2020
JEL No. G21,G28,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

We study asset and debt characteristics of US bank holding companies. We show that financial institutions,
especially large institutions, are not just about holding discrete assets. Services and going-concern
values are important, and capital market debt against going-concern values accounts for 10% to 15%
of total assets, comparable to the volume of capital market debt against discrete assets. We find that
financial institutions' debt against going-concern values has weak monitoring, relative to similar debt
among non-financial firms. We argue that weak monitoring prevails because creditors cannot easily
punish or restructure these institutions should they violate covenants, which limits covenants' usefulness.


Yueran Ma
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
United States
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu

José A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js3317@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

    The funding of financial institutions has always garnered substantial interest in eco-

nomics research. A key focus has been theories and evidence on the nature of deposits.

Nonetheless, major deposit-taking financial institutions in the US also rely on a sizable

amount of non-deposit debt contracts from capital markets. For example, roughly 35%

of the total liabilities of JP Morgan and Bank of America are not deposits. What is the

nature of the capital market debt contracts of financial firms? What are the similarities

and differences relative to non-financial firms? We investigate these questions and draw

comparisons with non-financial firms, to flesh out the unifying themes as well as the

distinct features of debt contract enforcement among financial institutions.

    Among non-financial firms, there are two common approaches to debt enforcement.

One approach is to lend against the liquidation value of discrete, separable assets, such

as fixed assets and working capital, where creditors rely on the intrinsic liquidation value

of these well-defined assets. Another approach is to lend against the going-concern cash

flow value of the firm, where creditors rely on the value of the business as a whole and

the verifiability of cash flows. The prevalence of these two approaches is influenced by

the nature of firms' assets and economic activities, and the latter often comes with strong

creditor monitoring and control (Kermani and Ma, 2020b).

    In this paper, we collect data on the asset and debt characteristics of financial in-

termediaries (in particular, bank holding companies), and analyze the extent to which

a similar framework applies to the capital market debt of financial firms. We show

that there are broad similarities, but also important twists. On the asset side, although

intuitively financial firms have more liquid, separable assets than non-financial firms,

other types of activities such as services are also important, especially for large institu-


                                             1
tions. Indeed, whereas the asset features of non-financial firms appear to be significantly

shaped by the industry, the asset composition of financial firms varies much by size. On

the debt side, although debt against going-concern values among financial firms is less

prevalent than such debt among non-financial firms, its volume is still meaningful in

aggregate. Notably, this type of debt among financial institutions appears to have much

fewer covenants, relative to what we observe among non-financial firms. Thus financial

institutions can be an interesting "out-of-sample" data point for analyses of covenants

and creditor monitoring. To interpret our empirical findings, we develop a model in

which limited effectiveness or limited threats from creditor control results in the absence

of covenants and monitoring-intensive debt.

   In the empirical analyses, we start with asset composition, then proceed to debt com-

position, and finally contract enforcement. First, on the asset side, we find that the

pledgeable value of discrete assets (i.e., the amount of borrowing that discrete assets can

support when pledged directly) accounts for about 60% of total assets in aggregate. By

discrete assets, we mean assets that can be separated and repossessed on a standalone

basis, such as securities, mortgages and other loans, and fixed assets in the case of fi-

nancial intermediaries. This value is much larger compared to the case for non-financial

firms, where the liquidation value of (non-cash) discrete assets is less than 25% of total

assets in aggregate (Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Nonetheless, financial intermediaries do

generate meaningful going-concern values from services (e.g., deposit franchise, com-

mercial banking, underwriting, trading and market making, brokerage, etc.), which is

not necessarily captured by the intrinsic value of discrete assets.

   In addition, there is substantial heterogeneity in financial intermediaries' asset fea-

tures. In general, the share of services revenue is higher among larger institutions,

suggesting fixed costs or increasing returns to scale in the provision of services. We


                                             2
find that larger institutions and institutions with higher services revenue shares have a

significantly smaller share of the pledgeable value of discrete assets in total assets. In

particular, the size dependence of asset composition is much stronger among financial

intermediaries than among non-financial firms, where asset features are largely tied to

the industry. Financial intermediaries appear to have more scope for choice in asset

composition.

   Second, on the liability side, we find that the value of financial institutions' going-

concern debt is about 10% to 15% of total assets in aggregate. This amount is meaningful

and similar to the aggregate value of their asset-based debt.1 By asset-based debt, we re-

fer to capital market debt that has claims against discrete assets, analogous to creditors'

use of the term among non-financial firms. For financial institutions, this type of debt

includes repos and asset-backed securities, as well as borrowings against loans or fixed

assets. By going-concern debt, we refer to capital market debt that has claims against

the firm as a whole, rather than any well-defined discrete assets (e.g., a financial institu-

tion may derive value from its franchise, services, networks, which are not captured by

discrete assets). This concept is analogous to what is often called cash flow-based debt

among non-financial firms (Lian and Ma, 2020; Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito, 2020;

Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Here we use the term "going-concern debt" instead, since the

debt of financial intermediaries has less emphasis on borrowers' measurable cash flow

value. While cash flow-based debt of non-financial firms includes both loans and bonds,

as well as both secured and unsecured (or subordinated) debt, going-concern debt of

financial intermediaries primarily takes the form of unsecured (or subordinated) bonds.

   There is also substantial heterogeneity in the amount of going-concern debt among

financial intermediaries. The amount (normalized by total assets) increases with size and
   1 As mentioned at the beginning, we treat deposits separately; their primary form of enforcement in
the current US institutional environment is government regulation and deposit insurance.


                                                  3
services revenue share, and decreases with the share of the pledgeable value of discrete

assets in total assets. The amount of asset-based debt shows the opposite pattern.

   Finally, whereas cash flow-based debt of non-financial firms often emphasizes cred-

itor monitoring of the borrower's financial performance and control in the borrower's

actions, going-concern debt of financial institutions seems to have much weaker monitor-

ing and control rights. Compared with non-financial firms of similar credit quality, there

is a lower share in the form of loans, as well as a lower prevalence of financial covenants

in both bonds and loans. Although in principle the possibility of government bailouts

may substitute for creditor monitoring, and some research finds that bailouts reduce

interest rates (Acharya, Anginer, and Warburton, 2016; Berndt, Duffie, and Zhu, 2019),

we do not find that bailouts can fully explain the weak monitoring we observe (which

is present among smaller intermediaries too, not just "too-big-to-fail" institutions). The

composition of financial institutions' short-term debt in practice--mostly insured de-

posits and bankruptcy remote, largely nonrecourse repos--dampens the Diamond and

Rajan (2001) mechanism where short-term debt monitors and monitoring by other cred-

itors may not be necessary. Empirically we do not find that the amount of repos or

deposits has explanatory power. Also, while standard measures among non-financial

firms such as EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization)

are possibly less useful for evaluating financial intermediaries, the extensive use of mea-

surable indicators in regulation suggests there are measurable and contractible signals

which can be used for monitoring financial intermediaries. The most plausible expla-

nation we find is the difficulty to reform or orderly restructure financial intermediaries.

If borrowers were to violate covenants (e.g., due to managerial incompetence), creditors

may not have good alternatives because these institutions are opaque and complicated,

or because orderly restructuring such as Chapter 11 is difficult to implement given the


                                            4
nature of financial intermediaries. This lack of feasible creditor interventions would

diminish the value of covenants and creditor control.

   After presenting the empirical findings, we provide an equilibrium model to shed

further light on the results. In the model, a financial intermediary can invest in two types

of projects: 1) discrete, separable assets, and 2) other activities (which may generate

services revenue etc.). It has an endowment of equity and deposits, and can finance

the discrete assets with asset-based debt, or finance investments in general with going-

concern debt. We find that the heterogeneity in asset composition and debt composition,

such as the pronounced size dependence, cannot be easily delivered by risk aversion. It

is more likely that large institutions have an advantage in investing in other assets (such

as services). In addition, we use the model to show that if creditors do not have effective

ways to restructure or reform the borrower institutions should they violate covenants,

then covenants would not be very useful and would be less prevalent in contracts ex

ante. The model also suggests that if there are higher private benefits from being in

charge of financial institutions, and correspondingly management exerts great effort to

stay under control, this could reduce the role for covenants as well.

   Taken together, the data suggests that financial institutions, especially large institu-

tions, are not just about holding discrete assets. Services and going-concern values are

important. Correspondingly, debt against going-concern values is prevalent, especially

among large institutions. However, the enforcement of going-concern debt is non-trivial,

given the difficulty in reforming or restructuring complex institutions that engage in liq-

uidity provision (Duffie, 2010; Scott, 2012; Oehmke, 2014). In this case, monitoring and

control by creditors can be challenging to implement.

   Literature Review. There is a large literature on the funding of financial institutions.

A prominent strand of research since Diamond and Dybvig (1983) studies liquidity pro-


                                             5
vision through financial intermediaries' deposit liabilities (Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990;

Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein, 2002; Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny, 2015; Donaldson

and Piacentino, 2020; Ma, Xiao, and Zeng, 2020). Following the 2008 financial crisis, a

number of papers examine the asset-based debt of financial intermediaries, such as repos

and asset-backed commercial papers (Gorton and Metrick, 2012; Krishnamurthy, Nagel,

and Orlov, 2014). We show that the going-concern debt of financial intermediaries is

important as well, and its enforcement raises interesting questions. In addition, we pro-

vide a systematic comparison of financial intermediaries with non-financial firms in asset

composition, debt composition, and monitoring intensity to demonstrate the similarities

and differences, which to our knowledge has not been analyzed in the literature.

   Many papers on financial intermediaries also examine the issue of debt maturity

(Brunnermeier and Oehmke, 2013; Milbradt and Oehmke, 2015; Bai, Krishnamurthy, and

Weymuller, 2018). Going-concern debt among financial intermediaries is generally long-

term, perhaps in part because going-concern values largely derive from longer-term in-

vestments. Its maturity is not shorter than that of comparable debt among non-financial

firms. Asset-based debt of financial intermediaries, on the other hand, is often very

short-term (to enhance the provision of safety and liquidity). Nonetheless, some asset-

based debt of financial intermediaries is not necessarily ultra short-term, like Federal

Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances against mortgages.

   Finally, our work relates to empirical research on different approaches of debt en-

forcement, where many studies focus on non-financial firms. A long literature inves-

tigates the role of discrete or tangible assets (Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz,

2005; Benmelech and Bergman, 2009; Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2012; Rampini and

Viswanathan, 2013). Another set of work analyzes the importance of creditors' moni-

toring and control of borrowers' actions (Roberts and Sufi, 2009; Nini, Smith, and Sufi,


                                            6
2012; Matvos, 2013; Green, 2018; Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Our paper provides evi-

dence from financial intermediaries and shows the connection with results among non-

financial firms. We demonstrate that financial firms provide interesting "out-of-sample"

data points for analyses of creditor monitoring and control. We document weak creditor

control in this setting, examine the possible explanations, and highlight that this phe-

nomenon provides valuable information for understanding the foundations of creditor

control.


    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and defini-

tions. Sections 3, 4, and 5 present results on asset composition, debt composition, and

monitoring intensity, respectively. Section 6 outlines the model. Section 7 concludes.




2     Data and Definitions

    In this section, we describe the data and the construction of the main variables.



2.1   Asset Composition

    For asset composition of financial intermediaries, we collect data on bank holding

companies from FR Y-9C reports. The reporting institutions mainly include commercial

banks before 2009, and some broker dealers after 2009 (e.g., Goldman Sachs and Morgan

Stanley).

    For each institution, we define discrete assets as standardized, transferable assets that

can be separated and repossessed on a standalone basis, denoted by  x . The institution

may also have additional assets that generate revenue (e.g., networks, organizational

capital, etc.), denoted by y . The institution can directly pledge the discrete assets  x

and borrow based on their standalone resale values. We estimate the pledgeable value


                                              7
of the discrete assets, denoted by  x (i.e., the amount of debt that discrete assets can

support when pledged directly). Specifically, for each institution i in each year t, we

construct ix,t =  j  j ix, j,t , where  j is the liquidation recovery rate (one minus the

haircut) of asset class j and ix, j,t is the balance sheet amount of asset j held by institution

i in year t. In our baseline analysis, we use a constant  j for each asset class. We also

perform robustness checks that allow  j to vary over time, which show almost identical

results. Our method for constructing  x for banks is analogous to the procedure in Ma,

Xiao, and Zeng (2020).2

    In  x , we include the following asset categories: a) securities (e.g., Treasuries, gov-

ernment and municipal securities, MBS, ABS, bonds, and equities); b) reverse repos (not

including securities borrowed), which represent collateral received for repo loans that

the lender may use to raise financing (through rehypothecation); c) mortgages and real

estate loans; d) commercial and industrial loans; e) consumer loans; f) fixed assets (e.g.,

real estate).

    For  j , we collect data for each asset class, summarized in Table 1: a) for securi-

ties, our baseline analyses use the average haircut reported by Bai, Krishnamurthy, and

Weymuller (2018); b) for reverse repos, we assume an average  of 80% as a proxy of

the value allowed for rehypothecation; c) for mortgages, we follow Federal Home Loan

Banks' advance rate guidelines for lending against mortgage assets: 80% for single fam-

ily, 75% for multi family, 70% for commercial real estate, and 60% for other real estate

loans (Federal Home Loan Banks System, 2018); d) for commercial and industrial (C&I)

loans, we assume that 60% of the balance sheet value of large commercial loans and 20%

of the small business loans can be pledged directly; in practice C&I loans held by banks
   2 In the US, financial institutions report the net amount of derivatives (rather than the gross amount).
Given that derivatives in the US are also largely bankruptcy remote (Bolton and Oehmke, 2015), the US
reporting format is what we need in the empirical analyses and in the model (rather than reporting gross
amounts).


                                                    8
are not easy to pledge directly for borrowing, since the drawn amount on credit lines

can be highly variable and banks may also need to play an active role in monitoring

borrower firms (e.g., lead banks in syndicated loans need to collect information on bor-

rowers and organize renegotiations), so our assumptions may overestimate the effective

 on C&I loans; e) for consumer loans, we assume a 60% advance rate; f) for real estate

and fixed assets, we also use a 60% advance rate, assuming that most of these assets are

commercial real estate (e.g., office buildings, branch offices). One can also include cash

and reserves in  x with  = 1. Our main results are similar with or without cash hold-

ings. For securities, we can also obtain the time series of  j using data on tri-party repo

haircuts from Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014) and from the New York Fed. Our

results are the same using such time-varying estimates of  j because the haircut vari-

ations in these datasets are relatively small. In any case, our main analysis focuses on

cross-sectional differences across institutions, and always controls for year fixed effects,

so the measurement of time-varying  is not central.

   For comparisons with non-financial firms, we measure  x of non-financial firms us-

ing the liquidation value of their discrete assets (which mainly include property, plant,

and equipment, inventory, and receivable) constructed by Kermani and Ma (2020a).

These liquidation values are estimated orderly liquidation recovery rates based on in-

formation from the liquidation analyses in Chapter 11 filings. Overall, discrete assets of

financial institutions are much more generic, given they are more standardized, easier to

transfer, and have large liquid markets. The level of  correspondingly is much higher

compared to that for non-financial firms.




                                             9
2.2   Debt Composition

   We also collect detailed data on the debt composition of financial intermediaries. In

particular, we classify debt into three categories.

   The first category consists of debt against discrete assets, including repos, asset-

backed and securitized debt; FHB advances (generally collateralized by mortgages);

other debt against receivables, equipment, real estate, etc. This category is analogous

to "asset-based debt" among non-financial firms studied in several recent papers (Lian

and Ma, 2020; Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito, 2020; Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Debt

against discrete assets has high priority claims against the liquidation value of these

particular assets, but not against the firm value in general. For financial institutions,

such debt claims (e.g., repos) are often bankruptcy remote: they are separate from the

bankruptcy estate and are paid based on the liquidation value of the particular assets

pledged to them.

   The second category consists of debt against the going-concern value of the institution

as a whole, rather than any particular well-defined discrete assets. In the context of US

financial intermediaries, it typically takes the form of bonds or convertible securities,

and we include (non asset-backed) commercial papers as well; in certain cases, it may

also take the form of loans (which are much more common among non-financial firms).

This category is analogous to "cash flow-based debt" among non-financial firms (Lian

and Ma, 2020; Kermani and Ma, 2020b). In the context of financial intermediaries, we

refer to this type of debt as "going-concern debt" instead of "cash flow-based debt." The

reason is this type of debt has a much stronger emphasis on the value of measurable

cash flows among non-financial firms, whereas financial intermediaries' going-concern

values may not always be well-captured by cash flows, as we discuss more later.


                                             10
   The third category is deposits. We think of deposits as products mainly for transac-

tion and liquidity purposes, and debt enforcement relies on redemption or government

deposit insurance. Thus we separate deposits from capital market debt which may utilize

more contractual mechanisms for debt enforcement.

   For the classification of capital market debt in the first two categories, we mainly rely

on detailed debt-level data from CapitalIQ which is available starting in 2003 for most

public firms. For deposits, we use information from FR Y-9C filings.

   For both asset composition and debt composition, our primary measures are normal-

ized by total book assets. Total book assets proxy for the total costs of investment, and

we study how they can be funded in different ways.



2.3   Debt Covenants

   Finally, we collect data on debt covenants. We obtain covenants in loans from DealScan

and covenants in bonds from Mergent's Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD).



2.4   Sample Description

   As mentioned above, our analyses investigate bank holding companies. We thus

restrict to firms with SIC codes starting with 60 (depository institutions), 6211 (broker-

dealers), and 6712 (other bank holding companies). After combining data on asset com-

position and debt composition, we have about 780 bank holding companies and 5,500

bank-year observations from 2003 to 2016. As we discuss further in Section 5, in De-

cember 2016, the Federal Reserve announced the total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC)

regulation that specifically requires global systematically important banks (GSIBs) to

hold long-term unsecured and subordinated debt as loss absorption buffer. The reg-

ulation was implemented starting in January 2019. Our sample period precedes this

                                            11
regulation, so the results are not simply a reflection of TLAC regulatory requirements.

Table 2 provides summary statistics of the sample.3




3     Asset Composition of Financial Intermediaries

    In this section, we document the asset characteristics of financial intermediaries. We

study the aggregate composition in Section 3.1, bank-level composition in Section 3.2,

and summarize a comparison with non-financial firms in Section 3.3.



3.1        Aggregate Composition

    In the aggregate, we find that the pledgeable value of (non-cash) discrete assets,

namely the total value of  x , is about 60% of total book assets. Figure 1 Panel A shows

a time series plot of the aggregate share of  x , for commercial banks (red solid line) and

broker dealers (blue dotted line). Panel B additionally includes the value of all cash. The

magnitudes are very similar if we instead divide  x by the total market value, since the

market-to-book ratio of banks is close to one. Figure 1 also includes a comparison with

non-financial firms (green line with diamond). For non-financial firms, the pledgeable

value of discrete assets ( x ) is much lower, at less than 25% of total assets: non-financial

firms' assets are highly specific and the liquidation value of discrete assets is generally

limited (Kermani and Ma, 2020a).

    Figure 2 shows a further decomposition of  x : Panel A shows that for financial

institutions, roughly one half of the value comes from securities and another half from

loans; other assets such as fixed assets contribute minimally. Panel B shows that among
    3 Inthe data, we observe book values of banks' assets and liabilities: the value  x and the value of
debt are book values rather than market values. Although banks are subject to fair value accounting,
they do not always mark asset values to market (Laux and Leuz, 2010), so we may not be able to fully
detect the cyclical variations in the market value of bank assets. In our main analyses below, we focus on
cross-sectional variations (with time fixed effects) to analyze determinants of asset and debt composition.


                                                    12
non-financial firms, roughly one half of  x comes from working capital, and another

half from fixed assets (property, plant, and equipment).

   Although financial intermediaries' assets are much more generic than non-financial

firms' assets, there is still a sizable fraction of value in the aggregate beyond the pledge-

able value of discrete assets. As we discuss below, institutions also generate value from

services, networks, human capital, and organziational capital, which are not captured by

the intrinsic value of discrete assets. For instance, institutions with a smaller share of  x

in total assets are associated with indications of stronger services functions: they have

a larger share of non-interest income in total revenue, and a larger share of commercial

lending to non-financial borrowers with high asset specificity.



3.2   Bank-Level Composition

   Figure 3 plots the histogram of  x as a share of total assets among the financial

intermediaries in our sample. The data shows a fair bit of dispersion among different

institutions. The median ratio is about 0.67, which is larger than the aggregate ratio

shown above.

   Figure 4 and Table 3 show the relationship between the share of  x in total assets and

several bank characteristics, including size and features of economic activities. Figure 4

Panel A and Table 3 column (1) show the ratio decreases significantly with size: for

larger financial institutions,  x is a smaller share of total assets. Figure 4 Panel A and

Table 3 column (2) show the amount of  x also decreases with the fraction of revenue

from services (proxied by non-interest income). Table 3 column (3) shows that financial

institutions with less  x also tend to lend to non-financial borrowers with higher asset

specificity (lower liquidation value), as reflected by the average borrower liquidation




                                             13
value in syndicated loans from DealScan data.4 The idea is that loans to borrowers with

higher asset specificity have more intensive monitoring by lenders (Kermani and Ma,

2020b), which is a form of services. Finally, columns (4) and (5) show that there is some

overlap in these metrics. Size and the importance of services are positively correlated,

and the coefficient on each variable decreases somewhat when they are both included.

Nonetheless, they still remain statistically significant and both account for variations in

 x .



3.3    Comparison with Non-Financial Firms

   As shown in Figure 1, compared to non-financial firms, financial institutions' assets

are much more generic: the pledgeable value of discrete assets,  x , is a much higher

fraction of total assets. These differences mainly reflect the different nature of assets

among non-financial firms and financial institutions. The separable assets  x among non-

financial firms primarily take the form of physical assets that can be costly to transport or

custom designed, and therefore have low  and limited liquidation values (see Kermani

and Ma (2020a) for more analyses on determinants of  among non-financial firms). In

comparison, the separable assets  x among financial firms primarily take the form of

financial securities that are relatively standardized, and are tradable in large and liquid

markets.

   In addition, among non-financial firms, variations in the value of  x is largely an

industry characteristic. For instance, for variations in the amount of  x (normalized

by total assets), two-digit SIC fixed effects account for 40% of R2 , and four-digit SIC

fixed effects account for 50% of R2 . The size effect, on the other hand, is very weak
   4 Specifically,we calculate the borrower liquidation value (normalized by borrower book assets) using
the procedure in Kermani and Ma (2020a,b). Then for each lender in each year, we take all the loan
facilities the lender participates in, and calculate the average borrower liquidation value weighted by
facility amount.


                                                  14
compared to results in Table 3. Controlling for industry fixed effects, the coefficient

on log book equity is about -0.001 and the incremental R2 from size proxies is close

to zero. Taken together, for non-financial firms, asset features are largely driven by

the nature of production activities at the industry level (e.g., assets of transportation

companies are much more generic than assets of electronic manufacturers). For financial

intermediaries, the features of assets and economic activities have more variations within

the commonly defined industry, and some institutions engage in more services-intensive

activities (e.g., market making, derivatives trading, commercial lending) than others.




4     Debt Composition of Financial Intermediaries

    In this section, we turn to the characteristics of financial intermediaries' capital mar-

ket debt. In particular, we are interested in the role of debt against discrete assets versus

debt against going-concern values, as defined in Section 2.2. We study the aggregate

composition in Section 4.1, bank-level composition in Section 4.2, and summarize a com-

parison with non-financial firms in Section 4.3.



4.1   Aggregate Composition

    Figure 5 shows that the value of going-concern debt is almost as large as that of

asset-based debt in aggregate. Going-concern debt as a share of total assets is about 25%

among broker dealers (blue dashed line with circles) and about 10% among commercial

banks (red solid line with circles). In comparison, asset-based debt (sum of repos, secu-

ritized debt, FHLB advances, etc.) has about the same magnitude: its value is roughly

20% of total assets among broker dealers, which falls sharply to slightly above 10% after

around 2013 (green dashed line with diamonds), and roughly 10% of total assets among



                                             15
commercial banks (purple solid line with diamonds). Overall, the aggregate quantity of

going-concern debt is sizable.



4.2   Bank-Level Composition

   Figure 6 plots the histogram of going-concern debt as a share of book assets among

the financial intermediaries in our sample. The distribution is fairly skewed. At the bank

level, the median share is about 2%, much smaller than the share in aggregate.

   Figure 7 and Table 4 show the relationship between going-concern debt and several

bank characteristics. We normalize going-concern debt by total assets to maintain the

same denominator for balance sheet variables, but the results are similar if we alterna-

tively normalize by book equity or by total capital market debt.

   First, Figure 7 Panel A and Table 4 column (1) show there is a significant negative

correlation between the amount of going-concern debt and the amount of  x : institu-

tions with more generic, directly pledgeable discrete assets (higher  x ) have less going-

concern debt and vice versa. Second, Figure 7 Panel B and Table 4 column (2) show that

there are again variations with size: larger institutions have more going-concern debt.

Third, Figure 7 Panel C and Table 4 column (3) show that there are also variations with

the role of services: institutions that have stronger services functions (larger share of

revenue from non-interest income) have a larger amount of going-concern debt. Table 4

column (4) shows that there is overlap among these characteristics, so the coefficient on

each variable decreases somewhat when the variables are included together, as would

be expected based on findings in Section 3.2. Overall, the share of going-concern debt

decreases with the amount of  x , but size still plays an additional role even control-

ling for  x . Finally, several recent studies suggest that the deposit franchise contributes

to banks' going-concern values (Egan, Lewellen, and Sunderam, 2018; Drechsler, Savov,


                                            16
and Schnabl, 2020; Ma, Xiao, and Zeng, 2020). For instance, deposits may provide cheap

and stable financing, and deposit-related services may generate fee revenue. In the data,

we also observe that banks with more deposits have more going-concern debt as a share

of total capital market debt.5



4.3    Comparison with Non-Financial Firms

    For US non-financial firms, Lian and Ma (2020) document that in the aggregate cash

flow-based debt is about four times the amount of asset-based debt. As shown above in

Section 4.1, for financial intermediaries, in the aggregate going-concern debt has about

the same value as asset-based debt. In other words, financial institutions do have a

lower usage of debt based on going-concern in comparison. This is consistent with

financial institutions having a larger amount of generic assets than non-financial firms,

as discussed in Section 3. For both non-financial firms and financial intermediaries, the

share of going-concern debt in total assets decreases with  x , and increases with size.

    The seniority structure also appears somewhat different for cash flow-based debt of

non-financial firms and going-concern debt of financial intermediaries. Among cash

flow-based debt of non-financial firms, about 15% of debt outstanding by value is se-

cured (e.g., blanket liens against the firm as a whole),6 and around 5% is subordinated.

Among going-concern debt of financial intermediaries, less than 1% of debt outstanding

by value is secured, and around 20% is subordinated. For the cash flow-based debt of
   5 Here  we need to use going-concern debt as a share of total capital market debt. If we instead normal-
ize going-concern debt by total assets, then there would be a mechanical negative correlation between the
deposit share in total assets and the share of other types of debt in total assets.
    6 The collateral value of this type of secured debt is the going-concern value of the firm, minus the

liquidation value of discrete assets pledged separately. In other words, a debt contract secured by a
blanket lien on the firm has a high priority claim against the going-concern value of the firm (i.e., in
bankruptcy it obtains a senior claim up to the firm's going-concern value, minus the liquidation value of
discrete assets pledged separately). On the other hand, a debt contract secured by discrete assets such as
a piece of equipment (asset-based debt) has a high priority claim against the value of the equipment (i.e.,
in bankruptcy it obtains a senior claim up to the liquidation value of the equipment).




                                                    17
non-financial firms, taking seniority explicitly through having secured claims (against

the firm as a whole) can be important for creditor control (Donaldson, Gromb, and

Piacentino, 2019; Kermani and Ma, 2020b). Correspondingly, the absence of secured

going-concern debt may be related to the weakness of creditor monitoring and control

that we discuss below in Section 5.

    Another noticeable difference with non-financial firms is the determinants of debt

capacity. For non-financial firms with substantial cash flow-based debt, total debt of the

firm is typically benchmarked to operating earnings (specifically EBITDA, i.e., earnings

before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization) (Lian and Ma, 2020). For instance,

when non-financial firms seek to issue debt, total debt is commonly restricted to a mul-

tiple of earnings. In addition, they may need to comply with financial covenants that set

bounds of total debt or debt payments relative to earnings. For financial firms, however,

bounds of total debt relative to earnings are rare, for either debt issuance or maintenance.

For instance, for financial institutions like JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stan-

ley, the ratio of total debt (not including deposits) to earnings may exceed 10 or 20, which

is much higher than the level permitted for non-financial firms (e.g., debt to EBITDA of

4 to 6). There are several possible reasons why the standard debt to earnings bench-

marks among non-financial firms do not seem to apply to financial institutions. One

possibility is that accounting earnings are less useful for assessing the performance of

financial institutions. Most simply, EBITDA does not typically include capital gains and

losses on assets. It also does not include interest expenses.7                   Another possibility is

that government support creates value for financial institutions beyond their own earn-

ings (Atkeson, d'Avernas, Eisfeldt, and Weill, 2019). For example, we find that the ratio
   7 For non-financial firms, non-operating income like capital gains and losses are excluded from EBITDA
because they are not part of the core business. The aim of excluding interest expenses is to avoid the impact
of the debt tax shield and to make earnings more comparable regardless of capital structure. For financial
firms, however, interest expenses are part of the core financial intermediation activity.


                                                     18
of the market value of the firm to operating earnings is substantially higher among fi-

nancial institutions, and significantly increasing in size (in line with the possibility that

large institutions benefit more from government support). On the other hand, this ratio

decreases with size among non-financial firms.

    Finally, an evident difference between financial institutions and non-financial firms

is the level of leverage. This difference is mainly driven by deposits: capital market

debt (non-deposits) as a share of total assets, if anything, is smaller among financial

institutions in our sample. Deposit-taking is a key function of financial intermediaries

and may also offer subsidized funding (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl, 2020). Therefore,

the higher level of leverage among financial institutions due to deposits is not surprising,

and is not a primary focus of our study.




5    Enforcement of Going-Concern Debt

    Among non-financial firms, enforcement of debt against firms' going-concern values

is frequently associated with covenants, i.e., legally binding contractual provisions that

restrict borrowers' behavior. These covenants provide creditors with contingent control

rights (in the case of covenant violation) to influence firms' management and opera-

tions (Chava and Roberts, 2008; Roberts and Sufi, 2009; Nini, Smith, and Sufi, 2012).

In this section, we analyze the usage of covenants in financial intermediaries' going-

concern debt. We first show that financial intermediaries appear to have fewer covenants

than comparable non-financial firms. Financial intermediaries also have a substantially

smaller share of such debt in the form of loans, which are commonly considered to have

stronger monitoring and stronger covenants. We then discuss potential explanations for

these differences.



                                             19
5.1   Monitoring Intensity

   Figure 8 plots the fraction of bond issues (Panel A) and loan issues (Panel B) with

financial covenants by issuer ratings, for non-financial firms and financial intermediaries

in our sample. Bond financial covenants use data from FISD, which records covenants

whenever the bond prospectus mentions covenants.8 Loan financial covenants use data

from DealScan. Because loans are rare among financial firms (as discussed below), their

loan documentation and covenant information can be less comprehensive. With this

caveat in mind, we treat the analysis using loan covenants as one of several tests on

monitoring intensity. The shading of the bar color increases with the number of observa-

tions from financial intermediaries in each issuer ratings category. We see that financial

intermediaries generally have a lower prevalence of covenants, except in some cases for

low-rated issuers where there are few observations of financial intermediaries.

   In addition, it is commonly observed that commercial loans have stronger covenants

and more active monitoring compared to bonds (Diamond, 1984, 1991; Holmstrom and

Tirole, 1997). Figures 9 shows that among financial intermediaries' going-concern debt,

the share of loans is also much lower than comparable non-financial firms. This differ-

ence can further contribute to the weakness of covenants for financial intermediaries.

   In all of the comparisons above, we condition on issuer ratings to control for credit

quality. In other words, the observation that financial intermediaries have a lower preva-

lence of covenants is not driven by financial intermediaries having a higher credit quality.

Even for the same issuer rating category, financial intermediaries have a lower prevalence

of covenants than non-financial firms. Indeed, conditioning on issuer ratings is likely

conservative, given that recent research indicates some financial intermediaries' ratings
   8 We exclude medium term notes (MTNs) to be conservative since the documentation of covenants in
bond prospectus may be less clear for medium term notes. For the bond sample, we also exclude foreign
currency bonds and asset-backed bonds. For loans, we similarly exclude asset-based loans.

                                                 20
could have been inflated pre-crisis (Berndt, Duffie, and Zhu, 2019). Correspondingly, in

each issuer ratings bin, the financial intermediaries could have lower credit quality than

the non-financial firms, and if anything should have more--not fewer--covenants.

    Table 5 Panel A shows corresponding regression results controlling for basic firm

characteristics. We combine and compare non-financial firms and financial intermedi-

aries. In column (1), the outcome variable is a dummy variable of having at least one

financial covenant in a given bond issue. In column (2), the outcome variable is a dummy

variable of having at least one financial covenant in a given loan issue. In column (3), the

outcome variable is the share of loans in going-concern debt (cash flow-based debt for

non-financial firms).9 We use a linear model, and control for year fixed effects and issuer

ratings fixed effects similar to the comparisons in Figure 8. In all three columns, we see

a negative and significant coefficient on the dummy for financial intermediaries. For fi-

nancial intermediaries in our sample, the fraction of debt issues with financial covenants

is about 10 to 20 percentage points lower than that for non-financial firms. The share

of loans in going-concern debt is about 30 percentage points lower. Finally, although

it is sometimes viewed that shorter maturity can compensate for the lack of covenants,

we do not find shorter maturity for the going-concern debt of financial firms relative to

comparable debt of non-financial firms. The results in our tests of covenant prevalence

are also very similar if we additionally control for debt maturity.



5.2    Potential Explanations

    Why are covenants and creditor control rights weaker among financial intermedi-

aries? We discuss four classes of possible explanations.

    The first set of explanations focuses on the role of government supervision in the case
   9 We  focus on the presence of financial covenants, instead of the tightness, since covenant tightness can
be challenging to compare across different covenant formulas and different types of firms.


                                                     21
of financial intermediaries: regulations and bailouts may substitute for monitoring by

creditors. Specifically, creditors' expected losses are driven by the probability of default

and loss given default. For financial intermediaries, there are extensive government

regulations aimed at decreasing the probability of default. Government bailout may also

decrease both the probability of default and loss given default for creditors. Acharya

et al. (2016) find that bond spreads are sensitive to measures of risk for medium and

small financial institutions, but much less so among large financial institutions. Berndt,

Duffie, and Zhu (2019) find that prior to the financial crisis, bond yields of large financial

institutions indicate significant bailout subsidies. Government interventions may thus

decrease the necessity of creditor monitoring.

   We assess the role of government interventions in explaining weak creditor monitor-

ing by comparing covenant prevalence among globally systematically important banks

(GSIBS), which are subject to particularly heavy government interventions (regulations

or bailouts), with covenant prevalence among large non-GSIB banks (top 20 by size) and

other banks. Table 6 Panel A analyzes the prevalence of covenants among financial in-

termediaries' loan issues and bond issues, and tests its relationship with a dummy for

GSIBs and a dummy for large banks. It shows that large banks in general have slightly

fewer covenants, but GSIBs do not necessarily have much fewer covenants than other

large banks. In addition, Table 6 Panel B provides a placebo check using non-financial

firms: large banks roughly correspond to top 2% firms by revenue and GSIBs roughly

correspond to top 1% firms by revenue. If we add dummies for top 1% and top 2% by

size (revenue), we also find a lower prevalence of covenants among these largest non-

financial firms all else equal. Finally, even after excluding the largest institutions (GSIBs

and top 1% non-financial firms), we still find lower covenant prevalence among financial

firms compared to non-financial firms as shown in Table 5 Panel B. Overall, we have not


                                             22
found strong evidence that government intervention provides a full account of the lower

prevalence of covenants among financial intermediaries. In other words, while govern-

ment interventions may affect the pricing (Acharya, Anginer, and Warburton, 2016) and

quantity of financial firms' going-concern debt, especially for the largest institutions, we

do not find that they fully explain weaker creditor monitoring (which applies not just to

the largest institutions).

    The second set of explanations draws on the observation of Diamond and Rajan

(2001) that short-term debt may provide monitoring of financial intermediaries, and

substitute out monitoring by other creditors. For US financial intermediaries, short-term

debt primarily takes the form of deposits and repos.10 For deposits, insured deposits are

not very likely to have strong incentive to monitor (Egan, Hortac
                                                                ¸ su, and Matvos, 2017).

Even uninsured deposits are unlikely to be as sophisticated as professional investors.

For repos, most contracts are bankruptcy remote and largely nonrecourse (Roe, 2010;

Duffie and Skeel, 2012; Bolton and Oehmke, 2015). Thus creditors' payoffs are primarily

determined by the value of repo collateral, rather than the performance and governance

of the institution. Correspondingly, their monitoring incentives could also be weak.

Table 6 Panel A also shows that among financial intermediaries, we do not observe

having more deposits or repos is associated with a lower prevalence of covenants.11

    The third set of explanations is there may be fewer informative, contractible signals

to use for covenants in the case of financial intermediaries. As discussed in Section 4.3,

accounting earnings (such as EBITDA, the standard measure used among non-financial

firms) may not be informative about financial institutions' performance, and do not ap-
  10 Another   form is commercial papers: the total value of commercial paper liabilities reported by banks
is less than 2% of total assets, and their monitoring role might also be limited.
    11 We normalize deposits and repos by bank size measured using book equity. Results are similar if we

instead normalize using total assets (but this normalization could be subject to the concern that the shares
of different types of liabilities need to add up to one).




                                                    23
pear to be used to assess debt capacity. In particular, some earnings metrics (such as

EBTIDA) do not include capital gains and losses or charge-offs, which are central to

financial firms. EBITDA also does not include interest expenses, which are more sub-

stantial for financial institutions. Other earnings metrics (such as net income) do take

these items into account, but banks can have substantial discretion in estimating and

reporting capital gains and losses (Laux and Leuz, 2010). Recent research also finds

that major US banks delayed and under-estimated loan losses leading up to the crisis

(Bischof, Laux, and Leuz, 2019). However, measurable metrics are used extensively in

banking regulation, which suggests that there are at least some measurable and infor-

mative indicators. Therefore, even though covenants based on earnings may not be very

useful among financial institutions, in principle covenants can utilize alternative metrics.

   The fourth set of explanations is that creditors lack effective mechanisms to enforce

covenants. Creditors may not have credible threats in the case of financial intermediaries.

In particular, when covenants are violated, creditors have the legal power to accelerate

payments (i.e., make the debt due immediately), which they can use as threats during

the renegotiation process to influence borrowers' financial and real decisions and imple-

ment their requests (Nini, Smith, and Sufi, 2012). Such threats are credible if creditors

can expect to get reasonable payoffs upon payment acceleration (which likely result in

the borrower filing for bankruptcy). Correspondingly, Kermani and Ma (2020b) find a

positive correlation between the average enterprise value in Chapter 11 restructuring in

an industry (a proxy for firm value under creditor control) and indications of monitor-

ing intensity, including both loan covenant tightness and the amount of cash flow-based

loans. For financial intermediaries which engage in liquidity provision and can be sub-

ject to runs, orderly restructuring has been challenging. If creditors were to accelerate

payments after covenant violation and trigger bankruptcy of the borrower, their pay-


                                            24
offs could be very low, which limits the scope for creditor control. Relatedly, even if

some form of restructuring can happen, it may be difficult to fix problems or find better

management teams given that financial intermediaries can be complicated and opaque.

    In addition, in part due to the challenges for private restructuring of financial in-

termediaries, it is common for the government to be actively involved in the distress

resolution of financial intermediaries. The government may also restrict creditors' con-

trol rights. Most recently, total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements announced

by the Federal Reserve in December 2016 prohibit the going-concern debt of relevant

financial intermediaries from having meaningful covenants and creditor control rights.

Indeed, this could reflect the government's preference to be actively involved in the dis-

tress resolution of financial intermediaries: the government aims to be in control rather

than relying on creditor control. If covenants in private contracting are difficult to en-

force and less useful in any case, the requirement may not be a major issue. Nonetheless,

if private orderly restructuring of financial institutions becomes feasible at some point,

which may increase the enforceability of covenants, then the TLAC "covenant-free" re-

quirements could weaken otherwise useful creditor monitoring. Overall, when creditors

lack the ability to enforce effective monitoring and resolve under-performance (e.g., by

replacing management, implement restructuring), there tends to be more government

regulation. Government regulation could then make it even more difficult for creditors

to implement monitoring and control rights.




6    Simple Model

    In the following, we present a simple model to further understand the economic

mechanisms that can give rise to the empirical results we observe among financial firms.



                                           25
In Section 6.1, we analyze variations of asset and debt composition among financial

firms, especially along the dimension of size, as discussed in Sections 3 and 4. In Section

6.2, we investigate the low prevalence of debt covenants among going-concern debt k of

financial firms, as discussed in Section 5.12

      In the model, a risk-averse entrepreneur (bank) has equity endowment e. The en-

trepreneur can invest in discrete assets  x with random return x, or in other projects

(e.g., services) y with random return y. We model the asset structure as a choice by the

entrepreneur, which reflects the greater flexibility in selecting assets and business models

among financial firms as suggested by Section 3. The entrepreneur can borrow against

the pledgeable value of discrete assets  x (through asset-based debt) with nonrecourse

and rate of return r p . The entrepreneur can also borrow against firm value in general

(going-concern debt) of amount k with coupon c. We assume that lenders are willing to

supply any amount of such debt demanded by the entrepreneur, provided the expected

rate of return is at least a constant R. Finally, the entrepreneur can obtain deposits up

to an amount D, with return r and guaranteed by the government. The government

charges a deposit insurance premium (per unit of deposit) that equals the expected loss

L.

      The investment returns x and y in our model are observable and verifiable, so con-

tracts can specify payments based on investment payoffs. Accordingly, the entrepreneur

will not be able to repudiate payments when investment returns are high, or to steal

output (unlike models where payoffs are not verifiable such as Hart and Moore (1994)

and Hart and Moore (1998)). This assumption of payoff verifiability is natural in the US

institutional environment, with generally strict financial auditing, SEC supervision, and
     12 As
        shown in Sections 3 and 4, financial firms also have more  x and a higher prevalence of asset-
based debt compared to non-financial firms. Since a key part of the higher value of  x among financial
firms arises from exogenous features of the types of assets they have, our model does not focus on ad-
dressing this difference between financial and non-financial firms.


                                                 26
effective courts, as well as additional government regulation in the case of financial insti-

tutions. The verifiability of payoffs is especially relevant for the value of going-concern

debt k.13 Because our focus is debt contracting, we also assume that the bank manager

and shareholders are fully aligned, and the entrepreneur represents equity holders too.



6.1    Variation in Asset and Debt Composition

   In Sections 3 and 4, we find that financial institutions' asset composition and debt

composition varies substantially by size. In particular, unlike most non-financial firms

where asset composition is driven largely by the industry, financial institutions' asset

composition appears to be more of an endogenous choice that differs by size. Smaller

institutions hold more discrete asset ( x ). They also borrow more asset-based debt. We

start by studying what might explain the role of size in financial intuitions' asset and

debt composition.

   For simplicity of illustration and to obtain clear comparative statics, we consider an

environment with four states, with probability i and returns xi on  x and yi on y for

each state i  {1, 2, 3, 4}. In order to avoid the entrepreneur specializing in only one

type of asset, we need enough variability on the relative returns of x and y across the

different states. We thus assume that in state 1, y has low returns and the returns on  x

are also low enough, so the entrepreneur fully defaults on debt. In addition, to simplify

the calculation of the deposit insurance premium, we assume that the cost of default

is large enough so that the deposit insurer receives zero in state 1. In state 2, y2  R,

but the returns on  x and the presence of equity and deposits may compensate these
  13 There  are two aspects of verifiability that could be relevant. First, when the entrepreneur has good
performance, k will be paid accordingly, instead of repudiated. Second, when the entrepreneur has poor
performance and defaults, the court will assign payments to k based on realizations of investment payoffs.
The value of k in bankruptcy is important among non-financial firms (Lian and Ma, 2020; Kermani and
Ma, 2020b), since Chapter 11 restructuring is reasonably streamlined and payments to creditors in Chapter
11 are largely based on the enterprise value of the reorganized firm. The value of k in bankruptcy can be
more limited among financial institutions, given the challenges of orderly restructuring.

                                                   27
losses, so there is no default. In contrast, in state 3, the returns on discrete assets are low

                                                                                             R
x3 < r p , but returns on y are sufficient to avoid default (in particular, y3 >            1-1 ).   In

state 4, both  x and y yield relatively good returns, so that no investment subsidizes

                                                        R
another ex-post. In particular, x4 > r p and y4 >      1- 1 .   We will impose parameter values

such that, in equilibrium, defaults on debt or deposits only occur in state 1.

   In Appendix A.2, we show it is straightforward to see that if the entrepreneur's

utility follows CARA, namely u(z) = 1 - exp(- Az), then asset composition would be

homogeneous among institutions with different characteristics. For example, there is no
                                                                  x       y
variation with respect to size (i.e., equity endowment):         e    =   e   = 0. In the data, on the

other hand, we do observe size effects in asset composition as shown in Section 3. What

can generate these empirical results we observe? Instead of assuming a different class

of utility functions, we maintain CARA utilities but postulate that larger financial insti-

tutions (i.e., those with more equity endowments) have advantages in services projects.

Specifically, yi (e) = yi +  (e) for every i > 1, with  (e) > 0. This can capture that some

services activities require a sufficient scale (e.g., large corporate banking, capital market

services, trading, asset management).

   In Appendix A.2, we obtain that in the four-state model with CARA utility functions

and  (e) =  e, given the parameter restrictions described above, the following properties

hold:


Proposition 1. xxxxx


  1. If the returns on discrete assets ( x ) in the states where these returns exceed returns on

        asset-based debt (namely x2 and x4 ) are close enough, then both  x and y increase with e.

                                                R
  2. If in addition and y3 < [ -y (1 -  ) + 1] 1-1 , then
                                x                                 x
                                                                 x +y   decrease with e.


   Appendix Table A1 presents a numerical simulation, which yields variation of asset

                                                28
composition and debt composition to size that is similar to what we observe in the data.14



6.2    Prevalence of Covenants

    In Section 5, we find that the prevalence of covenants is much lower among the going-

concern debt of financial institutions. A possibility is that covenants are more challenging

to enforce among financial institutions, because creditors have less powerful threat. For

instance, restructuring financial institutions is more difficult, given the nature of their

business (liquidity creation that involves many short-term contracts) or the opacity and

complexity of these institutions. We investigate this issue in our model next.

    We think of covenants as contractual provisions that allow for contingent creditor

interventions. There are a few models in the literature studying the role of covenants,

which analyze asymmetric information (Garleanu and Zwiebel, 2009), moral hazard of

borrowers (Kermani and Ma, 2020b), or commitment problems of lenders (Rajan and

Winton, 1995). To illustrate how ex post covenant enforceability affects the ex ante usage

of covenants, we focus on a simple modeling framework without these additional fric-

tions. In our model, the existing entrepreneur has an intrinsic ability that is uncertain

initially. The entrepreneur can choose effort, and enjoys non-pecuniary benefits if she

keeps control until output is produced. Covenants allow for contingent replacement of

the current entrepreneur when signals of her ability emerge. Industries differ in whether

high quality alternative management can be found, which affects the ex ante usefulness

of covenants. In equilibrium, the entrepreneur would choose effort15 taking into con-

sideration the cost of effort, the amount of non-pecuniary benefits, and the net benefits
  14 The  reason for assuming x4 being close to x2 is that if x4 >> x2 , the correlation between payoffs to
 x and payoffs to y increases, and the motive for diversification can be too weak. In this case, an increase
in the payoff of y may cause a decrease in the optimal  x . On the other hand, if x4 << x2 , the value of
diversification can be too strong. In this case, an increase in the payoff of y may cause a increase in the
optimal share of  x .
   15 We can interpret this more broadly as variable performance of the institution that can be affected by

managerial actions.

                                                    29
to borrowers of replacing the management. In equilibrium, covenants are less prevalent

if good management replacement is more difficult to find, or if the entrepreneur enjoys

larger non-pecuniary benefits.

    We still use the four-state example above, and now we introduce that the entrepreneur

can exert effort w which decreases the probability of the worst state 1. The effect of effort

                                                  ~ that takes values µ1 (with proba-
w depends on the realization of a random variable µ

bility q) or µ2 > µ1 , and is independent of the realization of the state. In other words,

some entrepreneurs are more capable at avoiding the worst state than others. More

precisely, the states have base probabilities ¯ 1, ¯ 2, ¯ 3 and ¯ 4 , and if an entrepreneur

exerts effort w and µ j obtains, i (w, j) = ¯ i (1 + µ j w) for i = 2, 3, 4 and consequently

1 ( w, j ) = ¯ 1 - µ j w (1 - ¯ 1 ).

    The entrepreneur's choices are made before µi is observed. The entrepreneur has a

utility cost of exerting effort given by (w), which satisfies  > 0,  > 0, and              0.
                                                       ¯1
We also assume  (0) = 0 and that as w                 
                                                   (1- ¯ 1 ) µ2
                                                                ,   (w)  . This will guarantee

a choice of w such that 0 < 1 (w, j) < ¯ 1 . We continue the parametric assumptions

under which the entrepreneur only defaults in state 1. For simplicity, we take w as

contractible--conditional on w, lenders expect that with probability q, they will receive

the promised debt payments with probability (1 + µ1 w)(1 - ¯ 1 ); with probability (1 - q),

they will get debt payments with probability (1 + µ2 w)(1 - ¯ 1 ). As before, we assume

that the entrepreneur has CARA utility function u(z) = 1 - exp(- Az) and maximizes:



                       [qi,1 (w) + (1 - q)i,2 (w)][u(zi (w))] - (w).                       (1)
                        i



In addition, the current entrepreneur has a non-pecuniary benefit of b  0 units of utility

if she holds control until output is produced and there is no default.



                                              30
      Finally, after asset and debt choices are made, and w is chosen, a signal with values in

{1 , 2 } is observed. This signal is informative of the quality of management. The value

of the signal is independent of the state i, and if 2 is observed, then one learns that µ2

obtained. However, if 1 is realized, the probability that µ1 obtains is q > q, namely the

ex-post probability of a weaker entrepreneur (i.e., one who has µ1 ) is higher than the

ex-ante probability q. Thus after observing the signal, the probability of state 1 becomes:



                                1 (w, 2 ) = ¯ 1 - µ2 w (1 - ¯ 1 ),



                                1 (w, 1 ) = ¯ 1 - µ w (1 - ¯ 1 ),


where µ  q µ1 + (1 - q )µ2 < 1. In particular, the ex-ante probability of observing 1 is
q
q .

      We now introduce a role for covenants: if a covenant is present, lenders can intervene

and replace management after observing the signal . Under new management, the

probability of state 1 (where default occurs) instead becomes:



                               1 (w, 2 ) = ¯ 1 -  f (1 - ¯ 1 ),                            (2)

                               1 (w, 1 ) = ¯ 1 -  f (1 - ¯ 1 ).                            (3)



In particular,  f is a key parameter that indicates how easy it is to find a good new

manager. It can be interpreted more generally as how easy it is to restructure the firm if

signals suggest that current operations are weak.

      The old entrepreneur keeps equity claims and will get compensated in states i > 1.

However, she loses the non-monetary compensation b, which now goes to the new man-

agement. Gains to lenders are the gains from lowering the probability of the worst state.


                                                31
The expected gain from changing management is: ( f - µ2 w)(1 - ¯ 1 )c when signal 2

is observed and  f - µ w (1 - ¯ 1 )c if 1 is observed. Assuming, for definiteness, that

lenders do not replace managers if gains are zero, the following proposition holds:

                             f                f
Proposition 2. : Let w1 :=   µ2   and w2 :=   µ   . Then


  1. Management is replaced for every signal if w < w1 ;


  2. Management is replaced if and only if  = 1 for w1  w < w2 ;


  3. Management is never replaced if w  w2 .


   This proposition shows the settings where the old entrepreneur will be replaced.

Specifically, if w is too low, then management is always replaced. If w is in an interme-

diate range, then management is replaced when the bad signal is obtained. If w is high

enough, then management is never replaced. Furthermore, as we establish in Appendix

A.4, the following result holds:


Proposition 3. If  f is small enough then the entrepreneur will choose w  w2 , which makes

covenants useless, even if the entrepreneur enjoys no private benefits. In addition, if private

benefits are large enough, the entrepreneur will also choose w  w2 , making covenants useless.


   An important implication of this proposition is that if lenders cannot easily replace

weak management, or more generally restructure weak operations, then covenants are

not very useful and will be less prevalent. This result speaks to our observation in

Section 5.2 about the possible reason for fewer covenants and weaker creditor control

among financial intermediaries, compared to non-financial firms. A plausible explana-

tion is that covenants are more difficult to enforce for financial intermediaries (small

 f in the model). This can arise from the opacity and complexity of managing finan-

cial firms, which makes replacing weak management difficult. More generally, it can

                                                  32
arise from the difficulty of punishing or restructuring financial firms should they violate

covenants. Finally, Proposition 3 also suggests that when private benefits of staying as

management are high, the entrepreneur may also exert high effort to avoid being re-

placed. In this case, the necessity for replacing management, and correspondingly for

having covenants, would also be lower. This alternative possibility for having a lower

prevalence of covenants may be difficult to test empirically, but the model shows that if

having control rights of financial institutions is more valuable, this might reduce the role

for "external intervention" through covenants.




7    Conclusion

    We study asset and debt characteristics of US financial intermediaries, and compare

them with results from non-financial firms. For asset composition of financial intermedi-

aries, we find that the pledgeable value of discrete assets accounts for 50% to 60% of total

assets in aggregate. The share decreases with size and increases with the importance of

services functions. This share is substantially higher than non-financial firms (less than

25% as shown in Kermani and Ma (2020b)), given the generic nature of the financial as-

sets that financial institutions have, but still indicates a significant role for other activities.

For debt composition, we find that going-concern debt accounts for 10% to 15% of total

assets in aggregate, about the same as asset-based debt. The share increases with size

and the importance of services functions. While the aggregate ratio of going-concern

debt to asset-based debt in financial intermediaries (about 1:1) is smaller than the aggre-

gate ratio of cash flow-based debt to asset-based debt in non-financial firms (about 4:1

as Lian and Ma (2020) find), the quantity of going-concern debt in the financial sector is

still sizable. Moreover, we find that going-concern debt of financial intermediaries has



                                                33
weak monitoring. The most likely explanation for the weakness of creditor control is the

lack of credible threat and scope for creditor interventions, which limits the usefulness

of covenants and monitoring-intensive debt.




                                           34
References
Acharya, Viral V, Deniz Anginer, and A Joseph Warburton, 2016, The end of market
 discipline? Investor expectations of implicit government guarantees, Working paper.
Atkeson, Andrew G, Adrien d'Avernas, Andrea L Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, 2019,
  Government guarantees and the valuation of American banks, NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 33, 81­145.
Bai, Jennie, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Charles-Henri Weymuller, 2018, Measuring liq-
  uidity mismatch in the banking sector, Journal of Finance 73, 51­93.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K Bergman, 2009, Collateral pricing, Journal of Financial
  Economics 91, 339­360.
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J Garmaise, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2005, Do liquidation
  values affect financial contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning
  regulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1121­1154.
Berndt, Antje, Darrell Duffie, and Yichao Zhu, 2019, The decline of too big to fail, Work-
  ing paper.
Bischof, Jannis, Christian Laux, and Christian Leuz, 2019, Accounting for financial sta-
  bility: Lessons from the financial crisis and future challenges, Working paper.
Bolton, Patrick, and Martin Oehmke, 2015, Should derivatives be privileged in
  bankruptcy?, Journal of Finance 70, 2353­2394.
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Martin Oehmke, 2013, The maturity rat race, Journal of
  Finance 68, 483­521.
Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2012, The collateral channel: How
 real estate shocks affect corporate investment, American Economic Review 102, 2381­
 2409.
Chava, Sudheer, and Michael R Roberts, 2008, How does financing impact investment?
 The role of debt covenants, Journal of Finance 63, 2085­2121.
Diamond, Douglas W, 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review
  of Economic Studies 51, 393­414.
Diamond, Douglas W, 1991, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans
  and directly placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689­721.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance, and
  liquidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401­419.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Raghuram G Rajan, 2001, Liquidity risk, liquidity creation,
  and financial fragility: A theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy 109, 287­327.
Donaldson, Jason R, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2020, Money runs, Working paper.
Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Denis Gromb, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2019, Conflicting pri-
 orities: A theory of covenants and collateral, Working paper.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2020, Banking on deposits: Maturity
  transformation without interest rate risk, Journal of Finance Forthcoming.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, The failure mechanics of dealer banks, Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives 24, 51­72.


                                           35
Duffie, Darrell, and David A Skeel, 2012, A dialogue on the costs and benefits of auto-
 matic stays for derivatives and repurchase agreements, U of Penn, Inst for Law & Econ
 Research Paper .
Egan, Mark, Ali Hortac  ¸ su, and Gregor Matvos, 2017, Deposit competition and financial
  fragility: Evidence from the US banking sector, American Economic Review 107, 169­216.
Egan, Mark, Stefan Lewellen, and Adi Sunderam, 2018, The cross section of bank value,
  Working paper.
Federal Home Loan Banks System, 2018, Lending and collateral Q&A, Technical report.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Jeffrey Zwiebel, 2009, Design and renegotiation of debt
 covenants, Review of Financial Studies 22, 749­781.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo,
 Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425­451.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1990, Financial intermediaries and liquidity cre-
 ation, Journal of Finance 45, 49­71.
Green, Daniel, 2018, Corporate refinancing, covenants, and the agency cost of debt,
  Working paper.
Hanson, Samuel G, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C Stein, and Robert W Vishny, 2015, Banks
 as patient fixed-income investors, Journal of Financial Economics 117, 449­469.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of
 human capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841­879.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of
 debt, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1­41.
 ebert, Benjamin, 2017, Moral hazard and the optimality of debt, Review of Economic
H´
 Studies 85, 2214­2252.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and
 the real sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663­691.
Ivashina, Victoria, Luc Laeven, and Enrique Moral-Benito, 2020, Loan types and the bank
  lending channel, Working paper.
Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy C Stein, 2002, Banks as liquidity
  providers: An explanation for the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking, Journal of
  Finance 57, 33­73.
Kermani, Amir, and Yueran Ma, 2020a, Asset specificity of non-financial firms, Working
  paper.
Kermani, Amir, and Yueran Ma, 2020b, Two tales of debt, Working paper.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov, 2014, Sizing up repo, Journal of
  Finance 69, 2381­2417.
Laux, Christian, and Christian Leuz, 2010, Did fair-value accounting contribute to the
  financial crisis?, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 93­118.
Lian, Chen, and Yueran Ma, 2020, Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics Forthcoming.
Ma, Yiming, Kairong Xiao, and Yao Zeng, 2020, Debt versus equity in liquidity provision,
 Working paper.

                                           36
Matvos, Gregor, 2013, Estimating the benefits of contractual completeness, Review of
 Financial Studies 26, 2798­2844.
Milbradt, Konstantin, and Martin Oehmke, 2015, Maturity rationing and collective short-
 termism, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 553­570.
Nini, Greg, David C Smith, and Amir Sufi, 2012, Creditor control rights, corporate gov-
  ernance, and firm value, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1713­1761.
Oehmke, Martin, 2014, Liquidating illiquid collateral, Journal of Economic Theory 149,
 183­210.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Andrew Winton, 1995, Covenants and collateral as incentives to
  monitor, Journal of Finance 50, 1113­1146.
Rampini, Adriano A, and S Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and capital structure, Journal
  of Financial Economics 109, 466­492.
Roberts, Michael R, and Amir Sufi, 2009, Control rights and capital structure: An empir-
  ical investigation, Journal of Finance 64, 1657­1695.
Roe, Mark J, 2010, The derivatives market's payment priorities as financial crisis acceler-
  ator, Stan. L. Rev. 63, 539.
Scott, Kenneth E, 2012, A guide to the resolution of failed financial institutions: Dodd-
  Frank Title Il and proposed Chapter 14 .




                                            37
Figures and Tables

                                                    Figure 1: Aggregate  x /Assets
This figure shows aggregate total pledgeable value of discrete assets ( x ), normalized by total book assets.
The dashed line with circles represents broker dealers. The solid line with circles represents commercial
banks. The dashed line with diamonds represents non-financial firms. Panel A shows  x measured
without cash holdings; Panel B shows the same plot using  x plus cash holdings in the numerator.

                                                      Panel A. Total  x /Total Assets
                               .6     .5
                       x/Total Assets
                            .4 .3
                               .2




                                           2003      2005       2007       2009     2011       2013      2015
                                                                             Year

                                                            Broker Dealers                 Commercial Banks
                                                            Non-Financial Firms




                                                  Panel B. Total  x (+ Cash)/Total Assets
                               .7
                               .6
                        x/Total Assets
                       .4      .5
                               .3




                                           2003      2005       2007       2009     2011       2013      2015
                                                                             Year

                                                            Broker Dealers                 Commercial Banks
                                                            Non-Financial Firms




                                                                           38
                           Figure 2: Composition of Aggregate  x
This figure shows a decomposition of aggregate  x for the average year between 2003 and 2016. The total
area of the pie represents aggregate book assets. Panel A shows financial firms in our sample. Panel B
shows non-financial firms using data from Kermani and Ma (2020b).

                                   Panel A. Financial Institutions



                                                           7.1%




                                                                            26.0%




                                                0.5%
                                                             24.4%




                                 Cash                      Securities                    Loans
                                 Other Assets              Unaccounted




                                    Panel B. Non-Financial Firms



                                                             7.9%
                                                                     5.7%
                                                                        2.7%


                                                                            10.7%




                                   Cash                Receivables                  Inventory
                                   PPE                 Unaccounted




                                                        39
                                   Figure 3: Distribution of  x /Assets
This figure shows the distribution of the bank-level pledgeable value of discrete assets ( x ), normalized
by book assets. All bank-years in our main financial intermediary sample are included.




                       8
                       6
                    Density
                      42
                       0




                              .2          .4          .6            .8             1
                                                 x/Total Assets




                                                    40
                Figure 4: Variations of  x /Assets with Bank Characteristics
This figure shows binscatter plots of the relationship between the bank-level pledgeable value of discrete
assets ( x ) normalized by book assets (y-axis) and bank characteristics (x-axis). In Panel A, the bins are
formed based on size (log book equity). In Panel B, the bins are formed based on the share of non-interest
income in revenue. The average  x in each bin is shown by the dots. The plots control for year fixed
effects.

                            .7    .65            Panel A. Variations with Size
                     x/Total Assets
                    .6      .55




                                             4              6                    8     10
                                                            Log(Book Equity)




                                        Panel B. Variations with Non-Interest Income
                            .7
                            .68
                    x/Total Assets
                    .64       .66
                            .62
                            .6




                                         0               .2                     .4     .6
                                                       Non-interest Income/Revenue




                                                                41
              Figure 5: Aggregate Going-Concern Debt and Asset-Based Debt
This figure shows aggregate total going-concern debt (k) and asset-based debt (e.g., repos, securitized debt,
FHB advances), normalized by total book assets. The dashed line with circles and diamonds represent
going-concern debt and asset-based debt respectively for broker dealers. The solid line with circles and
diamonds represent going-concern debt and asset-based debt respectively for commercial banks.


                               .3          .25
                     Share of Total Assets
                         .15   .1
                               .05 .2




                                                 2003   2005      2007       2009        2011      2013       2015
                                                                               Year

                                                        Dealer: Going-Concern Debt              Dealer: Asset-Based
                                                        Commercial: Going-Concern Debt          Commercial: Asset-Based




                     Figure 6: Distribution of Going-Concern Debt/Assets
This figure shows the distribution of the bank-level going-concern debt (k), normalized by book assets. All
bank-years in our main financial intermediary sample are included.
                                   40
                                   30
                     Density
                      20           10
                                   0




                                                   0                .1                   .2                    .3
                                                                 Going-Concern Debt (k)/Total Assets




                                                                              42
          Figure 7: Variations of Going-Concern Debt with Bank Characteristics
This figure shows binscatter plots of the relationship between the bank-level going-concern debt (k) nor-
malized by book assets (y-axis) and bank characteristics (x-axis). In Panel A, the bins are formed based on
 x in book assets. In Panel B, the bins are formed based on size (log book equity). In Panel C, the bins
are formed based on the share of non-interest income in revenue. The average k in each bin is shown by
the dots. The plots control for year fixed effects.

                                                                              Panel A. Variations with  x

                                              .06
                           Going-Concern Debt (k)/Total Assets
                            .02      .03       .04
                                              .01        .05




                                                                     .5                .6                      .7       .8
                                                                                            x/Total Assets




                                                                              Panel B. Variations with Size
                                              .1
                           Going-Concern Debt (k)/Total Assets
                                  .04      .06.02       .08




                                                                              4             6                       8   10
                                                                                            Log(Book Equity)




                         Panel C. Variations with Non-Interest Income
                                                               .05
                           Going-Concern Debt (k)/Total Assets
                             .02        .03   .01   .04




                                                                          0             .2                     .4       .6
                                                                                      Non-interest Income/Revenue



                                                                                               43
      Figure 8: Prevalence of Financial Covenants among Financial Intermediaries'
                                  Going-Concern Debt
This figure shows the fraction of bond issues (Panel A) and loan issues (Panel B) that have financial
covenants. The fractions are calculated for each issuer rating category. "Non-Financial" represents non-
financial firms. "Banking" represents financial intermediaries in our main sample that are in the loan issue
or bond issue datasets. Each observation is a debt issue. We exclude medium term notes in bond issues
because their covenant information can be incomplete. The color intensity of the bars in each issuer rating
category increases with the share of financial intermediary observations that belong to the given issuer
rating category. The issues do not include debt that is collateralized by discrete assets (asset-based debt).

                                                                         Panel A. Financial Covenants in Bond Issues
                      Fraction of Bond Issues with Financial Covenants
                     0              .2               .4            .6




                                                                          AAA   AA    A        BBB        BB   B     C&D   NR
                                                                                          Non-Financial        Banking




                                                                         Panel B. Financial Covenants in Loan Issues
                      Fraction of Loan Issues with Financial Covenants
                     0               .2              .4            .6




                                                                          AAA   AA    A        BBB        BB   B     C&D   NR
                                                                                          Non-Financial        Banking




                                                                                                 44
  Figure 9: Prevalence of Loans among Financial Intermediaries' Going-Concern Debt
This figure shows the fraction of loans in going-concern debt for financial intermediaries. The fractions
are calculated for each issuer rating category. "Non-Financial" represents non-financial firms. "Banking"
represents financial intermediaries in our main sample. Each observation is a firm-year. The color intensity
of the bars in each issuer rating category increases with the share of financial intermediary observations
that belong to the given issuer rating category.

                                                                .4
                     Fraction of Loans in Going-Concern Debt (k)
                             .1           .2
                                           0        .3




                                                                     AAA   AA   A        BBB        BB   B     C&D   NR
                                                                                    Non-Financial        Banking




                                                                                           45
                            Table 1: Estimates of Pledgeable Value 
This table summarizes the estimate of  for each type of assets.


                         Securities
                         Treasuries: 0.98. Government obligations: 0.97.
                         Agency MBS: 0.98. Non-agency MBS: 0.94. ABS: 0.94.
                         Other debt securities: 0.95. Equities: 0.93.
                         Reverse repo: 0.8.
                         Loans
                         Single family: 0.8. Multifamily: 0.75.
                         Commercial real estate: 0.7. Other real estate: 0.6.
                         Consumer: 0.6. C&I: 0.2.
                         Other Fixed Assets
                         Real estate and other fixed assets: 0.6.



                                      Table 2: Summary Statistics
Summary statistics of financial institutions in the main sample. Mean, standard deviation, and selected
percentiles are presented. Sample period is 2003 to 2016.


                                               Mean            SD       p10      p50        p90
            Asset Composition
            Book assets                       28,728.2      182,766.4   546.0   1,620.0   17,519.6
            Enterprise value                  31,550.6      189,887.7   566.4   1,872.4   20,122.9
            Market value of equity             3,502.6       19,298.9    40.6    233.2     2,909.2
            Enterprise value/book assets         1.04          0.07      0.96     1.03       1.12
            Cash/assets                         0.05           0.05     0.02     0.04       0.11
             x /assets                          0.88           0.07      0.81     0.90      0.95
             x /assets                          0.67           0.07      0.59     0.67      0.74
            Liability Composition
            Equity/assets                       0.10          0.03      0.07     0.10       0.13
            Deposits/assets                     0.77          0.10      0.65     0.78       0.86
            Asset-based debt/assets             0.10          0.08      0.02     0.09       0.20
            Going-concern debt/assets           0.02          0.03      0.00     0.02       0.04




                                                       46
                Table 3: Variations in Pledgeable Value of Discrete Assets  x
This table presents the relationship between  x (normalized by book assets) and bank characteristics.
Year fixed effects are included. R2 does not include fixed effects. Standard errors are double-clustered by
firm and time.

                                                                          x /Assets
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
     Size (log book equity)                      -0.014***                            -0.011***   -0.009***
                                                  (0.002)                              (0.001)     (0.003)
     Noninterest income/revenue                              -0.150***                -0.101***   -0.240***
                                                              (0.034)                  (0.028)     (0.059)
     Liquidation value of C&I loan borrowers                              0.155**                  0.077*
                                                                          (0.068)                  (0.041)
     Observations                                 5,480       5,486         295        5,474         295
     R2                                            0.13        0.11         0.04        0.17         0.51
     Fixed effects                                                    Year




                                                    47
                          Table 4: Variations in Going-Concern Debt k
This table presents the relationship between going-concern debt k (normalized by book assets) and bank
characteristics. Year fixed effects are included. R2 does not include fixed effects. Standard errors are
double-clustered by firm and time.


                                                                k/Assets
                                                  (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)
                 x /assets                     -0.137***                          -0.063***
                                                (0.023)                            (0.014)
                Size (log book equity)                     0.008***               0.007***
                                                            (0.001)                (0.001)
                Noninterest income/revenue                             0.061***    0.021**
                                                                        (0.015)    (0.010)
                Observations                     5,422      5,411        5,416      5,405
                R2                               0.11       0.24          0.10       0.28
                Fixed effects                                       Year




                                                  48
        Table 5: Monitoring Intensity of Financial Intermediaries' Going-Concern Debt
In column (1), the outcome variable is a dummy that is equal to one if a bond issue has at least one financial
covenant. In column (2), the outcome variable is a dummy that is equal to one if a loan issue has at least one
financial covenant. In column (3), the outcome variable is the share of loans in going-concern debt. The debt
issues do not include debt that is collateralized by discrete assets (asset-based debt). Bond issues also exclude
medium term notes (MTNs). The sample includes both non-financial firms and financial intermediaries. The
bank dummy is equal to one for financial intermediaries. Panel B excludes the largest firms (GSIBs and top 1%
non-financial firms by revenue each year). Year and issuer ratings fixed effects are included. R2 does not include
fixed effects. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and time.

                                                 Panel A. All Firms

                               Has Fin Cov (Bonds)       Has Fin Cov (Loans)    % Loans in Going-Concern Debt
                                       (1)                       (2)                         (3)
 Bank dummy                            -0.097**               -0.203***                     -0.303***
                                        (0.042)                (0.038)                       (0.019)
 Bond size (log face value)              0.005
                                        (0.004)
 Senior bond dummy                      -0.018
                                        (0.013)
 Convertible bond dummy               -0.085***
                                        (0.030)
 Loan size (log face value)                                    0.060***
                                                                (0.008)
  x /assets                            -0.001                  -0.126**                       0.010
                                       (0.037)                  (0.059)                      (0.046)
 Firm size (log book equity)            -0.002                -0.047***                       0.001
                                       (0.003)                  (0.008)                      (0.003)
 EBITDA/l.assets                        0.003                  0.078**                      0.031***
                                       (0.022)                  (0.038)                      (0.005)
 Observations                          13,383                   13,124                       31,291
 R2                                      0.02                     0.03                        0.07
 Fixed effects                                                 Year, issuer ratings

                                      Panel B. Excluding Largest Firms

                               Has Fin Cov (Bonds)       Has Fin Cov (Loans)    % Loans in Going-Concern Debt
                                       (1)                       (2)                         (3)
 Bank dummy                           -0.091***               -0.238***                     -0.307***
                                       (0.032)                 (0.044)                       (0.020)
 Bond size (log face value)             0.008
                                       (0.005)
 Senior bond dummy                    -0.034***
                                       (0.013)
 Convertible bond dummy               -0.091***
                                       (0.030)
 Loan size (log face value)                                    0.057***
                                                                (0.008)
  x /assets                            -0.010                  -0.134**                       0.005
                                       (0.042)                  (0.062)                      (0.047)
 Firm size (log book equity)            0.004                 -0.039***                       0.003
                                       (0.004)                  (0.008)                      (0.003)
 EBITDA/l.assets                       -0.007                  0.075**                      0.031***
                                       (0.019)                  (0.037)                      (0.005)
 Observations                          10,283                   12,098                       30,443
 R2                                     0.02                      0.03                        0.07
 Fixed effects                                                 Year, issuer ratings


                                                        49
                 Table 6: Monitoring Intensity: Are Largest Institutions Special?
In column (1), the outcome variable is a dummy that is equal to one if a bond issue has at least one financial
covenant. In column (2), the outcome variable is a dummy that is equal to one if a loan issue has at least one
financial covenant. In column (3), the outcome variable is the share of loans in going-concern debt. The debt
issues do not include debt that is collateralized by discrete assets (asset-based debt). Bond issues also exclude
medium term notes (MTNs). In Panel A, the sample includes financial intermediaries. "GSIB" is a dummy for
global systemically important banks. "Large non-GISB" is a dummy for top 20 US banks excluding GSIBs. In
Panel B, the sample includes non-financial firms. "Top 1% (2%) non-financial" is a dummy for top 1% (2%)
non-financial firms in a given year based on revenue. Year and issuer ratings fixed effects are included. R2
does not include fixed effects. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and time.

                                     Panel A. Financial Intermediaries

                                Has Fin Cov (Bonds)     Has Fin Cov (Loans)     % Loans in Going-Concern Debt
                                        (1)                     (2)                          (3)
 GSIB                                   -0.015                  -0.040                       -0.068*
                                       (0.029)                 (0.089)                       (0.036)
 Domestic large non-GSIB              -0.071**                  -0.006                        0.046
                                       (0.034)                 (0.083)                       (0.034)
 Bond size (log face value)              0.013
                                       (0.008)
 Senior bond dummy                     0.134**
                                       (0.061)
 Convertible bond dummy                 -0.026
                                       (0.031)
 Loan size (log face value)                                     -0.016
                                                               (0.025)
 Deposits/equity                         0.011                  0.017                          -0.005
                                       (0.009)                 (0.013)                        (0.003)
 Repo/equity                            -0.024                  0.051                        0.022***
                                       (0.021)                 (0.040)                        (0.008)
  x /assets                             0.230                  -0.361                          0.073
                                       (0.241)                 (0.391)                        (0.104)
 Firm size (log book equity)             0.014                  0.037                        -0.012**
                                       (0.012)                 (0.023)                        (0.005)
 EBITDA/l.assets                       -2.262*                  2.642                           0.670
                                       (1.239)                 (2.709)                        (0.424)
 Observations                            1,079                   203                            4,215
 R2                                      0.12                    0.04                           0.01
 GSIB+Large=0 ( p-value)                 0.02                    0.51                            0.27
 Fixed effects                                                 Year, issuer ratings




                                                       50
                Monitoring Intensity: Are Largest Institutions Special? (Cont.)
                                Panel B. Non-Financial Firms (Placebo)

                              Has Fin Cov (Bonds)   Has Fin Cov (Loans)    % Loans in Going-Concern Debt
                                      (1)                   (2)                         (3)
Top 1% non-financials               -0.033**               -0.009                      -0.005
                                     (0.015)              (0.030)                     (0.012)
Top 2% non-financials                 0.013              -0.110***                   -0.074***
                                     (0.013)              (0.025)                     (0.010)
Bond size (log face value)            0.006
                                     (0.004)
Senior bond dummy                  -0.053***
                                     (0.018)
Convertible bond dummy             -0.092***
                                     (0.032)
Loan size (log face value)                                0.063***
                                                           (0.008)
 x /assets                           -0.012               -0.124**                      0.031
                                    (0.037)                (0.060)                     (0.047)
Firm size (log book equity)           0.001              -0.036***                     0.005*
                                    (0.004)                (0.008)                     (0.003)
EBITDA/l.assets                      -0.001                0.067*                     0.031***
                                    (0.021)                (0.035)                     (0.005)
Observations                        12,304                 12,920                      27,019
R2                                    0.01                  0.03                         0.01
Top 1%+2%=0 ( p-value)                0.24                  0.00                         0.00
Fixed effects                                             Year, issuer ratings




                                                    51
Internet Appendix

A     Model
    We provide more details about the model in this appendix.


A.1     Setup
    A risk-averse entrepreneur (bank) has e dollars of equity, invests  x  0 in discrete
assets with random ex-post rate of return x, and invests y  0 in other projects with
random ex-post rate of return y. The entrepreneur can obtain funding from the follow-
ing sources. First, she can borrow against the liquidation value of the discrete assets
(such as using repos). In this market, she pays r p > 1 per dollar borrowed. If the en-
trepreneur has invested  x in discrete assets, she can borrow any fraction 0    1 of
the maximum pledgeable value  x , where 0 <  < 1. The fraction (1 - ) is the haircut.
 x maps into asset-based debt, which lends against the pledgeable value of discrete
assets. Among financial institutions, borrowing against discrete assets (e.g., repos) is
often bankruptcy remote and largely nonrecourse (Roe, 2010; Duffie and Skeel, 2012;
Bolton and Oehmke, 2015); accordingly, if an entrepreneur borrows  x , her liability is
min{r p  x ,  x x }. Second, the entrepreneur can also borrow k against income in gen-
eral from risk-neutral lenders by paying a coupon c that produces an expected return to
lenders that equals R, and we assume R > r p . k maps into going-concern debt, which
lends against firm value as a whole. Third, the entrepreneur also has access to deposits
up to an amount D. Deposits get a return r  1 and are guaranteed by the government.
The government insures deposits but charges a premium per unit of deposit that equals
the expected loss L. We assume that depositors and the government have first claims to
revenues of the bank, except for the revenue of the discrete assets pledged (which can
be bankruptcy remote). Then:

                                   x + y   x + k + e + d,                                            (A1)

where d  D is the amount of deposits the entrepreneur accepts.16
    The payoff to the entrepreneur is:

             max{0,  x  max{0, x - r p } +  x (1 - ) x + y y - ck - (r + L)d},                       (A2)
  16 Since the entrepreneur is risk-averse, the optimal contract with risk-neutral lenders would entail
equity participation. Our focus on debt leads us to concentrate on debt contracts. Alternatively one could
use the framework of H´  ebert (2017) where entrepreneurs are risk-neutral but discount future payoffs by
more than lenders do. H´ ebert (2017) deals with financing of a single project so one would to make several
extensions of the model to accommodate the entrepreneur's choice of a portfolio of assets and the different
sources of capital that we consider.



                                                    52
where r p > r is the return on debt against discrete assets, and c is the coupon promised
to lenders of k. To simplify matters we assume there are no other claimants to output so
lenders of k receive the minimum between what they were promised and the total value
of the firm (minus payments to deposits and debt against discrete assets). The required
rate of return R must thus satisfy:

   E min ck, max{0,  x  max{0, x - r p } +  x (1 - ) x + y y - (r + L)d          = Rk.    (A3)

   In particular this implies that c  R and if we assume that the return on cash by the
entrepreneur is not more than R, then inequality (A1) must hold with equality. Thus we
get:

                                k =  x (1 - ) + y - e - d.                                (A4)

   If r + L < R, that is, deposits are cheaper than borrowing k even after taking into
consideration the deposit insurance premium, then the payoff to the entrepreneur when
d increases and k decreases would be higher in every state ( x, y). This is because in
states where the entrepreneur defaults on k her payoff is independent of the amount of
deposits, whereas in other states she would benefit from cheaper financing. Accordingly,
when k > 0 we may restrict ourselves to the case where d = D. Similarly, if r p < R, we
would obtain  = 1 when k is positive. In the data,  is close to 1 for liquid assets such
as securities, especially for large financial institutions (for small institutions, there could
be fixed costs of setting up repo networks).  is much smaller for illiquid assets such as
commercial loans. This could come from over-estimation of  for these assets, or from
the illiquidity of these assets leading to an effectively higher r p .


A.2    Four States
   As mentioned in Section 6.1, for simplicity of illustration and to obtain clear compara-
tive statics, we consider an environment with four states, with probability i and returns
xi on  x and yi on y for each state i  {1, 2, 3, 4}. In order to avoid the entrepreneur
specializing in only one type of asset, we need enough variability in the relative returns
of assets across the different states. We thus assume that in state 1, y has low returns
and the returns on  x are low enough, so the entrepreneur defaults on debt. In addition,
to simplify the calculation of the deposit insurance premium, we assume that the cost
of default is large enough, so that the deposit insurer receives zero in state 1. In state 2,
y2  R, but the returns on  x is large enough so that together with equity and deposits
it compensates the losses on y , so there is no default. In contrast, in state 3, the returns
on discrete assets are low x3 < r p , but returns on y are enough to avoid default (in
                    R
particular, y3 >   1-1 ).   In state 4, both  x and y yield relatively good returns, so that
                                                                              R
no asset need to subsidize another ex-post--in particular, x4 > r p + (1 - ) 1- 1 and

                                               53
        R
y4 >   1- 1 .
   Since default only occurs in state 1 and is full in this state, competitive lenders of k
will charge a coupon c such that:

                                     (1 - 1 )ck = Rk,                                  (A5)

where k = y +  x (1 - ) - e - D. In addition the deposit insurance L would solve:

                                                       r
                                      (r + L ) =          .
                                                    1 - 1

The payoff of the entrepreneur in states i = {2, 3, 4} is therefore:

                                                          r
                  zi = y yi +  x max{ xi - r p , 0} -        D - ck
                                                       1 - 1
                                                          r         R
                      = y yi +  x max{ xi - r p , 0} -       D-        k.
                                                       1 - 1     1 - 1

   In an interior maximum, the FOCs are are:

                                             R                                 R
          2 u ( z2 ) x2 -  r p - (1 -  )            + 3 u ( z3 ) - (1 -  )
                                           1 - 1                             1 - 1
                                                                          R
                                   + 4 u ( z4 ) x4 -  r p - (1 -  )             = 0,
                                                                        1 - 1
                                                R                              R
                            2 u ( z2 ) y2 -             + 3 u ( z3 ) y3 -
                                              1 - 1                          1 - 1
                                                                          R
                                                    + 4 u ( z4 ) y4 -           = 0.
                                                                        1 - 1

   It is obvious from these FOCs that if the entrepreneur has CARA utility, namely

                                    u(z) = 1 - exp(- Az),

then asset composition would be homogeneous among institutions. For example, there
is no variation with respect to size of equity endowment:

                                        x   y
                                          =   = 0.
                                       e    e

In the data, on the other hand, we do observe size effects in asset composition as shown
in Section 3.
   Instead of assuming another class of utility functions, we maintain CARA utilities
but postulate that firms with more equity have better projects: more precisely, yi (e) =
yi +  (e) for every i > 1, with  (e) > 0. The example discussed below shows that we
may choose  (e) =  e, so that the assumptions about default in different states hold for



                                               54
                     ¯]. Then for i > 1
e in an interval [e, e

                                   zi              R
                                      = y  (e) +       > 0.
                                  e              1 - 1

    If we write Fx for the FOC with respect to  x , and Fy for the FOC with respect to y ,
then for CARA utility functions,

              Fx ,e = 0,                                                                           (A6)
              Fy ,e = y  (e)[2 u (z2 (e)) + 3 u (z3 (e)) + 4 u (z4 (e))] > 0.                      (A7)

.
    Thus:

                                   x     1
                                     =       F , F ,e ,                                            (A8)
                                  e    |H F | y x y
                                  y        1
                                     = -       F , F ,e ,                                          (A9)
                                  e      |H F | x x y

                                                                                               x
where |H F | > 0 denotes the determinant of the Hessian matrix of F. In the data,             e    >0
       x
      y
and   e  < 0.
    In addition,

                                                        R                           R
           Fy ,x = 2 u (z2 (e)) x2 - r p - (1 - )                    y2 ( e ) -
                                                      1 - 1                       1 - 1
                                               R                      R
                   + 3 u (z3 (e)) -(1 - )              y3 ( e ) -
                                             1 - 1                  1 - 1
                                                        R                           R
                   + 4 u (z4 (e)) x4 - r p - (1 - )                  y4 ( e ) -           .
                                                      1 - 1                       1 - 1

    Using the FOC with respect to  x we obtain

                                            R                                          R
Fy ,x = 2 u (z2 (e))( x2 - r p ) y2 (e) -       + 4 u (z4 (e))( x4 - r p ) y4 (e) -
                                          1 - 1                                      1 - 1
                                            R                                          R
      = A x2 - r p     3 u (z3 (e)) y3 -        - A( x4 - x2 )4 u (z4 (e)) y4 (e) -        ,
                                         1 - 1                                      1 - 1
                                                                                    (A10)

where in the last line we used the FOC with respect to y . Notice that the first term in
the last line is always positive but the second term is negative if x4 > x2 . As x4 increases
relative to x2 the correlation between the payoffs of the two kinds assets increases and
the motive for diversification decreases. In this case an increase in the payoff of y may
                                                             x
cause a decrease in investments in  x . To guarantee that   e       > 0 we need to assume that
x4 is not much larger than x2 .


                                             55
                                             y
   On the other hand, since Fx ,x  0,        e        0. Furthermore,

                                                                    2
                                                            R
- Fx ,x = A 2 u (z2 (e)) x2 - r p - (1 - )
                                                          1 - 1
                                                 2
                                        R
            + 3 u (z3 (e)) (1 - )
                                      1 - 1
                                                                2
                                                        R
            + 4 u (z4 (e)) x4 - r p - (1 - )
                                                      1 - 1
                                                                    2
                                                 R
            = A 2 u (z2 (e)) x2 - r p - (1 - )
                                               1 - 1
                                        R                        R
            + 3 u (z3 (e)) (1 - )                    (1 -  )         - ( x2 - r p ) + ( x2 - r p )
                                      1 - 1                    1 - 1
                                                        R                                               R
            + 4 u (z4 (e)) x2 - r p - (1 - )                + x4 - x2           x4 -  r p - (1 -  )
                                                      1 - 1                                           1 - 1

                                          R
            = A 3 u (z3 (e))(1 - )            ( x2 - r p )
                                        1 - 1

                                                                   R
            + 4 u (z4 (e))( x4 - x2 ) x4 - r p - (1 - )                     .                            (A11)
                                                                 1 - 1

If we write:
                              (z3 ) := 3 u (z3 (e))( x2 - r p ) > 0,
             x
            y
and then     e   < 0 if and only if


  x        (z3 (e)) y3 (e) - 1-R
                                1 - 4 ( x4 - x2 ) u ( z4 ( e )) y4 ( e ) - 1-1
                                                                                   R
    >                                                                                       . (A12)
  y   (z3 (e)) (1 - ) 1- R
                          1   +   4 ( x 4 - x 2 ) u ( z 4 ( e )) x 4 -  r p - ( 1 -  )   R
                                                                                       1- 1


Notice that if x4  x2 then the RHS is dominated by

                                                   R
                                            y3 - 1- 1
                                                     R
                                                           .
                                           (1 -  ) 1- 1

        x
       y
Thus   e    < 0 if
                                          x               R
                                 y3 <       (1 -  ) + 1
                                          y             1 - 1
or, provided   x
              y < 1,
                                                 x R
                                          y3 <            .
                                                  y 1 - 1
Hence for the case x4  x2 it suffices to assume that rates of return on y-projects do not


                                                     56
exceed   x
         y    times the coupon on firm's unsecured borrowing.17
   Notice that if x4 is much smaller than x2 , the inequality (A12) is no longer guaranteed
                       x R
even when y3 <          y 1- 1 .   This is because if x4 << x2 the correlation between the payoffs
of the two kinds assets decreases and the value of diversification increases. In this case,
an increase in the payoff of y may cause an increase in the share of  x .
   To summarize, we have shown that if x2 and x4 are not too different, and y3 <
                                                        x
 x                    R               x                y
  y (1 -  ) + 1      1- 1 ,   then   e    > 0 and      e    < 0.


A.3      Variable Effort
   To set the stage for studying covenants, we further extend the model to allow for
variable effort of the entrepreneur. We continue with the four-state example in the above,
and we specify that the entrepreneur can exert effort w which decreases the probability
                                                                                           ~
of the bad state 1. The effect of effort w depends on the realization of a random variable µ
that takes values µ1 (with probability q) or µ2 > µ1 , and is independent of the realization
of the state. More precisely, the states have base probabilities   ¯ 1, ¯ 2, ¯ 3 and ¯ 4 , and if
an entrepreneur exerts effort w and µ j obtains, i (w, j) = ¯ i (1 + µ j w) for i = 2, 3, 4 and
consequently, 1 (w, j) =  ¯ 1 - µ j w (1 - ¯ 1 ).
   The entrepreneur's choices are made before µi is observed. There is a utility cost of
exerting effort given by (w), which satisfies  > 0,  > 0, and                   0. We assume
                                          ¯1
 (0) = 0, and that as w                  
                                      (1- 
                                            (w)  . This will guarantee a choice of w such
                                          ¯ 1 ) µ2
                                                   ,
that 0 < 1 (w, j) <     ¯ 1 . We will continue to make parametric assumptions such that the
entrepreneur only defaults on loans in state 1. We assume that w is contractible: condi-
tional on w lenders expect that with probability q, they will get the agreed coupon c with
probability (1 + µ1 w)(1 -      ¯ 1 ); with probability (1 - q) they will get c with probability
(1 + µ2 w)(1 - ¯ 1 ). Independence and risk-neutrality imply that lenders would require a
coupon that equals

                            R                R                      R
              c(w) =                =                   =                         ,
                       1 - E1 ( w )   (1 + µw)(1 - ¯ 1)   (1 + µw)(¯2 + ¯3 + ¯ 4)

where µ = qµ1 + (1 - q)µ2 . There is no loss in generality of choosing units so that µ = 1,
which we do from now on.
   Similarly, self-financed deposit insurance would imply that the entrepreneur will be
charged
                                        r                   r
                                                =
                                   1 - E1 ( w )   (1 + w)(¯2 + ¯3 + ¯ 4)
per unit of deposits D. Again if we assume r < R the entrepreneur would employ all the
exogenously available D, before choosing k > 0.
  17 Since                                                          R
             in the data  x  3y it suffices to assume that y3 < 3 1-  .
                                                                     1




                                                            57
   We continue to assume that the entrepreneur has CARA utility function u(z) = 1 -
exp(- Az) and maximizes:

                       [qi,1 (w) + (1 - q)i,2 (w)][u(zi (w))] - (w).                        (A13)
                       i

   Since u(0) = 0 and the realization of µ j and the realization of the state i are indepen-
dent, we may rewrite the objective as

                                   ¯ i (1 + w)[u(zi (w))] - (w),                            (A14)
                                    i

where zi is the payoff to the entrepreneur in state i > 1. Notice that given k = y +
 x (1 -  ) - e - D ,

                                               1          1
                  z i ( w ) - z i (0) =             -                    ( Rk + rD ),
                                           1 - 1 (0) 1 - E1 ( w )

                                  zi ( w )          ( Rk + rD )
                                           =                            > 0,
                                   w         (1 + w )2 ( ¯2 + ¯3 + ¯ 4)
and that
                           2 z i ( w )              ( Rk + rD )
                                       = - 2                            < 0.
                             w2              (1 + w )3 ( ¯2 + ¯3 + ¯ 4)
   Under the assumptions of the example, the entrepreneur defaults on repo in state
i = 3, and the FOCs are:

                                                          R                                     R
Fx = 2 u (z2 (w)) x2 - r p - (1 - )                               + 3 (w)u (z3 (w)) -(1 - )
                                                     1 - 1 ( w )                            1 - 1 ( w )
                                                             R
      + 4 (w)u (z4 (w))           x4 -  r p - (1 -  )                = 0,
                                                         1 - 1 ( w )
                                              R                                  R
Fy = 2 (w)u (z2 (w))              y2 -                  + 3 u (z3 (w)) y3 -
                                          1 - 1 ( w )                       1 - 1 ( w )
                                              R
      + 4 (w)u (z4 )(w)           y4 -                  = 0,
                                          1 - 1 ( w )
                                              ( Rk + rD )
Fw =       ¯i     u ( zi ) + u   ( zi )
                                        (1 + w)( ¯2 +   ¯3 + ¯ 4)
                                                                   -  (w) = 0.
           i >1


A.4    Covenants
   To introduce covenants, we assume that the entrepreneur has a non-pecuniary benefit
of b units of utility, if she holds control until output is produced and no default happens.
We also assume that after asset and debt choices are made, and w is chosen, a signal
with values in {1 , 2 } is observed. This signal is informative of the quality of the current
entrepreneur. The value of the signal is independent of the state i, and if 2 is observed,


                                                     58
then one learns that µ2 obtained. However, if 1 is realized, the probability that µ1
obtains is q > q, that is the ex-post probability of a weaker manager (i.e. one for which
µ1 obtains) is higher than the ex-ante probability q. Thus after observing the signal, the
probability of state 1 becomes:

                                        1 (w, 2 ) = ¯ 1 - µ2 w (1 - ¯ 1 ),

                                        1 (w, 1 ) = ¯ 1 - µ w (1 - ¯ 1 ),

where µ  q µ1 + (1 - q )µ2 < 1. In particular, the ex-ante probability of observing 1 is
q
q .
      The role of covenants is as follows: if a covenant is present, lenders can replace
management after observing the signal . Under new management, the probability of
state 1 (where default occurs) becomes instead,

                                      1 (w, 2 ) = ¯ 1 -  f (1 - ¯ 1 ),                                 (A15)
                                      1 (w, 1 ) = ¯ 1 -  f (1 - ¯ 1 ).                                 (A16)

The parameter  f denotes the quality of the new management, or more broadly, the
ability for lenders to intervene and restructure the firm. The old entrepreneur keeps her
equity claims, and will get compensated in states i > 1. However, the old entrepreneur
loses non-monetary compensation b, which now goes to the new management. Gains
to lenders are the gains from lowering the probability of the worst state. The expected
gain from changing managers is: ( f - µ2 w)(1 -   ¯ 1 )c when signal 2 is observed and
  f - µ w (1 -   ¯ 1 )c if 1 is observed.
      The proof of Proposition 2 is straightforward. Proposition 2.1 implies that18
                
                                      R
                 c1 ( w ) =   (1- ¯ 1 )(1+ f )
                                                                                       if w < w1
                
                              q              R                 q            R
       c ( w ) = c2 ( w ) =   q   (1-    ¯ 1 )(1+ f )
                                                        + 1-   q   (1- ¯ 1 )(1+µ2 w)
                                                                                       if w1  w < w2
                
                                     R
                                                                                       if w  w2 .
                c (w) =
                  3           (1- ¯ 1 )(1+w)


      The coupon function is continuous on w. Conditional on a choice of w, a manager
      18 When
            w  w2 priors are updated after observing the signal, but the ex-ante expected ability, by the
law of iterated expectations, is still µ.




                                                          59
would achieve utility,
          
           U1 (w) = (1 +  f ) sup{x ,y} ¯ 2 u(z2 (c1 (w))) +    ¯ 3 u(z3 (c1 (w))) + ¯ 4 u(z4 (c1 (w)))
          
           -(w) if w < w1
          
          U2 (w) = 1 + q  f + 1 - q µ2 w sup
          
                                                                ¯ 2 u(z2 (c2 (w))) + ¯ 3 u(z3 (c2 (w)))
          
                         q            q              {  x , y } 
U (w) =
                                     q
           +¯ 4 u(z4 (c2 (w))) + 1 - q b - (w) if w1  w < w2
          
          U3 (w) = (1 + w) sup{x ,y} (
          
                                       ¯ 2 u(z2 (c3 (w))) + ¯ 3 u(z3 (c3 (w))) + ¯ 4 u(z4 (c3 (w)))
          
          +b - (w) if w  w2 ,
          


where ( x , y ) satisfy for each state i = 2, 3, 4,

           x  max{0, xi - r p } +  x (1 - ) xi + y yi  c(w)[(1 - ) x + y - e].

That is, the entrepreneur does not default on debt in these states. Notice that since
       f             q                      q
w1 =   µ2 ,   then   q    (1 +  f ) + 1 -   q   (1 + µ2 w1 ) = (1 +  f ). Since the coupon function
is continuous in w, this implies that the expected utility is continuous at w1 if b = 0.
                              f
Similarly, since w2 =         µ   in this case, then:

         q                 q                               q                  q         f
           (1 +  f ) + 1 -              (1 + µ2 w2 ) =       (1 +  f ) + 1 -     (1 + µ2 )
         q                 q                              q                  q          µ
                                                                    q    q -q
                                                        = 1 + f        +      µ2
                                                                   q       q
                                                               f
                                                        = 1+      ( q µ + ( q - q ) µ2 )
                                                               µq
                                                              f
                                                        = 1+      [q (qµ1 + (1 - q)µ2 )]
                                                              µq
                                                                1
                                                        = 1 + f
                                                                µ
                                                        = 1 + w2 .

Hence U is also continuous w2 when b = 0, and the jumps at w1 and w2 are positive
if b > 0. Since c1 (w) is independent of w, U1 is maximized by setting w = 0. The
                                                         ¯ 2 := sup
entrepreneur exerts no effort and is always replaced. If U          {w1 w<w2 } U2 ( w ) and
U¯ 3 := sup     U3 (w) then,
              { w2  w }

      ¯ 2 and U
   1. U       ¯ 3 increase with b and so does U
                                              ¯3 -U
                                                  ¯ 2 . In particular, when private benefits
       b are large, the entrepreneur will work hard and not be replaced.

   2. A decrease in  f decreases w1 and w2 but the effect on w2 is larger.

   For Proposition 3, we observe that since z (0) > 0 and  (0) = 0, there exist                        >0
                                                                                           µ2
such that U3 (w) is increasing for w  [0, ], and consequently U3 ( ) >                     µ (1 +   )U3 (0),

                                                        60
for some  > 0, and we may always choose  < µ . Hence for  f < , b  0,

      U1 (w) < U1 (0) = (1 +  f )(U3 (0) - b) < U3 ( ) - b         sup           U3 (w), and
                                                              { w  w2 (  f ) }



                   µ2               q    µ2                             q
          U2 (w)      U1 (w) + (1 - )b <    (1 +  f )(U3 (0) - b) + (1 - )b
                   µ                q    µ                              q
                                     q
                 < U3 ( ) - b + (1 - )b      sup     U3 (w).
                                    q          2
                                         {ww ( )}f




A.5    Simulation
   We provide some simple numerical simulation examples below. We use the utility
function: u(z) = 1 - e-·z (CARA).
   For the analysis of asset composition and debt composition, we use the following
parameters:

   ·  = 3.

   ·  = 0.9. r p = 1.03.

   · D = 3.5. r = 1.03.

   · x2 = x4 = 1.05.

   ·  = 0.01. y2 = 1.055 + 0.01e; y3 = 1.135 + 0.01e; y4 = 1.185 + 0.01e.

   · 1 = 0.03; 2 = 0.38; 3 = 0.01; 4 = 0.58.
                       R
   · R = 1.06. c =    1- 1    1.093.

   We obtain the following results. As shown in Table A1, Panel B, the slope of the share
of  x in total assets with respect to log(e) is close to the findings in Table 3 column (1);
the slope of k normalized by total assets with respect to log(e) is close to the findings in
Table 4 column (2).




                                            61
             Table A1: Asset and Liability Composition for Different Levels of e
This table shows simulation results for different levels of e. In Panel A, we use four example values of e
(listed in column (1)). Columns (2) and (3) show the corresponding amount of assets  x and y . Column
(4) shows the amount of going-concern debt k. Columns (5) to (8) show the ratio of the pledgeable value
of discrete assets ( x ), other assets (y ), going-concern debt k, and deposits D as a fraction of total assets,
respectively. Column (9) shows the ratio of deposits to equity. In Panel B, we show the slope of asset and
debt composition with respect to log(e).

                                                  Panel A. Examples
                                                          x            y          k       D     D
                       e    x      y             k       x +y         x +y      x +y    x +y    e
                      (1)   (2)    (3)          (4)      (5)           (6)      (7)     (8)     (9)
                      0.5   7.25   4.38     1.21       0.5611        0.3765   0.1041   0.3007    7
                      0.6   7.31   4.51     1.25       0.5565        0.3815   0.1054   0.2960   5.8
                      0.7   7.37   4.64     1.29       0.5521        0.3865   0.1070   0.2913    5
                      0.8   7.43   4.78     1.33       0.5476        0.3915   0.1089   0.2865   4.3


                                          Panel B. Slope against log(e)
                                                                       x         k
                                           e          log(e)          x +y     x +y
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)      (4)
                                      0.5             -0.6931    0.5611       0.1041
                                      0.8             -0.2231    0.5476       0.1089
                                                        0.47     -0.0135      0.0048
                                     Slope                        -0.029       0.01
                                     Data                         -0.014       0.008


    We also provide a simple example of the model incorporating covenants. We set the
effort cost function (w) = 100w2 and use the following parameters:

   ·  = 3.

   ·  = 0.9. r p = 1.03.

   · D = 0 (for simplicity). r = 1.03.

   · x2 = x4 = 1.05.

   ·  = 0.01. y2 = 1.055 + 0.01e; y3 = 1.135 + 0.01e; y4 = 1.185 + 0.01e.

   · ¯ 1 = 0.03; ¯ 2 = 0.38; ¯ 3 = 0.01; ¯ 4 = 0.58.

   · R = 1.06.

   · µ1 = 0.5; µ2 = 1.6; q  0.545; m = 0.

    We obtain the following results (where U i denotes maximum utility for the expected
utility in region i and similar for other variables), where we evaluate the sensitivity of
the solution to parameters  f and b:



                                                                62
   Table A2: Optimal effort and Allocation Choices for Difference Values of  f and b
This table shows outcomes for example values of  f , which indicates whether creditors can find good
replacement for management. Bold text denotes the optimal choice (i.e., the choice that generates highest
utility).

                                                Panel A. b = 0
                        f       w1      w2      U 1     w 1   U 2      w 2     U 3     w 3
                        (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)   (6)      (7)     (8)     (9)
                       0.005   0.003   0.009    0.858    0    0.862   0.0104   0.867   0.017
                       0.007   0.004   0.012    0.864    0    0.865   0.0106   0.867   0.017
                       0.008   0.005   0.014    0.867    0    0.867   0.0107   0.867   0.017
                        0.01   0.006   0.018    0.873    0    0.871   0.0108   0.867   0.017
                       0.012   0.007   0.021    0.879    0    0.875   0.0110   0.867   0.017


                                               Panel B. b = 0.006
                        f       w1      w2      U 1     w 1   U 2      w 2     U 3     w 3
                        (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)   (6)      (7)     (8)     (9)
                       0.005   0.003   0.009    0.858    0    0.864   0.0104   0.873   0.017
                       0.007   0.004   0.012    5.549    0    0.868   0.0106   0.873   0.017
                       0.008   0.005   0.014    0.867    0    0.870   0.0107   0.873   0.017
                        0.01   0.006   0.018    0.873    0    0.874   0.0108   0.873   0.017
                       0.012   0.007   0.021    0.879    0    0.877   0.0110   0.873   0.017



   From Table A2, we see that as  f increases, the utility becomes higher in regions
where management replacement occurs. For low values of  f , never replacing cur-
rent management tends to dominate (therefore covenants are not useful). Similarly, by
changing the non-pecuniary benefits b, we can also change the optimal effort choice. In
particular, for higher values of b, it is less likely that the manager will chose zero effort
(given by region 1).
   We also visualize the results more directly in Figure A1. Panel A shows the case for
b = 0 and we vary  f (x-axis). Panel B shows a higher level of b in dashed lines.




                                                        63
   Figure A1: Optimal Effort and Allocation Choices for Different Values of  f and b
This figure shows the utility obtained under different arrangements, for each level of  f (x-axis). Panel A
shows the case for b = 0 and Panel B shows the case for b = 0.006. The blue line (V1) is the value for case 1
in Proposition 2 (always replacing management), the yellow line (V2) is the value for case 2 in Proposition
2 (conditionally replacing management), and the green line (V3) is the value for case 3 in Proposition 2
(never replacing management).

                                              Panel A. b = 0




                                            Panel B. b = 0.006




                                                     64
