                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INSURANCE AND PROPAGATION IN VILLAGE NETWORKS

                                         Cynthia Kinnan
                                     Krislert Samphantharak
                                       Robert Townsend
                                     Diego A. Vera Cossio

                                      Working Paper 28089
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28089


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank numerous colleagues and seminar audiences for helpful suggestions. Townsend
gratefully acknowledges research support from the University of Thai Chamber of Commerce,
the Thailand Research Fund, the Bank of Thailand, and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) (grant number R01 HD027638).
Opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Thailand, the Inter-American
Development Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cynthia Kinnan, Krislert Samphantharak, Robert Townsend, and Diego A. Vera
Cossio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurance and Propagation in Village Networks
Cynthia Kinnan, Krislert Samphantharak, Robert Townsend, and Diego A. Vera Cossio
NBER Working Paper No. 28089
November 2020
JEL No. D13,D22,I15,O1,Q12

                                          ABSTRACT

In village economies, insurance networks are key to smoothing shocks, while production
networks can propagate them. The interplay of these networks is crucial. We show that a
significant health expenditure shock to one household propagates to other linked households via
supply-chain and labor networks. Imperfectly insured households adjust production decisions---
cutting input spending and reducing labor hiring---affecting households with whom they trade
inputs and labor. Household businesses proximate to shocked households in the supply chain
network experience reduced local sales, and those proximate in the labor network experience a
lower probability of working locally. As a result, indirectly shocked households' earnings and
consumption fall. These declines persist over several years because networks are rigid:
households appear unable to form new linkages when existing links experience negative shocks.
Propagation is a function of access to insurance networks: well-insured households do not cut
spending when hit by shocks, leading to minimal propagation. A simple back-of-the-envelope
exercise suggests that the total magnitude of indirect effects may be larger than the direct effects
and that social (village-level) gains from expanding safety nets such as health insurance may be
substantially higher than private (household-level) gains.

Cynthia Kinnan                                   Robert Townsend
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics, E52-538
Tufts University                                 MIT
8 Upper Campus Road                              50 Memorial Drive
Medford, MA 02155                                Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                         and NBER
cynthia.kinnan@tufts.edu                         rtownsen@mit.edu

Krislert Samphantharak                           Diego A. Vera Cossio
School of Global Policy and Strategy             Research Department RES/RES
University of California San Diego               Inter-American Development Bank
9500 Gilman Drive                                1300 New York Ave.
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                          Washington, DC 20001
krislert@ucsd.edu                                diegove@iadb.org
1    Introduction

Households in developing countries are both consumers and producers (Banerjee and Duflo 2007;
Samphantharak and Townsend 2010). In addition to purchasing goods and services for consump-
tion, they exchange productive inputs with each other (Braverman and Stiglitz, 1982). These inputs
flow through local supply chain networks (networks of households buying and selling output, raw
material or intermediate goods) and labor networks (networks of households providing and hiring
labor).
    Households are also exposed to shocks, such as health, weather and business demand, affect-
ing both consumption needs and production. These may be smoothed by transfers or loans from
other households, via self-insurance, or not at all. Linkages between households mean that what
happens to one household has the potential to propagate to others, too. This paper documents
that this potential is empirically relevant. Local networks of gifts and loans (which we call "finan-
cial networks") provide insurance, as previous work has shown (e.g., Udry 1994; Townsend 1994;
Samphantharak and Townsend 2018). On the other hand, when financial networks fall short of full
insurance, supply chain and labor networks propagate shocks.
    We leverage a unique dataset to examine network effects--both positive (insurance) and negative
(propagation). The Townsend Thai data, constructed from 14 years of monthly panel surveys
to households in rural and peri-urban Thai villages, allow us to identify idiosyncratic shocks to
households' budgets. Using detailed information regarding gifts, loans and transactions across
family-operated businesses, we are able to observe labor, supply chain, and financial networks, and
study their evolution over time and their role in mitigating and/or propagating shocks.
    Of course, shocks to household endowments are not typically exogenous, which makes it chal-
lenging to empirically identify their causal effects. To overcome this challenge, we exploit variation
in the timing of episodes of sudden increases in health spending and construct counterfactuals for
shocked households using households that experience similar shocks, but at different points in time
(Fadlon and Nielsen, 2019). These sudden increases in health spending are idiosyncratic shocks
to household endowments, which constitute exogenous and inescapable obligations that generate
pressure on household budgets. We show that, conditional on ever experiencing a health spending
shock, their timing is exogenous and uncorrelated across households. We also show that the shocks
are severe--they are twice as large as average per capita food consumption and coincide with sharp
increases in inpatient care.



                                                  1
Summary of Results

We first analyze the direct effects of idiosyncratic shocks on household consumption, production,
and financing decisions. We find that directly-shocked households are able to smooth the shock on
the consumption side. We find neither significant nor substantial changes in non-health consump-
tion for these households in the aftermath of a shock. This consumption-side smoothing is achieved,
in part, through intra-village insurance. Shocked households were more likely to receive transfers
from other households in the village, constituting a 29% increase in total incoming transfers rela-
tive to the pre-shock periods. This result highlights the importance of local financial networks in
providing insurance against idiosyncratic shocks.
      However, while local financial networks provide insurance, this informal insurance is incom-
plete.1 As a result, in order to fully smooth consumption, shocked entrepreneurs reduce business
spending: in essence, financing the shock out of the business budget. They substantially reduce
costs (23% decrease), and almost entirely cut their demand for external labor (79% decrease).
This decrease in productive activities leads to an average 12% reduction in revenues, relative to
the pre-period. Shocks to the health of prime-aged members could also affect labor endowments;
however, we show that even shocks to children and elderly household members affect production.
Thus, shocks to households' consumption needs affect production-side decisions, in violation of the
separation theorem (Benjamin, 1992).
      The impacts of health shocks are related to incompleteness in insurance and labor markets.
Shocks to households with limited access to informal insurance (that is, with limited participation
in gift and loan networks during the year preceding the shock) reduce costs and revenues by 34%
and 27%, respectively. In contrast, for households with higher informal insurance participation,
these decreases are almost fully attenuated. Thus, households that are not well-integrated into local
informal insurance networks are most vulnerable and so, in turn, are their network connections.
Additionally, the declines in production are larger when the shocks also affect household labor
endowments and thus are unlikely to be fully insured by local financial networks. Namely, shocks
related to the illness of prime-age household members (i.e., financial and labor endowment shocks)
are associated with significant declines in hired labor and business costs, while shocks affecting
elderly or children (i.e., mostly financial shocks) affect business revenues but do not significantly
affect hired labor or costs. Thus there appears to be a missing market for individual-specific labor
  1
      In the half-year of the shock, less than half of the spending need is met by transfers: see Figure 3.




                                                            2
inputs into household production, so naturally, the separation hypothesis fails.
       We next examine the indirect impact of these shocks: the effect on other local businesses and
workers. Our empirical strategy relies on variation in the proximity of a given household to the
shocked household through pre-period economic networks. We undertake a generalized difference-
in-difference analysis: comparing changes in outcomes before and after each shock, between more-
exposed households (i.e., those that are closer to a shocked household in the pre-period network)
and less-exposed households (those farther away). Closer households, with greater exposure, see
larger falls in total transactions (a 21% decline for a unit change in closeness), and therefore a fall in
income (12% decline for a unit change in closeness). They do not experience a change in incoming
gifts. Given a fall in income and no offsetting change in gifts, consumption falls (4% decline for
a unit change in closeness). These indirect effects are largely driven by shocks to underinsured
households, suggesting that, by protecting directly hit households, local financial networks can also
reduce or prevent propagation.
       Propagation occurs in a context of rigid networks: suppliers struggle to find new customers
when their clients suffer a shock, and workers struggle to find new jobs when existing employers face
shocks. We document that links are quite persistent: ceteris paribus, households that transacted
at baseline are substantially more likely to transact ten years later, relative to households that
did not transact at baseline. Kinship relationships are strong predictors of trade, highlighting the
importance of time-invariant contract-enforcement barriers to trade across households (Ahlin and
Townsend, 2007; Johnson et al., 2002). Frictions leading to rigid labor networks are particularly
important in the Thai setting, as proximity to the shocked household via the labor market network
is most strongly associated with indirect effects on income and consumption.2 These indirect effects
persist even two years after the shock, suggesting that, in a context of rigid networks, the recovery
from indirect shocks can be sluggish.
       As expected, the magnitude of the indirect effect experienced by a single household is smaller
than the magnitude of the effect felt by the directly-hit household (i.e., the one experiencing the
health shock). But, the indirect effects hit many more households. As a result, a simple back-
of-the-envelope exercise suggests that the total village-level magnitude of the indirect effects of a
given shock may be as large or larger than the direct effects of that shock, with a multiplier (i.e.,
   2
       Evidence of frictional slack in goods and labor markets is also shown by Egger et al. (2019) in the context of
rural Kenya and by Breza et al. (2020) for rural India. Chandrasekhar et al. (2020) present a model of network-based
hiring arising from informational frictions.



                                                           3
a ratio of the total indirect fall in consumption to the direct reduction in business spending) of
approximately 1.5.


Contributions to the Literature

Previous studies have provided evidence of non-separability of household consumption (labor sup-
ply) and production (input or labor demand) decisions in developing countries.3 We build on
this literature by showing that idiosyncratic shocks to household spending can affect not only the
production decisions of shocked households but also those of other (non-shocked) households. Our
findings emphasize the dual role of networks in understanding non-separability and its consequences:
risk-sharing networks provide insurance, but production networks increase the risk of propagation.
       In turn, we complement the empirical literature studying the firm-to-firm propagation of re-
gional or sectoral shocks through production networks.4 We leverage our unique data and the
context of family-owned firms (micro and small enterprises) to show that, in line with recent
macroeconomic models linking granular shocks to aggregate fluctuations (Gabaix, 2011; Acemoglu
et al., 2012; Farhi and Baqaee, 2020), granular shocks to health spending affect family enterprises
and propagate to other local firms. Our ability to focus on local and granular shocks is important
as a large share of firms across the world are small and family-operated (Beck et al., 2005; Banerjee
and Duflo, 2007; La Porta et al., 1999; Bertrand et al., 2008), and thus exposed to shocks affecting
family endowments. The fact that we uncover a multiplier (i.e., a ratio of indirect to direct effects
stemming from a change in demand) that is similar to multiplier estimates for demand shocks in
the US (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Su´
                                        arez Serrato and Wingender, 2016) and in Kenya (Eg-
ger et al., 2019) suggests that our results have applicability beyond the specific context of Thai
villages, and that, in settings of imperfect insurance and rigid supply-chain and labor networks,
idiosyncratic shocks can lead to similar multipliers as those generated by aggregate shocks.
       This paper also contributes to the literature studying local economic networks in developing
countries (e.g., Bramoull´
                         e et al. (2016); Chuang and Schechter (2015); Munshi (2014)). Previous
studies have analyzed the ability of households to use local networks to buffer shocks (Townsend,
   3
       See for example Benjamin 1992; Dillon and Barrett 2017; Dillon et al. 2019; Samphantharak and Townsend 2010;
LaFave and Thomas 2016; Samphantharak and Townsend 2018, among others.
  4
    There is a growing literature in international trade studying the propagation of shocks through production
networks in the aftermath of natural disasters (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Carvalho et al., 2020), trade shocks
(Tintelnot et al., 2018; Huneeus, 2019), and sectoral or regional shocks (Caliendo et al., 2017).




                                                          4
1994; Kinnan and Townsend, 2012; Angelucci and De Giorgi, 2009)5 ; we build on these studies
by showing that access to informal insurance not only mitigates the direct impact of idiosyncratic
shocks, but also reduces the degree of propagation to other households. This result underscores the
importance of expanding safety nets in developing countries. Studies analyzing the direct effects of
health shocks on households highlight the potential household-level gains from expanding insurance
(Gertler and Gruber, 2002; Genoni, 2012; Fadlon and Nielsen, 2015; Dercon and Krishnan, 2000);
however, to our knowledge the spillover benefits of such programs via reduced shock propagation,
have not previously been acknowledged. Moreover, our findings show that, from a methodological
perspective, local spillovers should be taken into account when analyzing the incidence of both
consumption and production-side shocks:6 households who do not directly experience a shock are
cannot be used as a control group without understanding if and how they may be indirectly affected
by the shock.
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the dataset and the process to elicit
local networks. Section 3 discusses the steps to compute the idiosyncratic shocks. Section 4 analyzes
the direct effects of the shocks on business performance and labor earnings, while Section 5 analyzes
the indirect effects. Section 6 analyzes potential explanations for propagation. Section 7 offers a
simple back-of-the-envelope calculation to put the effects in context, and Section 8 concludes.


2        Context and Data

2.1        Characterization of the environment

Our approach to empirically studying the direct and indirect effects of idiosyncratic shocks, and
considering possible policy responses, rests on the standard theoretical characterization of village
economies. This characterization delivers several testable implications.
        The timeline for production is as in Moll (2014) and Samphantharak and Townsend (2018):
given previously accumulated capital k and current shocks z , a household running a firm decides
on hiring labor and purchasing intermediate inputs to produce output at the end of the period,
    5
        Other studies have documented the crucial role of local networks in the adoption of technologies (Beaman et al.,
2018; Banerjee et al., 2013; Emerick, 2018), reducing adverse selection through peer referrals (Beaman and Magruder,
2012), the diffusion of information (Banerjee et al., 2019) and overcoming enforcement problems (Chandrasekhar et al.,
2018).
   6
     Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) make the important point that shocks propagate via risk sharing but, to our
knowledge the scope for propagation via production networks has not been highlighted.



                                                             5
subject to potential collateral constraints on financing. The household-as-firm is forward-looking
and maximizes current plus discounted expected utility over consumption and leisure. In this
setting, expenditure shocks are interpreted as an exogenous and inescapable obligation that hits
during the production period, at the time of intermediate and labor decisions. Instead of operating
a firm, the household can supply wage labor, as is standard in the endogenous occupation choice
literature (Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt, 2000; Buera et al., 2011). One can refer to profits or wage
earnings as (endogenous) income.7
       The across-period problem considers capital accumulation, with k = k , and financial assets a.
However, unlike Bewley (1981) or Aiyagari (1994), risk-sharing transfers can take place to hedge
ex ante shocks z . For example, in Samphantharak and Townsend (2018), transfers are determined
as a solution to the full risk-sharing problem of a "planner" determining gifts and investment. As
in Silva et al. (2019), households invest in real assets for which there is a market each period and
in financial assets.
       Another key feature of the environment is the set of agents a household-as-firm can transact
with in the local markets. In Chandrasekhar et al. (2018), households experience participation
shocks which determine whether in a given period they can participate in insurance networks
(paying a premium or receiving indemnities) and trade in markets for safe and risky assets, or not.8
Participation could be determined by exogenous shocks, or rather modeled as endogenous, e.g., with
moral hazard if there is an effort cost to joining and/or costly participation under noisy ex ante
signals of within-period income. We go a bit further here and conceptualize this as a multi-period
problem with correlated costs.
       Likewise, supply-chain network decisions can be viewed as endogenous choices that entail a
fixed cost of interacting with new firms.9 Thus, supply-chain networks may be thin and persistent.
Likewise, for wage labor, we have in mind that there is a cost to forming new employment contracts.
Both types of costs could either subtract from economic resources or could be non-pecuniary.
Finally, there may be another production sector a household can choose: selling at small economy-
   7
       In practice, a household consists of multiple members, with multiple sources of income, but this is easily incor-
porated as a household with a unitary utility function engaged in multiple activities.
   8
     Households that can participate in markets when markets are thin are most valued in terms of their Pareto
weight, receiving higher than average consumption.
   9
     Throughout the paper we adopt the terminology of the literature studying supply chain networks. We refer to
households providing inputs or labor to shocked households as upstream households. Likewise, we refer to households
purchasing inputs or labor from shocked households as downstream households.




                                                            6
fixed (given) prices, though this might have lower returns.
Conceptual Framework for Welfare. Community solutions to such a planner's problem can
be termed constrained-optimal as they consider the various possible constraints. However, there
may be scope for improvement. In Chandrasekhar et al. (2018), welfare can be improved by
optimally-targeted liquidity injections,10 in effect, allowing increased insurance. Potential spillovers
or externalities are internalized in the planner's problem. Here again, there may be scope for
improvement if instead the village economy is viewed as consisting of competitive markets. In that
case, pecuniary and non-pecuniary externalities would make competitive equilibria not constrained
optimal.11 The various costs outlined above could be brought down by broader participation in
cross-village insurance platforms and non-relationship-based matching platforms for production and
labor. We see in the data that membership in networks is correlated with kin, and so non-kin are
particularly vulnerable even within a village.
      Exact welfare statements and particular remedies require additional steps in modeling and take
us beyond the fact-finding mission of this paper. We should note, however, that adjustments can
be costly in utility terms. Consumption, which is steady, may be achieved by costly mechanisms
(Chetty and Looney, 2006). Households may have diversified income sources ex ante at the expense
of higher returns, or ex post as a consequence of shocks (Morduch, 1995). We use the loss of income
as a back-of-the-envelope measure of spillovers, but this is only a proxy for impact and not welfare.
Empirical implications. Our characterization of the economic environment suggests several
testable implications. First, the extent to which households can access state contingent assets
(gifts and loans) for risk smoothing will determine the extent to which they need to smooth shocks
via business disinvestment; that is, the extent to which the separation theorem fails. Secondly, the
nature of the shock--­whether only affecting available cash on hand, or also affecting the household
labor endowment--­will also affect the extent of separation failure since pure cash shocks may be
more insurable than shocks to labor endowments.
      Turning to implications for indirectly shocked households, the extent of propagation is expected
to depend, first, on the households' proximity to the shocked household in the pre-shock network,
which determines its exposure to the shock and, second, on the extent of network rigidity, which
determines a household's ability to find new buyers or employers in the network. Additionally, the
extent of propagation may depend on whether a household was connected to the directly shocked
 10
      A new measure of financial centrality is used to determine who would optimally get these, see footnote 8.
 11
      Remedies consist of better market design (Kilenthong and Townsend, 2011; Jain and Townsend, 2014).




                                                          7
household via the labor market network, supply chain network, or both, since the two networks
may exhibit differential degrees of frictions such as moral hazard and, in turn, differential rigidity.


2.2       Household data

The data we use in this study come from the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey. The survey follows
a sample of households from 16 randomly selected villages in four provinces in Thailand: Chacho-
engsao and Lopburi provinces in the Central region and Buriram and Sisaket in the Northeastern
region. On average, the survey covers approximately 45 households per village, representing 42%
percent of the village population.12 The baseline interview was conducted from July to August
1998, collecting information on the demographic and financial situation of the households as well
as ecological data of the villages. The subsequent monthly updates began in September 1998 and
had continued through November 2017.13 The sample in this paper covers the period between
September 1998 and December 2012. We focus our analysis on the subset of 509 households that
responded to the interview throughout all survey waves.
       Table 1 characterizes the sample households in terms of their demographic, financial and busi-
ness characteristics. Consistent with our characterization of village economies, it shows that while
households derive income mostly from family farms, they also operate off-farm businesses and pro-
vide labor to other households or businesses. In addition, 13% of their total income comes from the
receipt of government transfers and/or gifts from other households. Out of their income, households
tend to allocate around 50% of their resources to consumption, and use the remaining resources to
accumulate assets, which are evenly distributed between liquid and fixed assets. In terms of access
to financial markets, on a given year, 83% of the households report borrowing from any source,
48% from formal or quasi-formal financial institutions,14 and 30% from personal lenders, including
relatives.
  12
       There is one exception: one sampled village in Sisaket has a total population less than 45, so all households are
included in the survey.
  13
     For more detail about the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey, see Samphantharak and Townsend (2010).
  14
     There are different types of financial institutions operating in these markets. The most prominent institution is the
Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC). Community-driven institutions such as cooperatives,
production credit groups and village funds also an important source of loans in the village.




                                                            8
2.3       Networks data

The Townsend Thai Monthly Survey contains detailed information on transactions among house-
holds and captures different types of economic inter-linkages. During each survey wave, intervie-
wees identify any and all households in the village with whom they have conducted a given type of
transaction.15 We aggregate the monthly transaction data by year to elicit three types of village
networks, for each year in the sample. First, we recovered information regarding intra-village finan-
cial networks, which include the provision and receipt of gifts and loans. Second, we recovered the
supply chain networks that capture transactions of output, inputs and intermediate goods across
businesses of households in the same village. Third, we also recovered labor networks that capture
employer-employee relationships across households in the same village. Finally, as the baseline
survey asks each interviewee to list all their first-degree relatives living in the village, we are able
to elicit time-invariant baseline kinship networks.16
       Figure 1 depicts different networks for a sample village. It suggests a significant degree of
variation in the number of households interacting in different markets. The financial network
appears rather thin. In contrast, there appears to be a great degree of interconnection across
households in the supply chain and labor networks.
       Of course, depictions of one village are only suggestive. Panel C of Table 1 shows average
participation across the sample as a whole. On average, 35% of the households in the sample
participate in the local financial networks in a given year--i.e., give or receive at least one gift or
loan from other households in the village. Just under half (48%) of the households transact in
the local village supply-chain network by transacting inputs and final output, and 62% provide or
purchase labor to/from other households in the village. Out of these networks, households seem to
be particularly well connected to local labor networks. On average, households transact with three
  15
       The set of transactions include the relinquishment of assets, purchases or sales of inputs or final goods, the
provision of paid and unpaid labor, and giving and receiving gifts and loans.
  16
     As it is usually the case in networks based on survey instead of census data (Chandrasekhar and Lewis, 2017),
our networks may look thinner than the networks that would be elicited using census data (unavailable to us). For
instance, suppose that in the population network, household i is connected to j through connections with households
k and h, such that i  k  h  j . Suppose that households i and j are in the survey sample but households k
and h are not. While we are able to recover the links between household i and k and households h and j , we would
not be able to recover the links between households k and h. As a result, i and j would appear unconnected in
the sampled network when they are in fact indirectly connected. Thus, we would be underestimating the distance
between households i and j . We discuss the implications of this source of bias for our research design in Section 5.




                                                           9
different households during a year. Households also tend to participate in several networks, in a
given period. For instance, among those that trade on financial networks, over 60% also transact
in local supply-chain networks and over 70% of them transact in local labor markets. Over 77%
of households transacting in the village supply-chain networks also sell or purchase labor locally,
and 45% trade in local financial markets. Likewise, over 59% and 43% of households that buy or
provide labor locally transact in the supply-chain and financial village networks. In addition, as
we discuss in the next section, local kinship networks also overlap with these transaction-based
networks.


2.4   Rigidities in local networks

Our characterization of the village economy suggests that costs related to the creation of new links
may limit the participation of some households in local networks. Indeed, Panel C of Table 1
shows that while an significant share of households transacts in the village networks, there are
also households that do not participate in the networks. There is evidence from other contexts
suggesting that market frictions may prevent transactions across businesses. For instance, Johnson
et al. (2002) finds that access to adequate institutional infrastructure (e.g., well-functioning courts)
encouraged business owners to try new suppliers in post-Communist countries. In the Thai setting,
Ahlin and Townsend (2007) provide evidence highlighting the importance of social ties and local
sanctions in the context of joint-liability loans, for which commitment is crucial. Other sources of
frictions may include product specificity (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016), or barriers to trade related
to racial/ethnic differences of owners of small businesses (Aaronson et al., 2004).
   If the aforementioned barriers are empirically important, one should observe a large degree of
persistence in the economic networks. To test for rigidities in the local networks, we construct a
dyadic dataset including indicators of whether each pair of sample households (dyads) transacted
in year t either in the local goods, labor or financial market. We then use this dataset to estimate
the following model:



                Linki,j,t =Linki,j,t-1 + 1 Kinshipi,j + 2 Demographic distance i,j

                            + 3 Net-Worth distance i,j + v,t + i + j +       i,j,t                  (1)

where Linki,j,t is an indicator of whether households i and j transacted in period t. Kinshipi,j is an
indicator that takes the value of 1 when households i and j share a direct link in the local kinship

                                                  10
network (e.g., first-degree relatives), which is measured during the baseline survey in 1998.17 We
include controls for distance with respect to demographic characteristics and a measure of distance
between each pair of households based on baseline net worth (e.g., total assets net of liabilities).18
Finally, we also include household-fixed effects. The parameter of interest is , which captures the
persistence of the economic interactions between each pair of sample households.
       Table 2 presents estimates of equation (1). There is an important degree of persistence in
the labor-market and supply chain networks, with raw auto-correlation coefficients of 0.46 and
0.42 (see column (1) in each sub-panel). These are substantially higher than that of the financial
network (0.26). In the case of the labor market and the supply chain networks, having transacted
during the previous period explains one-fifth of the overall variation in the current probability of
trading. This pattern contrasts sharply with the case of the transactions in the financial markets
(gifts and loans) as transactions in period t - 1 only explain 7% of the overall variation in the
probability of transacting at t. One explanation is that financial networks are less active, and
are probably responding to either unexpected business opportunities or shocks. We explore this
premise in Section 4. Persistence remains substantial after controlling for village-year fixed effects,
suggesting that economic linkages respond mostly to within-village variation (see column (2) in
each sub-panel).
       In columns (3) and (4), we analyze whether persistence is related to kinship relationships,
differences in demographic characteristics or differences in endowments (net worth). Although, in
all three networks, controlling for baseline kinship links reduces the persistence coefficients, they
are still high. Persistence does not seem to respond to including measures of differences in terms
of demographic characteristics or initial wealth. In all cases, pairs that share kinship connections
are 10 percentage points more likely to trade. The probability of trade in the supply chain and
labor networks does not respond to differences in distance or wealth between the two households.
In contrast, the probability of trading in the local financial network increases when households
are different in terms of demographic characteristics, but decreases when there are differences in
baseline wealth in the pair. This pattern highlights two features of local financial networks. First,
among those households with similar wealth, households that differ in demographic characteristics
  17
       Two households share a link if they are first-degree relatives (including parents-in-law).
  18
       Demographic distance is measured as the euclidean norm of a vector of household attributes capturing household
size, gender and age composition, as well as average age and education corresponding to members of the household
at baseline. We then take logs of the resulting norm. Net worth distance is constructed by taking logs of the squared
net-worth difference within each pair.



                                                          11
are more likely to transact, suggesting that one motive for trading is diversification, as shock type
and occurrence may vary with demographics. Second, similarly wealthy households are more likely
to trade, which suggest that, although diversification takes place, it is restricted to household pairs
for whom insurance is more likely to be actuarially fair.
         In sum, the labor-market and supply chain networks exhibit a striking degree of persistence
over time. One implication of this persistence is that the effects of shocks which propagate via
these networks may be quite persistent, an implication that we test in Section 5.


3         Constructing idiosyncratic shocks

Our goal is to examine how household production decisions respond to idiosyncratic shocks to
household wealth and labor endowments, and whether these shocks propagate to other households
through village economic networks. In this paper, we focus on idiosyncratic events associated with
high levels of health spending to identify episodes of high financial stress.19 Analyzing these shocks
is important for three reasons. First, it has been shown that health shocks affect household finance
and labor supply (Gertler and Gruber, 2002; Genoni, 2012; Hendren et al., 2018). Second, because
these shocks are uncorrelated across households, we are able to separate these idiosyncratic shocks
from aggregate shocks that could directly affect economic activity through changes in the markets
for final goods, intermediate inputs, and labor. Finally, it allows us to analyze shocks that are, in
principle, insurable through local networks, and so to understand whether individual responses to
such shocks vary with access to local insurance networks.
         We identify the shocks as follows. On a monthly basis, we compute health spending as the sum
of spending on medicines, transportation to medical facilities, and fees related to either inpatient
or outpatient care. For each household, we identify the month with the highest amount of monthly
health spending throughout the panel. We focus on the largest shocks as we want to restrict the
    19
         Thailand has a universal health insurance program, so these expenses are above and beyond those covered. The
insurance program essentially covers expenses related to basic healthcare services. These services include medical
visits at registered primary healthcare facilities (which must be located in the same area as each patient's registered
residential address), transferred patients from a primary facility to secondary or tertiary facilities for complicated
cases, emergency cases at non-registered facilities, expenses for in-patients staying for less than 180 days for the same
illness, and prescriptions of medicines as listed in the National List of Essential Drugs. For details, see Thailand's
National Health Security Office (NHSO), Administrative Manual, 2014 (in Thai). http://www.oic.go.th/FILEWEB/
CABINFOCENTER3/DRAWER091/GENERAL/DATA0000/00000367.PDF




                                                           12
analysis to shocks that pose a financial burden to the household.20 To facilitate measuring responses
to the shocks by comparing households' behavior before and after the episodes, we restrict the search
to years 2-12 in the panel (out of 14 years of monthly data). This enables us to observe at least two
years of both pre- and post-shock behavior for all households. Following this approach, we identify
505 episodes of sudden increases in monthly health spending, one per household.21
       We exclude 32 events related to possible pregnancies/births from our analysis as the associated
changes in health spending are likely to be anticipated.22 After excluding possible pregnancies,
there are 473 shocks. In addition, for a subset of 405 of these events, we were able to identify
the health symptoms affecting household members at the time of the events, and when these
symptoms were initially reported. Appendix Figure A1 shows that, prior to the sudden increase in
health spending, the median number of consecutive months in which households report any health
symptoms is three months. To account for potential anticipation effects, we define the beginning
of each event by subtracting the number of months preceding the episode of high health spending
during which household members reported health symptoms from the month corresponding to the
episode.23 In the case of the 85 households for which we could not identify the beginning of the
symptoms,24 we coded the beginning of the event as three months before the episode of high total
health spending. We present robustness checks varying the beginning of the shock in Section 4.3.1.


3.1       Characteristics of the shocks.

Relationship between health spending and health status. Appendix Figure A3 depicts total
household health spending (left axis) and the probability of reporting health symptoms around the
events of financial stress (right axis). The figure shows that health spending and self-reported
symptoms co-move, confirming that the events are correlated with decreases in household health
  20
       An alternative way of identifying shocks would be to identify households who report not having been able to
work due to illness. Hendren et al. (2018) follow this approach using the same dataset. However, we follow a different
approach as we are interested in extreme events that are related to severe financial needs. For instance, a worker
could catch an infection and thus miss some weeks at work, but that may not necessarily imply large spending needs.
  21
     In some cases, our approach identified more than one sudden increase per household­i.e., increases of the same
magnitude. In such cases, we only focus on the first increase to avoid sample selection issues due to repeated shocks.
 22
    As we do not observe pregnancies or births directly, we do so by excluding events that coincide with the inclusion
of a new child in the household roster within 12 months of the sudden increase in health spending.
  23
     For example, if the episode of high health spending was recorded in month 100 and the symptoms started being
reported three months before, the beginning of the event is month 97.
  24
     There were 19 households for which symptoms were repeatedly reported for two years or more, and 68 households
for which we did not find information related to symptoms.


                                                         13
endowments. Appendix Table A1 reports the distribution of types of health symptoms reported by
shocked households during the two years around the shock, during non-shock periods, and during
all the sample periods. Relative to non-shock periods, there is a lower incidence of transitory
symptoms such as headaches, colds, cough or influenza during shock periods. In contrast, during
the periods related to the shocks, there is a higher incidence of other less common symptoms which
might be more severe.
Magnitude of the shock. Appendix Figure A3 also shows that episodes of high health spending
represent a substantial financial burden for the households: on average, such increase in health
spending is twice as large as the monthly average per-capita food expenditure, and represents 18%
of average monthly household income. The figure also demonstrates that food consumption is
smoothed even as health spending spikes, which we confirm via regression analysis below.
Shocks to household budget or household labor supply? The shocks are related to a
substantial increase in spending needs but also to substantial declines in health status. Appendix
Figure A2 shows that 50% of the shocks affected family members that were 52 or older, and that
10% of the shocks affected children under the age of 18. Thus, the majority of shocks are related to
illness of non-prime age household members. Indeed, Appendix Table A2 shows that in the month
before experiencing the shocks, on average, affected individuals spent most of their days helping
with household chores rather than working in family businesses. Moreover, the distribution of
type of symptoms around the shock matches more closely that of older individuals (see Appendix
Table A1). Thus, for the subsample of shocks affecting non-prime age household members, we
interpret the shocks as financial shocks. In contrast, around 40% of the events relate to household
members in prime-working age, and we interpret this subset of shocks as affecting both spending
needs and labor endowments. Below we test whether "financial only" shocks have different effects
than "financial plus labor" shocks.
Are the shocks idiosyncratic? Our analysis requires that the events be idiosyncratic and their
occurrence be uncorrelated with trends in household behavior. The top panel of Appendix Figure
A4 presents the distribution of months associated with the beginning of each event. It shows that
the event start dates are spread through all the periods in the sample and suggests that the events
are indeed idiosyncratic. Indeed, the bottom panel shows that in over 87% of the cases, the shocks
affected only one household per village at the same time.25
 25
      We formally test whether village-level trends explain the occurrence of these events in Appendix Table A3.




                                                          14
4         Direct effects of idiosyncratic shocks

4.1         Research Design

Estimating the effects of idiosyncratic shocks on household outcomes requires a valid comparison
group. Ideally, we would like to compare changes in outcomes before and after the shock between
shocked households and otherwise-similar households who, by chance, were not simultaneously
exposed to such a shock. We follow Fadlon and Nielsen (2019) and exploit the plausibly random
variation in the timing of severe health shocks to approximate this ideal scenario. That is, we
compare households that suffer a shock in a given period with households who will suffer a similar
shock, but later in time.
         We follow the approach of Fadlon and Nielsen (2015, 2019) to construct counterfactuals for
shocked households. We compare the behavior of households that experienced the shock in period
t (i.e., treated households), to the behavior of households from the same age group and village that
did not experience the shock at time t, but experienced a similar shock later on, in period t + 
(control households). We then undertake a difference-in-difference approach to estimate the effect of
the shock by computing differential changes in outcomes, before and after the treated household's
shock, between treatment and control households. The underlying identification assumption is
that, in the absence of the shock, the outcomes of households in the treatment and control group
would have followed parallel trends. By comparing households in the same village and age group,
we isolate contemporaneous village-specific shocks and potential differences in the trajectories of
business and household-finance outcomes that could vary along the life cycle (Silva et al., 2019).
We validate the identifying assumption using flexible difference-in-difference estimates that allow
us to analyze whether there were systematic differences across treatment and control groups before
the occurrence of the shocks.
         We operationalize this approach in three steps. First, we split households into two age groups--
i.e., below and above the median household age at baseline (1997).26 Given our sample size, we
choose two age group bins to ensure that we have multiple observations per bin in each village.
Second, for each age group within each village, we split the panel in two equal-length sub-samples
{1 , 2 } by taking the midpoint between the months associated to the first and last shocks in each
age group-village bin (), such that those households suffering a shock between periods t and
    26
         One alternative way of assigning households into cohorts is by focusing on the age of the household head. However,
that approach ignores the age structure of the household as in several cases several families are part of the household.



                                                              15
tmed = t +  belong to the treatment group (1 ), and those experiencing the shock between periods
         ¯ belong to the control group (2 ).27 By construction, there is no overlap between the
tmed and t
two groups. Third, we assign a placebo shock to each household in the control group  periods
before they experienced their actual shock. Thus, if a household in the control group experiences
the actual shock in t , its placebo shock is assigned to period t - . Because the timing of the
shocks is evenly distributed over time (see Appendix Figure A4), the placebo shocks occur within
the domain of the actual shocks. As 243 out of 473 shocked households experienced a shock in the
earlier part of the panel, this process yields 243 households in the treatment group and 230 in the
control group.
       By using households that experience a shock  periods (approximately 5 years) in the future,
this process ensures that none of the households in the control group experienced a shock themselves
during the analysis period. This is potentially important as Hendren et al. (2018) show that
households that experience illness are more likely to experience other illness episodes in the future.
This approach reduces the threat of biases arising from contemporaneous shocks affecting the
control group, but comes at the cost of precision since we do not exploit the occurrence of the actual
shocks in the second part of the sample. To increase power, we also report estimates exploiting the
variation associated with shocks to households in the second half of the sample for robustness. In
this case, the comparison group consists of households that suffered the shock earlier on and their
corresponding placebo shock occurs in period t + ;  periods after their actual shock. Including
this variation does not materially alter the point estimates, but it increases statistical power.
       Figure 2 plots means of health spending and the self-reported probability that at least one
household member experienced health symptoms over time, for the treatment and control groups.
It shows that the control group does not experience any change in health spending or health status
around the placebo shock. In the case of the treatment group, the sharp increase in health spending
coincides with sharp increases in spending on inpatient and outpatient care. The magnitude of
the increase in health spending suggests that health shocks were quite severe. The figure also
demonstrates that, prior to the shock, the treatment and control groups are on similar trajectories
in terms of spending, symptoms, and probability of receiving care, supporting the parallel trends
assumption.
  27                       ¯-t
                           t
       We define  as  =      2
                                 for each age-group-village bin. On average, each sub-sample covers 66 months. We
exclude shocks occurring during the first and last 24 survey waves to ensure that we observe pre and post outcomes
                                                             ¯ <= 148.
for at least two years for all households--i.e., t >= 24 and t



                                                         16
4.2      Estimation

We estimate the following generalized difference-in-difference specification, following Fadlon and
Nielsen (2019):


                                    =3                                          =3
                       yi,t =                I[t =  ] × T reatmenti +                   I[t =  ]                   (2)
                                 =-4, =-1                                   =-4, =-1

                                +  + Xi,t  + i + t +        i,t


where yi,t denotes the outcome of interest corresponding to household i, during period t. We
control for time-invariant household characteristics and aggregate time-varying shocks by including
household fixed effects (i ) and month fixed effects (t ). We denote T reatmenti as an indicator of
whether the observation belongs to the treatment (T reatmenti = 1) or control (T reatmenti = 0)
group. Time to treatment is denoted by i,t and is measured in half-years to increase precision. X
is a vector of time-varying demographic characteristics including the number of male and female
household members, age of the household head and maximum years of schooling in the household.
The coefficients of interest are { } =3
                                     =-4 , which compare differences in changes in outcomes with

respect to the period preceding the shock ( = -1) between households in the treatment and
control group. We focus on a two-year (i.e., four-half year) time window before and after the shock
as our panel is fully balanced during this period.
      We complement equation (2) with a more parsimonious differences-in-difference specification:

                       yi,t = P osti,t × T reatmenti + P osti,t + Xi,t  + i + t +                i,t               (3)

where P osti,t is an indicator that takes the value of 1 in periods following the shock, and 0 otherwise.
The parameter of interest,  , compares differences in outcomes before and after the shock, between
households in the treatment group and the comparison group. In both specifications, we cluster
standard errors at the household level as our main source of variation comes from cross-household
variation in the timing of events.28


4.3      Results

Outflows of resources must equal inflows of resources plus changes in cash holdings. Thus, a shock
to health spending, which entails large outflows of resources, can be financed through four types
 28
      This also flexibly accounts for serial correlation within the household over time (Bertrand et al., 2004).


                                                            17
of (non-mutually exclusive) adjustments. First, the shock could crowd out non-health spending.
Second, households may liquidate assets to finance spending needs. Third, households may receive
other inflows of resources, either as gifts from other households, government transfers, or loans.
Finally, the shock could affect household production decisions -- reducing hired labor or business
input spending to free up resources to meet the shock.
       Figure 3 reports flexible difference-in-difference estimates following the specification in equation
(2). Panel (a) shows that, relative to the control households, the shocked households experience a
sharp increase in total expenditure. Panel (b) shows that shocked households experience a sudden
increase in incoming gifts from other households. This increase in gifts from other local households
highlights the importance of local informal insurance networks; when idiosyncratic shocks occur,
other households respond by providing gifts or transfers to the affected household.
       During the first six-month period after the shock, the increase in gifts and loans only covers
around one-half of the increase in spending needs due to the shock.29 As households are only par-
tially insured through gift/transfer networks, the shocks affect other household financial decisions,
namely production-side decisions. Panel (c) shows that there is a decline in fixed assets after the
shock. Panel (d) shows that, compared to households in the control group, labor usage declines for
shocked households. Panel (e) shows that input spending falls after the shock. Finally, Panel (f)
shows that the slowdown in input spending coincides with a slowdown in revenues after the shocks.
Note that the sharp declines in input spending and revenues coincide with the sharp increase in
spending induced by the shock. One implication is that, as fixed assets can be hard/costly to liq-
uidate quickly, households may have to meet short-term liquidity needs by drawing down working
capital.
       The dynamics of these effects suggest that households use gifts to (partly) finance immediate
expenses, and appear to rely on alternative sources for financing remaining expenses related to the
shock. Thus households may follow a pecking order when it comes to financing or coping with
adverse shocks; they first rely on gifts, which may be less costly, and then turn to resources meant
to fund their family businesses, which could compromise future income. We explore this possibility
in the next subsection.
       The graphical evidence suggests that despite the receipt of gifts and transfers, health-driven
  29
       While gifts and loans are also received in later post-shock periods, we show below that households appear
constrained in their ability to borrow and so, even if these future transfers are anticipated, they cannot be used to
meet immediate spending needs.




                                                         18
shocks to household spending affect production decisions, inconsistent with the separation theorem.
The graphical evidence also documents parallel pre-trends: for all six outcomes, there are no
spuriously significant "effects" prior to the spending shock.30
      To provide a quantitative assessment of the overall impact of the health shocks, in Table 3
we report difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of the shock on outcomes, corresponding
to equation (3). Panel A examines household spending. Column 1 shows that the shock leads
to a large increase in health spending. While this is by construction, the magnitude is notable,
representing a roughly 350% increase relative to the baseline mean. Column 2 shows that during the
two years following the shock, on average, total spending increases for shocked households, relative
to control households, by an amount close to the effect on health spending, though the effect is
not significant at conventional levels. Columns 3 to 5 shows that there are neither substantial nor
significant effects on non-health spending (total, non-food, and food, respectively). Thus, in terms
of non-health consumption spending, shocked households were able to buffer the shocks, despite
strong pressures on household budgets.
      We next turn to analyze whether the shocked households draw down assets to finance their
spending needs. Panel B of Table 3 shows that households did not rely significantly on either
deposits in financial institutions or cash in hand to cover their health expenses. We also fail to
detect significant changes in inventory or livestock, which are traditional proxies for buffer-stock
savings. Similarly, we do not find significant changes in household fixed assets. While savings
and the stock of fixed assets decrease, the decrease is not significant over the two-year post-shock
period. Thus, incoming gifts allow households to (partly) cope with the shocks and, as we show
below, the remainder of the shock is buffered by reducing business spending.
      Panel C of Table 3 shows that although incoming gifts significantly increased, there were no de-
tectable effects on borrowing. One interpretation is that obtaining credit from banks or community-
based organizations is costly and/or entails a significant amount of delay. For instance, village funds
do not meet often enough to evaluate loan applications quickly.
      Panel D of Table 3 shows that affected households significantly decrease spending on business
inputs (column 1) and reduce the use of external labor (column 2). Households also appear to reduce
the use of labor provided by household members (column 3), though the effect is not significant.
There is no significant effect on business assets (column 4). As a result of reduced investment in
inputs and labor (columns 1-3), there is a decrease in the revenues from family enterprises, as seen
 30
      Appendix Figure A5 shows the same dynamics in the raw data.



                                                      19
in column 5. (The effect on revenues has a p-value of 0.106.) Thus, households insure consumption
against health shocks, but consumption smoothing comes at the cost of a decline in household
business investment and revenues.


4.3.1   Robustness

Robustness to using shocks occurring in the second half of the panel. Our main analysis
uses households who experienced the shock in later periods as a comparison group for households
that experienced the shock earlier on. To increase power, we also report results using households
who experienced the shock in the earlier periods as a comparison group for households who suffered
the shock in later periods. Appendix Table A4 replicates the results from the previous section and
shows results that are quantitatively similar, but estimated with higher precision since we now use
473 shocks as opposed to only 243, as in Table 3. By adding more shocks we are able to detect
significant declines in fixed assets, household labor, and revenues.
Alternative definitions of shock onset. Throughout our analysis, we use the first consecutive
month in which households reported experiencing health symptoms within the six months preceding
the peak in health spending, in order to account for potential anticipation effects that could bias
the results. Appendix Table A5 reports results from two alternative definitions of the beginning of
the shock. Panel A reports estimates of the effects of the health shocks assuming that the beginning
of the event coincided with the peak in health spending. This approach provides a lower bound
since households may have adjusted their behavior before the peak. Panel B reports estimates
assuming that the event started six months before the observed peak. In both cases, the estimates
are qualitatively similar to those from our main specifications.
Alternative definitions of comparison groups. We report two robustness checks that rely
on different comparison groups for our analysis. Our main specification assigns placebo shocks
 periods away from the actual shocks, within village-age groups bins. An alternative approach
would be to randomly allocate the placebo event within each village bin. The main difference
between these approaches is that our main specification ensures that the placebo group does not
suffer a shock during the two-year comparison window. In contrast, the random assignment of the
placebo event could coincide with other shocks. Panel A in Appendix Table A6 reports results
using the random placebo assignment, based on a uniform distribution between the months of the
first and last shock in each village. The results are qualitatively similar to those from our main
specifications.


                                                 20
       We also report results from a panel specification in the spirit of Gertler and Gruber (2002) and
Jack and Suri (2014), where we regress the outcome of interest on an indicator of whether household
i experienced a shock during the past 12 months, a vector of demographic characteristics, household
fixed effects and village-month fixed effects. Panel B of Table A6 reports estimates following this
approach. It is worth noting that, as opposed to our main specification, this approach ignores age-
specific trends and does not guarantee that the comparison households--non-shocked households at
time t--do not suffer a shock within 12 months of the shocks to the focal household. Reassuringly,
we obtain qualitatively similar results.


4.3.2       Non-separability: Unpacking the effects on household production

The results above show that idiosyncratic shocks to household endowments also affect household
production decisions. This is a violation of the separation that would occur with complete mar-
kets.This could be due to frictions in either local insurance markets and/or labor markets. Incom-
plete local insurance would imply that (some) households are unable to rely on transfers to smooth
out shocks, and would have to reduce input spending. Incomplete labor markets would suggest that
(some) households are unable to replace a sick worker due to missing markets for individual-specific
labor. In this section, we examine both mechanisms.
The role of insurance networks. Although gifts and transfers provide households with insur-
ance against shocks, not all households have equal access to this mechanism. Un- or under-insured
households may have to cut input spending in order to smooth consumption. This suggests that
shocked households who can rely more on local risk-sharing networks should have smaller adjust-
ments to their production decisions. To test this idea, we use data on intra-village provision and
receipt of gifts or loans during the year preceding the shock. We classify households with relatively
more pre-shock connections in their networks (above median) as having "high" access to infor-
mal insurance, and others as having "low" access to informal insurance.31 We then estimate the
following triple differences model:32
  31
       We perform this exercise for households in both the treatment and control group. For the control group, we
construct the measure based on the number of transactions during the year preceding the placebo shock.
  32
     To increase statistical precision, in these regressions we use households that experience a shock in the second
half of the period as additional treatment observations, with the demographically similar households experiencing
the shock in the first half as placebo observations. The results using only households shocked in the first part of the
period as treated are similar, see Table A7.




                                                          21
                      yi,t =1 P osti,t × T reatmenti + 2 P osti,t × T reatmenti × Highi                           (4)

                             + 1 P osti,t + 2 P osti,t × Highi + Xi,t  + i + t +          i,t


where yi,t , T reatment and P ost are defined as before. Highi takes the value of 1 for households
with high access to informal networks before the shock (either actual or placebo). The coefficients
1 captures the effects of the shock for households with low access to insurance networks, and 2
captures the differential effect for households with high access to intra-village insurance. The sum
1 + 2 captures the total effect of the shock for high-access households.
       Panel A in Table 4 reports estimates of the direct effects of the shock on gift receipt and business
outcomes by access to informal insurance. Households with high access to informal insurance
are more likely to receive gifts from other households than those with low access, although the
differences are not precisely estimated (see columns 3 and 4). Moreover, the statistically significant
declines in input spending (column 8) and business revenues (column 9) for low-access households
are almost fully offset for high-access households. The results suggest that households with limited
access to insurance drive most of the declines in business activities, suggesting that incompleteness
in local insurance markets may lead to non-separability of household spending and production
decisions. Conversely, improvements in access to risk smoothing may reduce the extent of non-
separability and thus reduce propagation.
The role of labor market frictions. To shed light on the role of labor market frictions, we
examine the effect of shocks to different household members. Illnesses of non-prime-aged household
members are unlikely to directly affect labor supply; such shocks are primarily financial and can,
in principle, be smoothed by relying on gifts and transfers.33 In contrast, the illness of prime-age
members may decrease labor supply even if gifts fully cover health spending needs. This distinction
would be irrelevant if shocked households could substitute household labor with external sources
of labor. However, if households cannot substitute household and market labor, then shocks to
household labor supply will affect production decisions (Benjamin, 1992). Thus we use an equation
analagous to equation (4) to test whether shocks related to prime-age household members have
  33
       Of course, financial shocks may lead to indirect effects on labor supply of non-shocked household members, if,
for instance, they need to allocate time to take care of the sick household member. The underlying assumption here
is that the direct financial component of the shocks is relatively more salient than the possible indirect effects. We
return to this discussion in Section 6.



                                                          22
differential effects on business activity.34
         Panel B of Table 4 shows that the spending increases resulting from the shocks to non-prime-age
members are larger than those of prime-age members (see columns 1 and 2 for health and total
spending, respectively). In turn, while shocks to non-prime-age members led to large significant
increases inflows of gifts and transfers, shocks to prime-age household members lead to smaller
and non-significant increases in gift receipt (column 5). However, when we consider impacts on
production, we find that the shocks to prime-age members led to a larger and statistically significant
drop in the household's own labor supply (column 7). This decrease is twice as large as for shocks
related to illness of non-prime age household members and is not compensated by an increase hired
labor. In addition, both input spending and revenues decrease accordingly (column 9).
         Taken together, the heterogeneous effects analyses suggest that both insurance and labor mar-
kets are incomplete: households with less baseline access to local gift and transfer networks show
more evidence of separation failure, and shocks to prime-aged household members, despite gener-
ating smaller spending needs, lead to larger impacts on business decisions.
         We next turn to examining the effects of these shocks on other households, via propgation.


5         Economic networks and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks

The results above show that health shocks affect household production. Given the significant
degree of inter-linkage in the study villages, we next ask whether these shocks propagate to other
households. Motivated by the previous findings, we analyze two propagation channels. First, shocks
could propagate through local supply chain networks: health shocks lead to decreases in the supply
and demand for inputs, which could lead to reductions in sales and revenue for those households
that trade with shocked households. Second, shocks could propagate through local labor networks:
as supply and demand for outside labor decreases due to the shocks, households that exchange
labor with shocked households could suffer falls in hours, earnings and revenue.


5.1         Identification strategy

We exploit two sources of variation to test if idiosyncratic health shocks propagated to other agents
in the local economy. First, we use variation in the timing of each household-level shock. Second,
    34
         In the case of the placebo shock, we identify the household member who reports the symptoms in the actual
shock and assume that the placebo shock would affect the corresponding household member.




                                                          23
a household's exposure may depend on their network connections to the shocked household via
the supply chain or labor network (or both). Thus, we use variation from households in the
village with different levels of exposure to the shocked household. We assess the propagation of
idiosyncratic shocks to other local family businesses by comparing households who, before the
shock, shared market inter-linkages with household j 's businesses (exposed households) to those
who were unconnected to household j before the shock (unexposed households), before and after
the shock to household j .
       Throughout our sample period, we observe multiple health shocks per village. We construct a
dataset capturing information of non-shocked households before and after each health shock in the
sample. For each event, we take two years of pre- and post-shock observations of households living
in the same village of the directly shocked households.35 We then stack the observations into a
dataset at the household (i) by time (t) by event level (j ), for each village.
       We combine this dataset with information on network connections between the shocked house-
hold (j ) and other households (i) in the village, measured during the year preceding the shock
to household j . We use pre-shock networks as links may respond to economic shocks themselves.
The assumption is that households that transacted with the shocked household during the pre-
period, on average, would have been more likely to transact with the shocked households in the
post-period, in the absence of the shock. This is consistent with the evidence of persistence in the
village networks discussed in Section 2.4, and with evidence of the importance of time-invariant
determinants of economic connections such as kinship relations (Kinnan and Townsend, 2012), race
or caste (Munshi, 2014), and the existence of economic frictions such as contracting issues that may
limit trade between households (Ahlin and Townsend, 2007), or between firms (Aaronson et al.,
2004) in local economic networks.
       We measure exposure by constructing an index of closeness in the village networks as the inverse
distance in the undirected, unvalued network,36 between household i and the shocked household j :
                        1     37
Closenessi,j =       disti,j .     As non-shocked households are further away in the network from shocked
households, exposure (closeness) decreases. We begin by computing overall closeness based on
  35
       We restrict the analysis to two years before and after the shock, first, to be consistent with the analysis of the
direct effects of the shocks; second, we only have a fully balanced panel during this time window.
  36
     Below, we also present results using directed networks.
  37
     This measure equals one if household i directly traded with the shocked household j and zero if household i
does not have any direct or indirect connections with the shocked household. The geodesic distance between two
unconnected nodes is disti,j =  and so their closeness equals 0 in that case. By undirected networks we mean that
we do not distinguish between incoming vs. outgoing transactions. Likewise, we weight each transaction equally for


                                                            24
transactions in the supply chain or labor networks as households can be exposed through either
network. To distinguish between exposure in the supply chain and labor market networks, we also
compute measures of closeness in each separate network.
    We elicit economic networks using survey instead of census data (Chandrasekhar and Lewis,
2017). Thus, it is possible that we underestimate the closeness of some sample households to the
shocked households.38 Because we could be underestimating exposure--classifying some households
who are unexposed when they are actually exposed--our results could be downward biased towards
zero. Thus, we interpret our magnitudes as lower bounds of the indirect effects of idiosyncratic
shocks on other households.
    Finally, not all shocked households are active in the local markets for goods, and not all shocked
households employ other villagers for their businesses. Thus, we analyze the propagation of shocks
through village networks by focusing only on the events corresponding to the 391 households that
traded in either the supply chain or labor market networks during the year preceding their shock.39
    With these caveats in mind, we estimate the following difference-in-difference specifications:


                                =4
                 yi,t,j =                I[t =  ] × Closenessi,j + Closenessi,j + Xi,t,j 
                             =-4, =-1

                            + i + j + t +  + t × Degreei,j +           i,t,j                                  (5)

                 yi,t,j =P ostt,j × Closenessi,j + Closenessi,j + Xi,t,j 

                            + i + j + t +  + t × Degreei,j +           i,t,j                                  (6)

where y denotes the outcome of interest for household i in village v at time t. In the "event-
study" specification (equation (5)), j,t denotes a half-year, which may precede (h < 0) or follow
(h >= 0) the shock to household j . Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the shocked household
during the year preceding the shock to j .40 The coefficients of interest in equation (5) are  ,
which capture relative changes in outcomes corresponding to quarter  with respect to the quarter
preceding the event ( = -1) associated with one additional unit of closeness (i.e., between more-
vs. less-exposed households). In the generalized difference-in-difference specification, equation (6),
P ostt,j takes the value of one during the two years following the shock to household j , and zero
our calculations.
  38
     See footnote 16 for a discussion of this issue.
  39
     This represents 83% of all the shocks in our analysis.
  40
     Below we consider several definitions of Closeness: proximity in the overall network pooling supply chain and
labor market, as well as proximity in one network or the other.


                                                        25
for the pre-period. The coefficient of interest,  , captures differences in outcomes with respect to
pre-period, associated with one additional unit of closeness.
      We control for household fixed effects (i ), shocked-household fixed effects (j ), time-to-shock
fixed effects ( ), which vary across villages and over time, and a vector of time-varying demographic
characteristics (Xi,t,j ).41 We control for village- and month-fixed effects. We also control for time-
varying shocks affecting more central households, which could also be more likely to be close to
other households, by including interactions of the number of links of household i (Degreei,j ) during
the year preceding the shock to j with month-fixed effects. We use two-way clustered standard
errors at the event level j and household level i to allow for flexible correlation across households
during the periods preceding and following event j and across responses of the same household i
to different events. As we are focusing on indirect effects, we drop observations of directly shocked
households j from the analysis. We also exclude observations of households that experienced their
own shock within a year before and after the shock to household j .
      The identifying assumption underlying our strategy of estimating indirect effects is that, in the
absence of the shock to household j , the outcomes of households i and i , with differential closeness
to j , would have evolved along parallel trends ceteris paribus, i.e., conditional on the vector of
controls included in equation 5 and 6. We validate this identifying assumption by testing for a lack
of differences in the pre-period; namely, for  < 0, we verify that  is not different from zero.


5.2      Results: Propagation of shocks through economic networks

Figure 4 presents flexible difference-in-difference estimates following the specification of equation 5.
After a health shock, households who are more connected to shocked households differentially reduce
the number of transactions with other households in the village supply-chain (sales) networks. Panel
A analyzes total transactions. Prior to the shock, transactions through the are not different for
closer vs. more distant households. After the shock, however, sales network transactions decline
more for households who are closer to the shocked household. Panels B and C show that sales and
labor network transactions, respectively, each exhibit the same pattern seen for total transactions.
Finally, Panel D shows that, as local networks are shocked, total income declines for households
closer to the shocked household. In all four panels, the results for the pre-shock period show
no evidence of differential pre-trends. Figure 5 shows an analogous result for total consumption
expenditure, which declines in the post-shock period (and exhibits no differential trend in the
 41
      We control for household size, gender composition, average age and schooling.


                                                         26
pre-period).
       The effects on transactions, income and spending are evident in all three half-year periods
following the shock and do not exhibit evidence of shrinking in magnitude over time. Thus the
effects are quite persistent. In theory, indirectly-hit households might attenuate these effects over
time by finding new local trading partners. However, the evidence on the rigidity of local networks
shown above (section 2.4) demonstrates that such reorganization of local ties is very difficult, at
least over the span of 1-2 years.
       Panel A of Table 5 shows difference-in-difference estimates corresponding to (6). It documents
significant post-shock declines in the number of monthly transactions in the supply-chain (column
1) and labor-market networks (column 2), and in total transactions (column 3). These effects are
large, representing declines of 20%, 24% and 21% relative to the pre-period means, respectively.
Column 4 shows that these changes, in turn, reduce income: a one-unit increase in Closeness is
associated with a fall in income of THB 1236, or 11.7% of the pre-period mean. As seen in column
5, incoming gifts and loans do not change in response to indirect exposure to shocks. With income
falling and gifts and loans not filling the gap, consumption spending falls by THB 294, or 4.1%
of its pre-period mean (column 6).42 The fall in consumption is smaller than the fall in income,
suggesting that indirectly shocked households were able to partly, though not completely, smooth
out the health shocks affecting their networks.43
       The reason the (non-health) spending of directly-shocked households does not fall in response
to a health shock (see Section 4), while the consumption of indirectly-shocked households does fall,
relates to the differing response of incoming gifts. Directly shocked households see economically
and statistically significant increases in transfers, while indirectly shocked households do not. (It
is worth noting that, in addition to receiving transfers, directly shocked households take other,
costly, steps to buffer consumption, namely scaling back on business activities.) Two factors, not
mutually exclusive, may explain the divergence in transfer behavior. First, the direct shocks are
large increases in health spending, associated with changes in health symptoms. These shocks
are salient and relatively unlikely to raise concerns of effort (moral hazard), verifiability (hidden
income), etc. The indirect shocks, on the other hand, arise from reductions in supply and demand
  42
       Recall that these are the effects associated with moving from Closeness = 0 0, i.e., being unconnected to the
directly shocked household, to Closeness = 1, i.e., being directly connected to the shocked household. The mean
level of Closeness = 0.42, so that the average indirect effect is 42% of the coefficient.
  43
     In Appendix table A8, we re-estimate equation 5, including village-by-month fixed-effects (v,t ) to control for
potential village-and-time-specific shocks. The results are quite similar to those from the main specification.



                                                          27
facing household businesses. Such shocks are likely less salient and potentially more subject to
concerns of effort and verifiability, and hence potentially less insurable. Second, because the indirect
shock, by its nature, affects many interlinked households, the shock becomes de facto aggregate,
which makes the potential for insurance via gifts from other villagers more limited.


5.2.1       Propagation of health shocks through supply chain vs. labor networks

In Panel B of Table 5, we examine whether the effect of exposure through the supply chain network
has different effects than exposure through the labor market network. Because the two networks are
correlated, we analyze the effect of exposure to one controlling for the effect of the other.44 Column
1 shows that, conditional on proximity in the labor market network, a 1-unit increase in proximity
in the supply chain network is associated with a significant fall in input/output transactions of
0.228. There is no effect on input/output transactions associated with proximity through the labor
network. Analogously, column 2 shows that proximity through the labor market network has a
negative and significant effect (-0.21) on transactions involving paid labor, while there is no effect
seen via the supply chain network. The fact that proximity through the supply chain (labor)
network is associated with changes in input/output (hired labor) transactions, and not vice versa,
is supportive of the identification assumption, as confounds (e.g., differential trends between closer
vs. more distant households) would likely manifest in both sets of outcomes.
       In column 3, proximity via the supply chain network and the labor market network both have
negative and significant effects on the total number of transactions (-0.206 and -0.244, respectively).
In column 4, proximity via the labor market network is associated with a large and significant drop
in income, while the effect of proximity via the supply chain network is small and insignificant.
Column 5 shows that neither networks' proximity is associated with a large or significant effect on
gifts/transfers. Finally, in column 6, proximity via the labor market network is associated with a
large and significant drop in consumption spending, while the effect of proximity via the supply
chain network is small and insignificant. We return to the interpretation of this difference in the
impacts of exposure via the supply chain vs. labor markets in Section 6.2.
Transactions in vs. transactions out. Motivated by the fact that directly shocked households
  44
       On average, 41% of households share a direct or indirect link to the shocked households through both, supply-
chain and labor-market network, 16% are directly or indirectly linked to the shocked household only through the
supply-chain network, 13% are directly or indirectly connected to the shocked households only through the labor
network and 30% of households are neither connected to the shocked households through the supply-chain nor labor
network.


                                                          28
reduce their demand for inputs and labor, we have focused our discussion on "upstream" propa-
gation, to households selling goods or labor to the directly shocked household. However, directly
shocked households also see falls in revenues (Table 3, Panel D, col 5), so there are likely to be
negative indirect "downstream" effects on indirectly shocked households' ability to purchase inputs
and labor. We investigate these effects in Appendix Table A9, which separately presents effects on
outgoing/upstream transactions (columns 1 to 6) and incoming/downstream transactions (columns
7 to 12). Panel A shows that, using the measure of network proximity which combines the sup-
ply chain and the labor market networks, the fall in outgoing transactions documented above is
matched by a fall in incoming transactions (input purchases and labor hiring, as well as total in-
coming transactions) which is similar in magnitude; both sets of effects are statistically significant.
In Panel B, we distinguish closeness through the supply chain network and the labor market net-
work. Controlling for closeness in the labor market network, closeness in the supply chain network
is associated will falls in both outgoing purchases and incoming sales. Controlling for closeness in
the supply chain network, closeness in the labor market network is associated with falls in both
outgoing labor provision and incoming labor hiring. Both networks independently predict falls in
total transactions. In sum, the health shocks we study generate indirect effects both upstream
and downstream, as the costly adjustments taken by the directly shocked household reverberate
through the local economic networks.


6     Propagation Mechanisms

6.1   Access to insurance and the propagation of shocks

Section 4 presented suggestive evidence that idiosyncratic shocks were more likely to trigger declines
in business activities when the shocked household had limited access to informal insurance. This
suggests that shocks to uninsured households may propagate more to other households. To test
this hypothesis, we estimate the following difference-in-difference model:



              yi,t,j = 1 P ostt,j × Closenessi,j + 2 P ostt,j × Closenessi,j × Accessj             (7)

                   + 3 P ostt,j × Accessj + 4 Closenessi,j × Accessj + Closenessi,j                (8)

                   + Xi,t,j  + i + j + t +  +       i,t,j




                                                  29
where Accessj is an indicator of whether directly shocked household j had above-median pre-period
access to informal insurance networks, measured by the number of transfers and loans exchanged
with other households in the village during the year preceding the shock. As above, Closenessi,j
denotes inverse distance between household i and directly shocked household j during the year
preceding the shock. For simplicity and to maximize power, we focus on overall closeness. The
coefficient 1 measures the change in outcomes after the shock associated with a one-unit change
in proximity to the shocked household when that shocked household has below-median access to
informal insurance, and 2 captures the differential indirect effects when the shocked household had
above-median access to informal insurance networks. The total indirect effect associated with a one-
unit change in proximity to a shocked household with above-median access to informal insurance
networks is 1 + 2 .
   Table 6 provides evidence that shocks to less-insured households propagate differently, com-
pared with those to more-insured households. Column 1 shows that input/output transactions
by indirectly affected households fall by 0.26 (from a base of 0.999) when the shocked household
had low access to insurance in the pre-period. When the shocked household had high access to
insurance, however, the fall in sales is much smaller (the differential effect is significant at the 1%
level) and the net effect is no longer significant. For hired labor (column 2), the fall for indirectly
affected households is 0.107 (from a base of 0.470) when the shocked household had low access
to insurance in the pre-period; in this case, the fall when the shocked household had high access
to insurance is similar. Column 3 shows that the fall in total transactions (summing input/out
sales and hired labor), is 0.367 (from a base of 1.47) when the shocked household had low access
to insurance in the pre-period; when the shocked household had high access to insurance, the fall
in sales is reduced by 0.09 percentage points, although this difference is not precisely estimated it
accounts for 25% of the decline in total transactions in the case of shocks to uninsured households.
   Column 4 shows that income displays the same pattern: when the shocked household had low
access to insurance in the pre-period, the fall in income associated with 1 unit greater Closeness is
1654 baht. When the shocked household had high access to insurance, the fall in income is lower by
1031 baht (the differential effect is significant at the 1% level) and the net effect is not significant.
Column 5 shows that incoming gifts to indirectly shocked households do not respond, regardless
of the baseline insurance status of the directly shocked household. Finally, column 6 shows that
the consumption spending of indirectly affected households falls by 321 baht, or roughly 5%, when
the shocked household had low access to insurance in the pre-period (the p-value of this effect is


                                                   30
0.134). When the shocked household had high access to insurance, however, the fall in consumption
spending is reduced by 94 baht (the differential effect is significant at the 1% level).


6.2    Total spillovers and access to insurance

Our results highlight that the extent to which shocks propagate is a function of whether the directly-
shocked household has access to informal insurance, with shocks to well-insured households being
buffered more successfully and hence spreading less through networks. To assess how the total
indirect impacts of shocks relate to informal insurance, we calculate how much shocks to more- vs.
less-insured households propagate. Households with low access to insurance have a mean (median)
of 21.42 (17) contacts and mean (median) closeness of 0.39 (0.38). The figures for those with high
(i.e., above median) pre-shock access to insurance are similar, with a mean (median) of 21.14 (18)
contacts and mean (and median) closeness of 0.46.
   Using the figures from Table 6, column 6, the consumption effect associated with a one-unit
increase is Closeness to a poorly-insured shocked household is a fall of -1654 baht (significant at
1%). The implied total indirect effect from poorly-insured households using mean values is therefore
-1654 × 0.39 × 21.42 = -13817 baht per month. Using median values instead gives an implied
total indirect effect of -10,685.
   For well-insured households, the effect associated with a one-unit increase is Closeness is a
fall of -622.2 baht (not significantly different from zero). The implied total indirect effect from
well-insured households using mean values is -6051 baht per month. Using median values instead
gives an implied total indirect effect of -5152. Thus, the aggregate "spillover" effect is nearly twice
as large when the shock hits a poorly-insured household.
   Taken together, these results suggest that when households facing health spending shocks have
better ex-ante access to informal insurance networks, the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks to
other households is meaningfully reduced. This, in turn, suggests that policies that improve informal
insurance--e.g., by reducing frictions due to moral hazard, limited commitment, hidden income or
asymmetric information--will have spillover benefits even to those whose direct access to risk
sharing does not improve.
The cash vs. labor costs of health shocks. The direct-exposure results in table 4 show
that while input spending and revenues of the shocked household decline less when that household
has access to insurance, hired labor is affected even for high-insurance-access households (column
6). Likewise, the propagation results in Table 6 show no significant differences in labor-market


                                                  31
transactions (column 2) as a function of the insurance status of the directly-shocked household.
These results suggest that while incoming transfers help shocked households with expenses, they are
unable to compensate for the time required to take care of the ill household member. As illnesses
to prime-aged members induce a decline in hired labor provided by household members (Table 4,
Panel B, col 6), this suggests that household labor and hired labor are complements, namely that
household labor is required to supervise or monitor hired labor. This is further evidence of labor-
market imperfections driving propagation, and moreover, such imperfections blunting the ability
of gifts and transfers to smooth the impact of shocks.
    A related finding appears in Table 5, Panel B, namely that the indirect-effect declines in income
and consumption associated with exposure via the labor market network are large and highly
significant while those associated with exposure via the supply chain network are indistinguishable
from zero. This suggests that households connected to the shocked household via the labor market
network may suffer a double impact, namely, reduced labor demand via an income effect as the
directly hit household scales back, as well as a further hit due to the complementarity between
household and hired labor.
Propagation via insurance? It is also possible that households connected to shocked households
could have provided transfers in order to help them attenuate the consequences of the shocks. Thus,
the indirect effect on consumption (Table 5, column 6) could be a consequence of a decline in cash
on hand/liquidity arising from helping the directly shocked household. However, Appendix Table
A10, shows that neither transfers nor loans given by the indirectly shocked household to other
households increase following the shock.If anything, the point estimates suggest that the provision
of transfers to other households declined among higher-exposure households, perhaps because they
were experiencing negative indirect effects themselves. Moreover, the effect on consumption, while
meaningful, is less in both absolute and percentage terms than the effect on income (column 4),
suggesting that the fall in consumption can be fully explained by the fall in income stemming from
reduced local sales in the input/output and labor networks.


7    Putting the findings in context

In this section, we offer two exercises to help benchmark the magnitude of our results. First, we show
how the propagation of household-level shocks compares with that of a sector-wide shock. Second,
we perform a simple back-of-the-envelope exercise to estimate the total magnitude of indirect vs.



                                                 32
direct effects on revenues.


7.1       Aggregate vs. idiosyncratic shocks

To illustrate the idea that local networks may be less able to provide insurance against aggregate
shocks, Figure 6 provides a graphical comparison of the direct responses to idiosyncratic vs. aggre-
gate shocks. We consider the timing of the European Union ban on Thai shrimp imports, which
was announced in May 2002 and directly affected over 30% of the households in Chachoengsao, the
shrimp-producing province in our dataset.45 The "sectoral" line in the figure depicts differences in
changes in incoming gifts, before and after the EU ban, between shrimp farmers and non-shrimp
farmers.46 The "idiosyncratic" line depicts changes in incoming gifts before and after health shocks,
relative to a placebo group as in equation (3). There is only a small, insignificant increase in gifts
within a year of the shrimp ban, in marked contrast to the sudden increase in gift inflows in the
aftermath of the idiosyncratic shocks. This simple comparison suggests that the effectiveness of
local risk-sharing networks depends on the nature of the shock and echoes our finding that, while
households directly hit by idiosyncratic health shocks see an increase in gifts (as seen in the fig-
ure), indirectly-shocked households do not, as the indirect effects are quasi-aggregate, hitting many
households in the network.


7.2       The multiplier effect of idiosyncratic shocks

As documented above, idiosyncratic health shocks have both direct costs (analyzed in section 4) and
indirect costs (analyzed in sections 5 and 6). The former are larger on a per-household basis, but the
latter can potentially affect many more households. In order to compare their overall magnitude,
and so obtain an estimate of the overall "multiplier effect' of the fall in spending associated with
the shock', we perform a simple calculation of the total indirect fall in consumption for each baht
of reduced business spending by directly affected households.
       The indirect effect on consumption associated with a 1 unit change in Closeness, from Table 5,
Panel A, column 6 is a fall of -308.9 baht (significant at 10%). The mean (median) level of Closeness
in the village network is 0.42 (0.43) and the mean (median) number of indirectly exposed households
  45
       Giannone and Banternghansa (2018) show that the EU ban lead to significant declines in revenues, to spillovers
to non-shrimp households, and to reallocation of resources towards non-shrimp businesses.
  46
     In this case, we estimated a regression of incoming gifts on time-to-treatment fixed effects, the interaction of
time-to-treatment fixed effects with an indicator of whether the households operated shrimp farms at baseline, and
household fixed effects. We plot the coefficient associated with the interactions.


                                                          33
(i.e., households who are connected to the shocked household via the network) is 21.23 (16).47 The
implied total indirect effect using mean values is therefore -308.9 × 0.42 × 21.23 = -2754 baht per
month. Using median values instead gives an implied total indirect effect of -2125.
         From Table 3, Panel D, column 1, the fall in business costs for a directly affected household is
-1783.4 baht, so the indirect effects using mean and median closeness represent multiplier effects of
1.54 and 1.19, respectively. For comparison, Egger et al. (2019) estimate a consumption-expenditure
multiplier of 1.7 from cash transfers in Kenya, and in the US, Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)
estimate an "open economy relative multiplier" of 1.5 and Su´
                                                            arez Serrato and Wingender (2016)
estimate a local income multiplier of government spending of 1.7 to 2. These estimates are quite
similar to ours despite very different data and methods.
         While our multiplier estimates are admittedly back-of-the-envelope, they demonstrate that, be-
cause the indirect effects are economically meaningful and affect many households for each directly
affected household, the total indirect effects are of a similar order of magnitude, and perhaps larger
than, the direct effect itself.


8         Concluding remarks

We study the dual role of networks--providing insurance and propagating idiosyncratic shocks.
Such shocks are widespread in both high- and low-income countries. Moreover, the novel coron-
avirus (COVID-19), while to a large extent an aggregate shock, has significant idiosyncratic aspects
due to variation in household infection risks and realizations (Jordan et al., 2020), the ability to
work from home (Dingel and Neiman, 2020; Angelucci et al., 2020), and the extent to which differ-
ent workers and sectors of the economy are affected by shutdowns and social distancing (Daly et al.,
2020). Thus the importance of understanding the ramifications of such shocks has, if anything,
increased in the COVID-19 era.
         If markets were complete, idiosyncratic shocks would be fully insured. Shocks would not affect
production and hence no propagation would take place through production networks. However,
in the absence of complete markets, spending-side shocks affect production-side decisions and, in
turn, ripple out to other households. In such a situation, indirectly-affected households will see falls
in local transactions and income and so are forced to cut consumption. The impact of propagation
    47
         We report medians as well as means since the median is less sensitive to networks with a high number of
connections or many distant (low-Closeness) connections, where the linear specification for Closeness may be less
appropriate.


                                                         34
through supply chain or labor networks could be long-lasting as suppliers and customers may
eventually switch to other partners or activities. This is potentially costly as there may be fixed
costs of each partner (e.g., workers may need to be specifically trained for each employer). These
costly adjustments could have been avoided if there were full insurance.
   Empirically, we use variation in the timing of severe shocks on health spending experienced by
households in Thai villages. We document consumption smoothing, i.e., no impacts on non-health
consumption expenditure for directly shocked households. This smoothing is partially achieved
through local gift and loan networks. However, insurance is partial and, as a result, shocked
households need to adjust their production decisions­drawing down working capital, cutting input
spending and reducing labor hiring. This propagates the shock to other households. Businesses
close to the shocked household in the supply chain network experience reduced local sales. Workers
closer to the shocked household in the labor network experience declines in the probability of
working locally and reduced earnings. As a result, their consumption falls.
   Our findings suggest that two sets of interventions might be beneficial: (1) policies that prevent
granular shocks from propagating and causing aggregate fluctuations, and (2) policies that mitigate
the indirect, propagated shocks, if they cannot be prevented. First, improved safety nets can help
prevent granular shocks from amplifying to become aggregate. Given that the ability to share
idiosyncratic shocks increases with the number of households participating in the insurance network,
local networks alone may not be enough to diversify this idiosyncratic risk, such that the shared risk
remains covariate. Formal commercial insurance contracts (through companies operating nationally
or beyond) or social insurance (through central governments) could allow better risk-coping and
better prevention of propagation through production and labor networks. Second, in order to
mitigate the impacts of propagation through supply chain and labor networks, one can consider
broadening the extent of product and factor markets beyond the local village market via regional
or economy-wide platforms, to take advantage of more systematic multilateral matching.


References

Aaronson, D., R. W. Bostic, P. Huck, and R. Townsend (2004). Supplier relationships and small
  business use of trade credit. Journal of Urban Economics 55 (1), 46 ­ 67.

Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The network origins of
  aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977­2016.


                                                 35
Ahlin, C. and R. M. Townsend (2007). Using repayment data to test across models of joint liability
  lending. The Economic Journal 117 (517), F11­F51.

Aiyagari, S. R. (1994). Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 109 (3), 659­684.

Angelucci, M., M. Angrisani, D. M. Bennett, A. Kapteyn, and S. G. Schaner (2020). Remote work
  and the heterogeneous impact of covid-19 on employment and health. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Angelucci, M. and G. De Giorgi (2009). Indirect effects of an aid program: how do cash transfers
  affect ineligibles' consumption? American Economic Review 99 (1), 486­508.

Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2013). The diffusion of microfi-
  nance. Science 341 (6144).

Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2019, 02). Using Gossips to
  Spread Information: Theory and Evidence from Two Randomized Controlled Trials. The Review
  of Economic Studies .

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2007). The economic lives of the poor. Journal of economic perspec-
  tives 21 (1), 141­168.

Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic
  Shocks in Production Networks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543­1592.

Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2018, August). Can network theory-
  based targeting increase technology adoption? Working Paper 24912, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Beaman, L. and J. Magruder (2012, December). Who gets the job referral? evidence from a social
  networks experiment. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3574­93.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine (2005). SMEs, growth, and poverty: Cross-country
  evidence. Journal of Economic Growth 10 (3), 199­229.

Benjamin, D. (1992). Household composition, labor markets, and labor demand: Testing for
  separation in agricultural household models. Econometrica 60 (2), 287­322.


                                               36
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). How much should we trust differences-in-
  differences estimates? The Quarterly journal of economics 119 (1), 249­275.

Bertrand, M., S. Johnson, K. Samphantharak, and A. Schoar (2008, June). Mixing family with
  business: A study of Thai business groups and the families behind them. Journal of Financial
  Economics 88 (3), 466­498.

Bewley, T. F. (1981). Stationary equilibrium. Journal of Economic Theory 24 (2), 265­295.

Bramoull´
        e, Y., E. Breza, A. Galeotti, and B. Rogers (2016, 06). Field experiments, social networks,
  and development.

Braverman, A. and J. E. Stiglitz (1982). Sharecropping and the interlinking of agrarian markets.
  The American Economic Review 72 (4), 695­715.

Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2020). Labor rationing: A revealed preference approach
  from hiring shocks.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011). Finance and development: A tale of two sectors.
  American economic review 101 (5), 1964­2002.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and P.-D. Sarte (2017, 12). The Impact of Regional and
  Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (4),
  2042­2096.

Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2020, December). Supply
  Chain Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake. Cambridge Working Papers
  in Economics 1670, Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.

Chandrasekhar, A. and R. Lewis (2017). The econometrics of sampled networks. Working paper.

Chandrasekhar, A. G., C. Kinnan, and H. Larreguy (2018). Social networks as contract enforce-
  ment: Evidence from a lab experiment in the field. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 10 (4), 43­78.

Chandrasekhar, A. G., M. Morten, and A. Peter (2020). Network-based hiring: Local benefits;
  global costs. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                37
Chandrasekhar, A. G., R. Townsend, and J. P. Xandri (2018). Financial centrality and liquidity
  provision. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chetty, R. and A. Looney (2006). Consumption smoothing and the welfare consequences of social
  insurance in developing economies. Journal of public economics 90 (12), 2351­2356.

Chuang, Y. and L. Schechter (2015). Social networks in developing countries. Annual Review of
  Resource Economics 7 (1), 451­472.

Daly, M. C., S. R. Buckman, and L. M. Seitelman (2020). The unequal impact of covid-19: Why
  education matters. FRBSF Economic Letter 2020, 17.

Dercon, S. and P. Krishnan (2000). In sickness and in health: Risk sharing within households in
  rural ethiopia. Journal of Political Economy 108 (4), 688­727.

Dillon, B. and C. B. Barrett (2017). Agricultural factor markets in sub-saharan africa: An updated
  view with formal tests for market failure. Food Policy 67, 64 ­ 77. Agriculture in Africa ­ Telling
  Myths from Facts.

Dillon, B., P. Brummund, and G. Mwabu (2019). Asymmetric non-separation and rural labor
  markets. Journal of Development Economics 139, 78 ­ 96.

Dingel, J. I. and B. Neiman (2020). How many jobs can be done at home?             Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Egger, D., J. Haushofer, E. Miguel, P. Niehaus, and M. Walker (2019). General equilibrium effects
  of cash transfers: experimental evidence from Kenya. NBER Working Paper No. 26600 .

Emerick, K. (2018). Trading frictions in indian village economies. Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics 132, 32 ­ 56.

Fadlon, I. and T. H. Nielsen (2015, July). Family labor supply responses to severe health shocks.
  Working Paper 21352, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fadlon, I. and T. H. Nielsen (2019, September). Family health behaviors. American Economic
  Review 109 (9), 3162­91.

Farhi, E. and D. R. Baqaee (2020). Supply and demand in disaggregated keynesian economies with
  an application to the covid-19 crisis.

                                                 38
Gabaix, X. (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79 (3), 733­772.

Genoni, M. E. (2012). Health shocks and consumption smoothing: Evidence from indonesia. Eco-
  nomic Development and Cultural Change 60 (3), 475­506.

Gertler, P. and J. Gruber (2002). Insuring consumption against illness. The American Economic
  Review 92 (1), 51­70.

Giannone, E. and C. Banternghansa (2018). The Large Consequences and the Spillover Effects of
  a Small Shock. 2018 Meeting Papers 986, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Hendren, N., A. Shenoy, and R. Townsend (2018). Household responses to negative health shocks
  in thailand. Mimeo.

Huneeus, F. (2019). Production network dynamics and the propagation of shocks. Working paper.

Jack, W. and T. Suri (2014, January). Risk sharing and transactions costs: Evidence from kenya's
  mobile money revolution. American Economic Review 104 (1), 183­223.

Jain, A. K. and R. M. Townsend (2014). The economics of platforms in a walrasian framework.
  Technical report, Working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Johnson, S., J. McMillan, and C. Woodruff (2002, April). Courts and Relational Contracts. Journal
  of Law, Economics, and Organization 18 (1), 221­277.

Jordan, R. E., P. Adab, and K. Cheng (2020). Covid-19: risk factors for severe disease and death.

Kilenthong, W. T. and R. M. Townsend (2011). Information-constrained optima with retrading:
  An externality and its market-based solution. Journal of economic theory 146 (3), 1042­1077.

Kinnan, C. and R. Townsend (2012). Kinship and financial networks, formal financial access, and
  risk reduction. American Economic Review 102 (3), 289­93.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (1999). Corporate ownership around the world.
  The Journal of Finance 54 (2), 471­517.

LaFave, D. and D. Thomas (2016). Farms, families, and markets: New evidence on completeness
  of markets in agricultural settings. Econometrica 84 (5), 1917­1960.

Lloyd-Ellis, H. and D. Bernhardt (2000). Enterprise, inequality and economic development. The
  Review of Economic Studies 67 (1), 147­168.

                                                39
Moll, B. (2014). Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing undo capital misal-
  location? American Economic Review 104 (10), 3186­3221.

Morduch, J. (1995, September). Income smoothing and consumption smoothing. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 9 (3), 103­114.

Munshi, K. (2014, November). Community networks and the process of development. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 28 (4), 49­76.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014). Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from us
  regions. American Economic Review 104 (3), 753­92.

Samphantharak, K. and R. M. Townsend (2010, December). Households as Corporate Firms.
  Number 9780521195829 in Cambridge Books. Cambridge University Press.

Samphantharak, K. and R. M. Townsend (2018, February). Risk and return in village economies.
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 10 (1), 1­40.

Silva, D., , and R. Townsend (2019). Risk-taking over the life cycle: Aggregate and distributive
  implications of entrepreneurial risk. Mimeo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Su´
  arez Serrato, J. C. and P. Wingender (2016, July). Estimating local fiscal multipliers. Working
  Paper 22425, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Tintelnot, F., A. K. Kikkawa, M. Mogstad, and E. Dhyne (2018, October). Trade and domestic
  production networks. Working Paper 25120, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Townsend, R. M. (1994). Risk and insurance in village india. Econometrica 62, 539­539.

Udry, C. (1994). Risk and insurance in a rural credit market: An empirical investigation in northern
  nigeria. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (3), 495­526.




                                                 40
Figures




                     (a) Kinship                                         (b) Financial




                  (c) Supply chain                                         (d) Labor

                       Figure 1: Socioeconomic Networks for a sample village
Note: The Figure depicts undirected, unweighted networks corresponding to a sample village in our sample.
Each dot represents a node. The size of the node increases with the number of links of each node. Each
link represents whether two nodes are connected through kinship at baseline [Panel (a)], or whether they
have transacted during the reference period [Panels (b) to (d)]. The reference period for Panels (b) to (d)
is 2005. Kinship networks are measured at baseline in 1998, while transaction networks are measured on an
annual basis. Financial networks are constructed based on gifts and loans between households in the same
village. Supply chain networks include transactions of raw material and intermediate goods as well as final
goods between businesses operated by households in the same village. Labor networks include relationships
through paid and unpaid labor between households in the same village.




                                                    41
                            Total health spending                     Outpatient-care spending                              Inpatient-care spending




              1500




                                                            400




                                                                                                                800
                                                            300




                                                                                                                600
              1000
           THB




                                                            200




                                                                                                                400
              500




                                                            100




                                                                                                                200
              0




                                                            0




                                                                                                                0
                     -4 -3 -2 -1        0     1     2   3         -4 -3 -2 -1        0     1    2       3             -4 -3 -2 -1         0    1      2     3



                      Prob. of reporting health symptoms           Prob. of receiving outpatient care                   Prob. of receiving inpatient care
              .5




                                                            .4




                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                                                .08
              .45




                                                            .35
           Prob.




                                                                                                                .06
            .4




                                                            .3




                                                                                                                .04
              .35




                                                            .25




                                                                                                                .02
              .3




                                                            .2




                     -4 -3 -2 -1        0     1     2   3         -4 -3 -2 -1        0     1    2       3             -4 -3 -2 -1         0    1      2     3
                          Time to event (half years)                  Time to event (half years)                           Time to event (half years)



                                                            Treatment                                       Placebo


            Figure 2: Health status and spending in the treatment and placebo samples
Note: The figure reports averages of health and total spending for periods before and after the health shocks
(left axis). The right axis reports probabilities of reporting health symptoms before and after the shocks.
The horizontal axis represents normalized time with respect to the event realization (time 0). Each time bin
corresponds to quarters.




                                                                             42
                                 Total consumption spending                                                                  Gifts/transfers


          3000




                                                                                                   1500
                                                                                                   1000
          2000




                                                                                                   500
     1000
     THB




                                                                                           THB
                                                                                                   0
          0




                                                                                                   -500
          -1000




                                                                                                   -1000
                   -4     -3      -2        -1              0            1    2   3                        -4    -3   -2        -1              0            1    2   3
                                         Time to event (half year)                                                           Time to event (half year)

                                           Coef                      90% CI                                                    Coef                      90% CI




                        (a) Total consumption spending                                                          (b) Incoming gifts/transfers
                                         Fixed Assets                                                                 Hired labor (hours/month)
          20000




                                                                                                   20
          10000




                                                                                                   0
                                                                                           Hours
     THB
      0




                                                                                                   -20
          -10000
          -20000




                                                                                                   -40




                   -4     -3      -2        -1              0            1    2   3                        -4    -3   -2        -1              0            1    2   3
                                         Time to event (half year)                                                           Time to event (half year)

                                           Coef                      90% CI                                                    Coef                      90% CI




                                 (c) Fixed assets                                                               (d) Hired labor (hrs/month)
                                       Business spending                                                                        Revenues
                                                                                                   4000
          2000




                                                                                                   2000
          10000




                                                                                             0
          THB




                                                                                           THB
     -1000




                                                                                                   -2000
          -2000




                                                                                                   -4000
          -3000




                   -4     -3      -2        -1              0            1    2   3                        -4    -3   -2        -1              0            1    2   3
                                         Time to event (half year)                                                           Time to event (half year)

                                           Coef                      90% CI                                                    Coef                      90% CI




                                (e) Input spending                                                                         (f) Revenues

                               Figure 3: Changes in household outcomes before and after the shock
Note: Each dot represents differences between treatment and placebo households in changes in outcomes
relative to the period preceding the beginning of the shock ( = -1).The estimating sample includes 2 years
before and after the shock divided in half-year bins. All specifications control for household time-variant
demographic characteristics, as well as household and month fixed effects. 90% confidence intervals are
computed using standard errors clustered at the household level. Costs and revenues exclude costs and
earnings associated with the provision of labor to other households or firms.




                                                                                      43
                 (a) Total transactions                            (b) Sales network transactions




            (c) Labor network transactions                                (d) Total income

                         Figure 4: Indirect effects on transactions and income

Note: The Figure presents flexible difference-in-difference estimates of the indirect effects of idiosyncratic
shocks on local businesses, following equation (5). All regressions include household fixed effects, event fixed
effects, month fixed effects, village- and year-fixed effects, and household size, household average age and
education, and the number of adult males and females in each household. Each dot captures differences in
changes in outcomes with respect to the half-year preceding the shock (-1) between more- and less-exposed
households. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the household (i) and shock level (j ).




                                                      44
                       Figure 5: Indirect effects on total consumption spending
Note: The Figure presents flexible difference-in-difference estimates of the indirect effects of idiosyncratic
shocks on local businesses, following equation (5). All regressions include household fixed effects, event fixed
effects, month fixed effects, village- and year-fixed effects, and household size, household average age and
education, and the number of adult males and females in each household. Each dot captures differences in
changes in outcomes with respect to the half-year preceding the shock (-1) between more- and less-exposed
households; that is, the coefficient on I[j,t = k ] × Closenessi,j , where Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance
to the shocked household during the year preceding the shock to j . Standard errors are two-way clustered
at the household (i) and shock (j ) level.




                                                      45
                                     Effects of shock on incoming gifts
                                                   By shock origin
                    3000
                    2000
                    1000
                    0
                    -1000




                            -4       -3       -2          0          1              2   3

                                              Idiosyncratic              Sectoral



                            Figure 6: Effects on gift reception by type of shock
Note: The figures depict flexible difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of idiosyncratic shocks on
incoming gifts (in blue) and of the EU shrimp ban on incoming gifts (in red). The figures focus on households
in the 4 villages corresponding to the Chachoengsao province, where most of the shrimp activity takes place.
The European Union import ban on Thai shrimp was announced in May 2002. The the effects of idiosyncratic
shocks are estimated using the specification detailed in equation (3). The effects of the shrimp-ban shock
are estimated using a regression of incoming gifts on month fixed effects, normalized with respect to May of
2002, and interactions of month fixed effects with an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the household had
a shrimp farm before the shock. In this case, the effects of the shock are captured by the plotted interaction
coefficients. In both cases, standard errors are clustered at the households level and are used to plot 90%
confidence intervals.




                                                       46
Tables

                                                     Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                     Panel A: Household baseline characteristics

                                                                                   N     Mean       S.D.     10th %ile   90th%ile


                    Number of household members                                   509     4.54      1.87         2          7
                    Number of adults                                              509     2.87      1.38         1          5
                    Household head age                                            507     51.95     13.45       35          70
                    Average age                                                   509     34.14     12.11       21          52
                    Household head is a male                                      507     0.77      0.42         0          1
                    Years of schooling: Household head                            504     4.49      2.59         3          7
                    Years of schooling: Household maximum achievement             509     8.19      3.64         4          14
                    Years of schooling: Household average                         509     5.09      2.17         3          8

                                                     Panel B: Household finance (annual data)

                                                                                   N     Mean       S.D.     10th %ile   90th%ile
                    Net Income in THB:
                    Farm                                                          7635   134389    1378506     -150       316500
                    Off-farm family business                                      7635    19095    115540        0        40700
                    Labor                                                         7635    52816    108492        0        152222
                    Total from operations (farm+off-farm + labor)                 7635   173327    618277     4974.07     410723
                    Gift/transfers                                                7635    24107    183826     -11613      75706
                    Total net income (Operations+Gifts/Transfers)                 7635   197434    644150      16241      446693
                    Consumption in THB
                    Food                                                          7635    32952     21915      11931      60559
                    Total consumption                                             7635    98149     99486      24330      204512
                    Household Assets and Debt
                    Total Assets (THB)                                            7635   2448596   7431394    194277     4817110
                    Fixed Assets/ Total Assets (%)                                7635     53        27         13          88
                    Total debt/Total assets (%)                                   7635     12        21          0          27
                    Households with outstanding loans (%)                         7635     83        38          0         100
                    Households with outstanding loans from institutions (%)       7635     48        50          0         100
                    Households with outstanding loans from personal lenders (%)   7635     30        46          0         100

                                                              Panel C: Village networks

                                                                                   N     Mean       S.D.     10th %ile   90th%ile
                    Baseline kinship networks: Degree (Number of links)           8344    2.36      2.19         0          6
                    Baseline kinship networks: Access ( any link)                 8344    0.77      0.42         0          1
                    Financial networks: Degree                                    8344    0.65      1.36         0          2
                    Financial networks: Access                                    8344    0.35      0.48         0          1
                    Sales networks: Degree                                        8344    1.26      2.64         0          3
                    Sales networks: Access                                        8344    0.48      0.50         0          1
                    Labor-market network: Degree                                  8344    3.07      4.42         0          9
                    Labor-market network: Access                                  8344    0.62      0.49         0          1

Note: Panel A reports summary statistics about demographic characteristics, measured at baseline. Panel B
reports household financial characteristics based on annual averages using a balanced panel of 509 households.
Farm income includes income from agriculture, livestock, fishing and shrimping. Off-farm income excludes
earnings from labor provision. In both cases income is net of operation costs. Gifts and transfers include
transactions from both households inside and outside the village, as well as the receipt of government
transfers. Consumption includes spending but also consumption of home production. In Panel C, all networks
are unvalued and undirected; all links have equal weight and the direction of the transaction is not considered.
Kinship networks are measured at baseline, while transaction networks are measured on an annual basis.
Financial networks are constructed based on gifts and loans between households in the same village. Supply
chain networks include transactions of raw material and intermediate goods between businesses operated by
households in the same village. Labor networks include relationships through paid and unpaid labor between
households in the same village. Degree: Number of households with whom each household transacted in
each year. Access: Takes the value of 1 if the household has participated in the network during a given year
and 0 otherwise.


                                                                          47
                                                          Table 2: Persistence in transaction networks, by network type

                                                                                           Probability of a direct link

                                                                               Supply chain                               Labor Market                                 Gift or Loans
                VARIABLES                                           (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)


                Lagged Prob. of link ()                           0.469***   0.460***   0.379***   0.379***   0.426***   0.401***   0.333***   0.333***   0.260***   0.258***   0.209***   0.209***
                                                                  (0.015)    (0.014)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.015)    (0.015)    (0.013)    (0.013)
                Kinship connection                                                      0.099***   0.099***                         0.109***   0.109***                         0.091***   0.091***
                                                                                        (0.006)    (0.006)                          (0.007)    (0.007)                          (0.006)    (0.006)
                Demographic ( log distance)                                                         -0.014                                      -0.107                                     0.141**
                                                                                                   (0.120)                                     (0.131)                                     (0.071)
                Net-worth distance (log of squared differences)                                     -0.037                                      -0.006                                     -0.035**
                                                                                                   (0.027)                                     (0.031)                                     (0.017)


                Village fixed effects                               No         Yes        Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        Yes
                Year fixed effects                                  No         Yes        Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        Yes        No         Yes        Yes        Yes
48




                Household fixed effects                             No         No         Yes        Yes        No         No         Yes        Yes        No         No         Yes        Yes
                Observations                                      233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240    233,240
                R-squared                                          0.221      0.227      0.268      0.268      0.189      0.207      0.241      0.241      0.067      0.069      0.102      0.102

                                                                                           p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

     Note: The table presents regression coefficients following the specification in equation (1). We model the probability that a pair of households {i, j }
     trades in year t as a function of whether the couple traded in period t - 1, by type of transaction. Column (1) presents raw correlations, Column (2)
     includes village-year fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) control for kinship first-degree connections, differences in baseline demographic characteristics,
     differences in baseline wealth (e.g., assets net of liabilities), and household fixed effects. The coefficients of Demographic and Net-worth distance are
     re-scaled by 100. All regressions are estimated over a sample of dyads of households included in the survey sample that responded in all 172 monthly
     waves of the survey. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the household i and j levels, and are presented in parentheses.
                Table 3: Effects on spending, assets, transfers, and family businesses

                                                       Panel A: Effects on Spending

                                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                                                              Non-health
                                               Health          Total
                                                                                Total          Non-Food         Food

                      Post X Treatment         534.8***        585.1            50.36            9.039          41.32
                                               (91.18)        (367.4)           (344.4)          (314.0)       (69.65)

                      Baseline mean (DV)        152.6          5451.0           5298.3           2903.7         2394.7
                      Observations              22709          22709            22709            22709          22709
                      Number of households       451            451              451              451            451
                      R-Squared                 0.0489         0.154            0.146            0.0886         0.676

                                           Panel B: Effects on household savings and assets
                                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                               Savings      Cash in hand      Livestock        Inventories   Fixed Assets

                      Post X Treatment         -1211.1        -16081.6          -1035.3          -7771.7       -5094.7
                                               (1847.5)      (22697.4)         (2467.5)         (7114.0)       (5471.4)

                      Baseline mean (DV)        5278.6        370556.0         36674.4          101918.1       88184.4
                      Observations              22709          22709            22709            22709          22709
                      Number of households       451            451              451              451            451
                      R-Squared                 0.0627         0.885            0.926            0.885          0.854

                                             Panel C: Effects on gifts, transfers and debt
                                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                Gifts from village hhs
                                                                            Gifts/Transfers    Borrowing     Gifts+Loans
                                                Prob.          count

                      Post X Treatment          0.0103         0.0140          570.4***          113.0          668.1*
                                               (0.006)        (0.009)           (220.5)          (258.8)       (398.7)

                      Baseline mean (DV)        0.0192         0.0249           1957.3           234.4          2736.5
                      Observations              22709          22709            22709            22709          22709
                      Number of households       451            451              451              451            451
                      R-Squared                 0.140          0.0695           0.159            0.0105         0.0399

                                                Panel D: Effects on family businesses
                                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                Costs       Hired labor       HH Labor         Biz. Assets    Revenues

                      Post X Treatment        -1783.4**       -14.33*           -10.89           1510.0        -1744.4
                                               (842.6)        (7.504)           (8.809)         (2101.4)       (1075.5)

                      Baseline mean (DV)        7610.2         18.11            154.1           33376.9        14939.0
                      Observations              22709          22708            22708            22709          22709
                      Number of households       451            451              451              451            451
                      R-Squared                 0.781          0.578            0.712            0.911          0.620

                                                         p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table reports estimates of  from equation (3) for different outcomes. Each column reports
differences between treatment and placebo households in changes in outcomes before and after the shock. All
regressions control for household demographic characteristics, household and month fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the household level. Costs, labor, assets and revenues are aggregated across all
businesses operated by household members, and exclude revenues and costs of wage labor provision to
other businesses or households. Hired labor and labor provided by household members are measured in
hours/month.



                                                                       49
                                       Table 4: Heterogeneity in the effects of health shocks

                                                  Panel A: Effects of the shocks by pre-period access to informal insurance

                                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)                       (4)                (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)
                                            Health Spending   Total spending    Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)    Gifts    Hired labor   HH Labor     Costs      Revenues



Post X Treatment (1 )                          402.8***           628.9                0.00574                   0.00494            458.5**     -8.895       -18.65*   -2596.8***   -4070.7***
                                                (65.57)          (520.5)              (0.00427)                 (0.00556)           (206.7)     (6.467)      (9.830)    (824.1)      (1099.7)


Post X Treatment X High Access (2 )              82.76            124.2                0.00594                    0.0169             1.537      -5.949       7.040      2053.1*     3947.1**
                                                (108.9)          (630.5)               (0.0110)                  (0.0156)           (351.9)     (10.57)      (14.69)    (1231.9)     (1647.3)



Effect: High Acceess (1 + 2 )                    485.6            753.1                 0.0117                    0.0218             460.0      -14.84       -11.61      -543.8       -123.6
P-val: High Access                               0.000            0.0650                0.259                     0.138              0.109      0.0952       0.294       0.555        0.919

Baseline mean (DV)                               148.8            6055.5                0.0203                    0.0258            2248.3       16.93       144.2      7524.5       15228.3
Observations                                    37325             37325                 37325                     37325             37325       37325        37325       37325        37325
Adj. R-Squared                                  0.0435            0.101                 0.113                     0.0605             0.138      0.677        0.649       0.743        0.542

                                              Panel B: Effects of the shocks by age of ill household member ( prime age 18-60)

                                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)                       (4)                (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)
                                            Health Spending   Total spending    Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)    Gifts    Hired labor   HH Labor     Costs      Revenues



Post X Treatment (1 )                          563.6***         1064.4***              0.00896                   0.00883            533.7*      -1.136       -5.741     -1468.8      -1962.8*
                                                (112.1)          (403.6)              (0.00920)                  (0.0126)           (292.5)     (2.999)      (12.56)    (894.9)      (1134.8)


Post X Treatment X Prime-working age (2 )      -255.8**           -935.0               -0.00244                  0.00165            -325.8      -17.03*      -4.344      -746.8       -726.2
                                                (123.7)          (574.3)               (0.0119)                  (0.0159)           (363.2)     (9.626)      (15.63)    (1293.4)     (1642.1)



Effect: Prime-working age (1 + 2 )               307.8            129.4                0.00652                    0.0105             207.8      -18.17       -10.09     -2215.6      -2689.0
P-val: Prime-working age                         0.000            0.754                 0.444                     0.335              0.339      0.0785       0.280      0.0186       0.0297

Baseline mean (DV)                               135.7            5632.1                0.0194                    0.0246            2134.2       18.50       142.9      7040.2       14449.8
Observations                                    29478             29478                 29478                     29478             29478       29478        29478       29478        29478
Adj. R-Squared                                  0.0376            0.168                 0.0738                    0.0399             0.116      0.706        0.659       0.735        0.525

                                                                              p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table reports estimates of 1 and 2 from equation (4) for different outcomes by access to informal
insurance networks, in Panel A, and by whether the shocks relate to illness of non-prime-age or prime-age
family members, in Panel B. Each column reports differences between treatment and placebo households
in changes in outcomes before and after the shock, and interactions of these differences with the relevant
variable capturing heterogeneity. High Access equals to 1 if the number of transfers or loans given/received
to/from other households in the village during the year preceding the shock are above the sample median.
Prime working age equals to 1 if the shock relates to the illness of a family member of age 18 to 60. Hired
and household labor are measured in hours per month. All regressions control for household demographic
characteristics, household and village-month fixed effects as well as flexible time-to-treatment trends by
access to informal insurance. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.




                                                                                          50
                                     Table 5: Propagation through village networks

                                                Panel A: Propagation through village networks

                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                 Input/Output      Hired labor    All transactions      Income       Incoming gifts   Consumption


      Post X closeness (village network)          -0.199***         -0.115**         -0.314***       -1,236.121***     -107.381        -294.199*
                                                    (0.061)          (0.044)          (0.077)          (450.332)       (125.041)       (160.936)


      Observations                                 410,578          410,578           410,578          410,578          410,578         410,578
      R-squared                                     0.440             0.231            0.374            0.197            0.140           0.620
      Pre-period Mean                               0.999             0.470            1.469            10486            2339            7265
      Number of events                               391              391               391              391              391             391
                                 Panel B: Propagation through supply-chain and labor-market networks
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                 Input/Output      Hired labor    All transactions      Income       Incoming gifts   Consumption


      Post X closeness (supply-chain network)     -0.228***           0.022          -0.206**           -73.483        -251.662         65.746
                                                    (0.065)          (0.040)          (0.081)          (489.309)       (160.727)       (174.830)
      Post X closeness (labor-market network)       -0.034          -0.210***        -0.244***       -1,323.731***      177.292       -485.050***
                                                    (0.066)          (0.043)          (0.083)          (447.973)       (138.280)       (159.340)


      Observations                                 410,578          410,578           410,578          410,578          410,578         410,578
      R-squared                                     0.535             0.274            0.483            0.316            0.254           0.819
      Pre-period Mean                               0.999             0.470            1.469            10486            2339            7265
      Number of events                               391              391               391              391              391             391
                                                              p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table presents estimates of  from equation (6). Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the
shocked household during the year preceding the shock to j . Each coefficient captures differences in changes in
outcomes before and after the shock between more- and less-exposed households, through village networks
in Panel A, and through supply-chain and labor-market networks in Panel B. Each regression includes
household (i), event j , and month fixed effects, as well as demographic characteristics such as household
size, average age, education and number of male and female adults. Standard errors are two-way clustered
at the household (i) and event (j ) level.




                                                                             51
                               Table 6: Propagation of health shocks and access to informal insurance of shocked households

                                                                        (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)

                VARIABLES                                          Input/Output   Hired labor   All transactions      Income       Incoming gifts   Consumption


                Post X Closeness (village network)                  -0.260***      -0.107**        -0.367***       -1,654.198***      -40.953         -321.272
                                                                      (0.066)       (0.048)         (0.085)          (565.595)       (150.804)       (213.899)
                Post X Closeness X Insurance (shocked household)     0.116***       -0.026           0.090         1,031.979***       -90.126        93.541***
                                                                      (0.030)       (0.078)         (0.130)          (64.348)         (59.874)        (10.928)


                Effect: High Access (1 + 2 )                          -0.144        -0.133          -0.277            -622.2           -131.1          -227.7
                P-val: High Access                                    0.442         0.233            0.376            0.198            0.141           0.622
                Observations                                         405,073       405,073          405,073          405,073          405,073         405,073
                R-squared                                             0.0498        0.0482          0.0150            0.267            0.371           0.287
52




                Pre-period Mean                                       0.999         0.470            1.469            10486            2339            7265
                Number of events                                       386           386              386              386              386             386
                                                                       p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

     Note: The Table reports estimates of 1 and 2 from the pooled difference-in-difference equation (7) for different outcomes by access to informal
     insurance networks of the shocked household. Access to informal insurance : Number of transfers or loans given/received to/from other households
     in the village (during the year preceding the shock) above the sample median. Each regression controls for household, event, and month fixed effects
     as well as time-varying demographic characteristics. The estimating sample excludes households who suffered a direct health shock during any of the
     24 months following the shocks to other households in their village. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the household (i) and event (j ) level.
A   Appendix Figures and Tables




                              53
                                 Symptoms' duration before the episode of high health spending




                      .4
                      .3
                   Density
                    .2.1
                      0




                             0              5            10             15         20            25
                                                    Number of consecutive months
                             Median:   3. Mean:   6.19




    Figure A1: Distribution of symptom duration before the episodes of high health spending

Note: The figure plots the distribution of the number of consecutive months prior to the episodes of high
health spending for which at least one household member reported health symptoms. The dashed vertical
line denotes the median number of consecutive months reporting symptoms before the episode of high health
spending.




                                                             54
                        .02
                        .015
                    Density
                    .01 .005
                        0




                               0         10        20      30      40     50      60   70     80       90
                                                                   Age at shock



                                                        Figure A2: Age at shock

Note: The figure plots a histogram capturing the distribution of age of family members reporting health
symptoms during the month associated to the beginning of each shock. The figure includes observations
corresponding to the 405 shocks for which we found households reporting non-pregnancy/non-birth health
symptoms. The dashed vertical line denotes the median age of household members reporting symptoms
during the month preceding the beginning of each shock.
            1500




                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                 .45
            1000




                                                                                                                 Prob.
          THB




                                                                                                                   .4
            500




                                                                                                                 .35
                                                                                                                 .3
            0




                   -8              -6         -4           -2      0        2          4           6         8
                                                            Quarters to event

                                        Health spending                                Per cap. food cons.
                                        Prob. of health issues (right axis)




                Figure A3: Health status and spending before and after health shocks.
Note: The figure reports averages of health and total spending for periods before and after the health
                                                      55 that at least one household member reports health
shocks (left axis). The right axis reports the probability
symptoms in a given month, before and after the shocks. The horizontal axis represents normalized time
with respect to the event realization (time 0). Each time bin corresponds to quarters. All averages are
computed over a balanced panel of 505 households.
                         Table A1: Incidence of health conditions by type of symptom




                                                                                                 All periods
                     Condition              Shock periods   Non-shock periods
                                                                                 All    Prime working age   Elderly    Children

                                                 (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)      (6)

      Headache/dizziness                        9.28              12.03         11.46         15.09            11.96     4.76
      Eye sore                                  1.33              2.05          1.92          1.73             2.09      2.40
      Tootache                                  1.36              1.77          1.72          2.22             0.84      3.00
      Cough/cold/influenza                      18.35             23.82         22.87         18.67            8.28     55.19
      Nausea/heartburn/abdominal pain           4.77              5.11          5.13          6.05             5.15      3.69
      Respiratory/asthma                        4.91              3.55          3.76          3.63             4.71      2.31
      Fever/chills                              2.04              2.09          2.05          1.46             1.01      3.14
      Diarrhea                                  1.11              2.01          1.83          1.77             1.01      2.51
      Skin disorders/scabies/ulcers/boils       1.84               2.1          2.14          1.89             2.07      2.85
      Rheumatism                                10.89             9.42          9.61          8.74             15.95     0.09
      Infections                                7.64              7.45          7.44          9.56             5.51      6.65
      Chest pains/heart problems                4.24              3.75          3.75          4.54             3.56      2.82
      Others-uncommon conditions                32.24             24.88         26.32         24.65            37.84    10.61




Note: The table reports the proportion of symptoms reported during different time periods and sub-
populations. Column (1) reports the distribution of reported symptoms during two years preceding and
following the episodes of high-health spending. Column (2) reports the distribution of symptoms for periods
that are within two years away of the events (non-shock). Columns (3) to (5) report the distribution of
symptoms during all the survey waves by age groups. Prime working age: 18 to 60 years old. Elderly: 60
years old or older. Children: 17 years old of younger.




                                                                 56
     Table A2: Time use in pre-shock periods: Count of days dedicated to different activities




                                               Number of days per month          More than 15 days
                                                          Average                        Share
      Cultivation                                           3.43                         0.08
      Livestock                                             6.55                         0.21
      Fish/Shrimp                                           1.13                         0.02
      Off-farm business                                     1.83                         0.07
      Housework                                             22.85                        0.78
      School or training                                    2.06                         0.05
      Positions in village organizations                    0.15                         0.00
      Funerals/Weddings                                     0.56                         0.00
      Labor exchange outside home                           0.02                         0.00
      Unpaid labor outside home                             0.39                         0.01
      Paid labor outside home                               3.94                         0.12
      Looking for a job                                     0.03                         0.00
      Sick                                                  0.10                         0.00


Note: The table reports participation in several activities for a subsample of individuals that reported being
sick during the periods in which their household experienced the shock. Column 1 reports the number of days
in which household members reported participating in each activity, during the month preceding the shock.
Column 2 reports the share of affected individuals that dedicated more than 15 days to each activity, during
the month preceding the shock. The sample is restricted to the month-preceding the shock and corresponds
only to household members that reported being sick during the shock. These activities are not mutually
exclusive, so the total days per month across categories add up to more than 30.




                                                     57
                            .01
                    Density
                   .005     0




                                           20     40        60       80      100        120      140   160
                                                                   Survey wave


                                                (a) Distribution of initial event's period
                            .8    .6
                   Share of shocks
                      .4    .2
                            0




                                       1                                 2                             3
                                                 Shocked households in the same village-month cell


      (b) Distribution of shocks by number of simultaneously affected households in the same village

  Figure A4: Distribution of events by initial event's periods and number of affected households

Note: The top panel plots a histogram capturing the distribution of survey months associated the beginning
of the health shocks across the full sample period.The bottom panel plots the distribution of events by the
number of households simultaneously affected in the same village.




                                                                    58
            Table A3: Timing of health shocks and village and household characteristics


                                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)

                    VARIABLES                                       P(event)     P(event)    P(event)


                    Lagged  P(event)                               -0.500***    -0.501***   -0.5010***
                                                                     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.0012)
                    Lagged  Total net operating income                                       0.0002
                                                                                             (0.0009)
                    Lagged  Consumption spending                                             -0.0022
                                                                                             (0.0017)
                    Lagged  Consumption of household production                              0.0082
                                                                                             (0.0913)
                    Lagged  Borrowing                                                        -0.0008
                                                                                             (0.0010)
                    Lagged  Lending                                                          -0.0070*
                                                                                             (0.0039)
                    Lagged  Inflows (transfers)                                              0.0008
                                                                                             (0.0010)
                    Lagged  Outflows (transfers)                                             0.0003
                                                                                             (0.0004)
                    Lagged  Livestock value                                                  0.0002
                                                                                             (0.0005)
                    Lagged  Cash in hand                                                     0.0005
                                                                                             (0.0004)
                    Lagged  Fixed assets - excludes land                                     0.0006
                                                                                             (0.0005)
                    Lagged  Land value                                                       0.0003
                                                                                             (0.0004)


                    Observations                                     80,750      77,163      77,163
                    R-squared                                        0.252        0.275      0.2754
                    Month FE                                          Yes          Yes         Yes
                    Village FE                                         No          Yes         Yes
                    Number of households                              475          475         475
                                                p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The table reports OLS coefficients from changes in the the probability of suffering a shock on period
t on lagged changes and village fixed-effects in columns 1 and 2. The bottom panel reports an F-test for
the joint significance of the village fixed effects. Column 3 reports similar coefficients including lagged first-
differences of household-finance variables. Standard errors are clustered at the household level to control for
serial correlation.




                                                            59
                             Total consumption                                                            Gifts                                                 Fixed Assets
            3000




                                                                          1000




                                                                                                                                          15000
                                                                                                                                          10000
            2000




                                                                          500




                                                                                                                                        5000
      THB




                                                                    THB




                                                                                                                                        THB
            1000




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                          -5000
            0




                                                                          -500




                   -4   -2              0                 2     4                 -4       -2               0                 2     4             -4    -2              0                 2     4
                             Time to shock (half years)                                          Time to shock (half years)                                  Time to shock (half years)

                              Treatment               Placebo                                     Treatment               Placebo                             Treatment               Placebo




                   (a) Total consumption                                                   (b) Assets                                   (c) Incoming gifts/transfers
                                 Hired Labor                                                    Costs/Input spending                                              Revenues
                                                                          2000




                                                                                                                                          3000
            10




                                                                                                                                          2000
            5




                                                                          1000




                                                                                                                                         1000
      hours




                                                                    THB




                                                                                                                                        THB
        0




                                                                          0
            -5




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                          -1000
            -10




                                                                          -1000




                   -4   -2              0                 2     4                 -4       -2               0                 2     4             -4    -2              0                 2     4
                             Time to shock (half years)                                          Time to shock (half years)                                  Time to shock (half years)

                              Treatment               Placebo                                     Treatment               Placebo                             Treatment               Placebo




     (d) Hired labor (hrs/month)                                                       (e) Input spending                                              (f) Revenues

                         Figure A5: Changes in household outcomes before and after the shock
Note: The Figure plots means of average monthly consumption, savings, cash holdings, and incoming gifts
for the four quarters preceding and following the shock. All variables are normalized with respect to the
pre-shock mean. Period  = -1 denotes the half year preceding the sharp increase in health spending.
Total consumption spending includes health spending. Revenues include income streams from all household
enterprises and exclude earnings from providing wage labor to other households.




                                                                                                      60
      Table A4: Robustness to including shocks occurring in the second half of the sample.

                                                 Panel A: Effects on Spending

                                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                                                         Non-health
                                         Health           Total
                                                                           Total          Non-Food         Food
                Post X Treatment         431.6***        711.3**           279.7            249.4          30.30
                                         (53.09)         (350.6)           (346.0)          (325.5)       (61.10)
                Baseline mean (DV)        147.3          6025.9            5878.5           3217.0         2661.5
                Observations              37881          37881             37881            37881          37881
                Number of households       471            471               471              471            471
                R-Squared                 0.0503          0.102            0.0932           0.0524         0.673
                                     Panel B: Effects on household savings and assets
                                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                         Savings      Cash in hand       Livestock        Inventories   Fixed Assets
                Post X Treatment         -1287.6         -6886.9           -1179.9          -3086.1      -10366.0*
                                         (1253.1)       (16517.8)         (1982.7)         (5062.9)       (6056.6)
                Baseline mean (DV)        6287.7        434066.6          29655.4          123317.6       95742.2
                Observations              37881          37881             37881            37881          37881
                Number of households       471            471               471              471            471
                R-Squared                 0.0813          0.849            0.775            0.834          0.759
                                       Panel C: Effects on gifts, transfers and debt
                                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                          Gifts from village hhs
                                                                       Gifts/Transfers    Borrowing     Gifts+Loans
                                          Prob.           count
                Post X Treatment         0.00873*        0.0131*          479.8***          229.5         752.4**
                                        (0.00522)       (0.00724)          (171.9)          (266.7)       (347.1)
                Baseline mean (DV)        0.0201         0.0255            2247.8           -30.78         2796.6
                Observations              37881          37881             37881            37881          37881
                Number of households       471            471               471              471            471
                R-Squared                 0.110          0.0585            0.136            0.0207         0.0382
                                          Panel D: Effects on family businesses
                                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
                                            Costs       Hired labor         HH Labor      Biz. Assets      Revenues
                Post X Treatment        -1666.6***      -11.26**          -16.38**          -767.4       -2271.6***
                                         (607.2)         (5.427)           (7.310)         (1934.4)       (808.3)
                Baseline mean (DV)        7447.5          16.80            143.6           33048.1        15110.3
                Observations              37881          37880             37880            37881          37881
                Number of households       471            471               471              471            471
                R-Squared                 0.743           0.677            0.645            0.880          0.541
                                                   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table reports OLS estimates of  from equation (3) for different outcomes. The estimating
sample includes results 471 households in the treatment and control group. Each column reports differences
between treatment and placebo households in changes in outcomes before and after the shock. All regressions
control for household demographic characteristics, household and month fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the household level. Costs, labor, assets and revenues are aggregated across all businesses
operated by household members, and exclude revenues and costs of wage labor provision to other businesses
or households. Hired labor and labor provided by household members are measured in hours/month.


                                                                  61
                                              Table A5: Robustness to alternative definitions of the onset of the shocks

                                                         Panel A: Beginning of event coincides with the observed peak in health spending

                                   (1)        (2)               (3)                       (4)                    (5)            (6)                (7)                      (8)             (9)
                                 Health      Total     Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)   Gifts/Transfers    Costs      Hired labor (Hrs/Month)   HH Labor (Hrs/Month)   Revenues


          Post X Treatment       494.9***   741.4**           0.0104*                    0.0130               550.3***       -1649.0**           -10.70*                  -8.833          -1233.8
                                 (82.52)    (326.2)          (0.00612)                 (0.00870)               (208.2)        (838.9)            (5.637)                  (9.079)         (1102.4)


          Baseline mean (DV)      147.9     5397.2             0.0201                    0.0265                1977.3         7561.6              19.01                   155.5           14643.0
          Observations            22643     22643              22643                     22643                 22643          22643              22642                    22642            22643
          Number of households     451       451                451                       451                   451            451                451                      451              451
          R-Squared               0.0810     0.196             0.163                     0.0929                0.175           0.784              0.570                   0.718            0.629
62




                                                     Panel B: Beginning of event starts 6 months before the observed peak in health spending
                                   (1)        (2)               (3)                       (4)                    (5)            (6)                (7)                      (8)             (9)
                                 Health      Total     Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)   Gifts/Transfers    Costs      Hired labor (Hrs/Month)   HH Labor (Hrs/Month)   Revenues


          Post X Treatment       280.8***    9.094            0.00802                    0.0104               470.1**        -1762.6**           -15.23*                  -11.15          -1637.2
                                 (89.16)    (404.9)          (0.00664)                 (0.00972)               (211.3)        (863.6)            (8.310)                  (8.506)         (1088.1)


          Baseline mean (DV)      214.5     5525.7             0.0178                    0.0236                2030.9         7618.8              17.17                   151.6           14977.5
          Observations            22742     22742              22742                     22742                 22742          22742              22741                    22741            22742
          Number of households     451       451                451                       451                   451            451                451                      451              451
          R-Squared               0.0762     0.182             0.173                     0.101                 0.182           0.790              0.596                   0.725            0.631
                                                                                         p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

     Note: The Table reports OLS estimates of  from equation (3) for different outcomes. Each column reports differences between treatment and placebo
     households in changes in outcomes before and after the shock. All regressions include a vector of demographic characteristics as well as household
     and month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.
                  Table A6: Robustness to alternative placebo groups and specifications


                                            Panel A: Randomly assigned placebo shocks

                               (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)        (9)
                                 Spending           Gifts (in village)                                           Production
                                                                            Gifts (total)
                             Health      Total     Prob.        Count                        Costs     Hired Labor     HH Labor   Revenues


      Post X Treatment       450.3***   712.5**   0.00811*     0.00534         271.7*       -975.3**     -6.471        -14.57**   -1671.2***
                             (64.81)    (324.2)   (0.00447)   (0.00705)       (147.7)       (474.3)      (5.619)        (6.006)    (633.7)


      Baseline mean (DV)      198.1     6186.2     0.0226       0.0275         2375.8       7707.3        17.13          142.1     15193.4
      Observations            43194     43194      43194        43194          43194         43194       43193           43193      43194
      Number of households     472       472        472          472            472           472         472             472        472
      R-Squared               0.0620     0.119      0.154       0.0698         0.156         0.779        0.735          0.699      0.572
                  Panel B: Panel regression with household and month fixed effects (Gertler and Gruber, 2002)
                               (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)        (9)
                                 Spending           Gifts (in village)                                           Production
                                                                            Gifts (total)
                             Health      Total     Prob.        Count                        Costs     Hired Labor     HH Labor   Revenues


      Post                   522.6***    94.54    -0.00506*   -0.00369         235.8*       -472.2*      -1.936         -5.541*    -986.0**
                             (88.57)    (334.3)   (0.00288)   (0.00480)       (130.7)       (246.8)      (1.349)        (3.212)    (430.4)


      Baseline mean (DV)      161.9     6306.1     0.0198       0.0257         2387.3       7938.9        18.92          142.9     15869.2
      Observations            21362     21362      21362        21362          21362         21362       21361           21361      21362
      Number of households     469       469        469          469            469           469         469             469        469
      R-Squared               0.0248    0.0764      0.158       0.0836         0.184         0.781        0.764          0.762      0.582
                                                       p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The table reports difference-in-difference estimates corresponding to equation (3). Panel A report es-
timates in which the placebo shocks are allocated randomly. Panel B reports estimates excluding households
who suffered the shock in the second half of the survey and their respective placebo group. Standard errors
are clustered at the household level. All regressions include a vector of demographic characteristics as well
as household and village-month fixed effects.




                                                                       63
                                      Table A7: Heterogeneity in the effects of health shocks

                                                 Panel A: Effects of the shocks by pre-period access to informal insurance

                                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)                       (4)                (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)
                                            Health Spending   Total spending    Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)    Gifts    Hired labor   HH Labor    Costs      Revenues



Post X Treatment (1 )                          458.3***           569.7                0.0135*                    0.0120            523.4*      -14.12       -15.44    -2703.7**   -3712.4**
                                                (98.17)          (553.0)              (0.00706)                 (0.00885)           (271.1)     (11.38)      (12.45)   (1261.5)    (1603.3)


Post X Treatment X High Access (2 )              172.7            -65.72               -0.00740                  0.00237            35.81       -1.011       12.38      1828.8     4037.4*
                                                (180.2)          (815.9)               (0.0130)                  (0.0195)           (452.2)     (18.01)      (19.40)   (1709.7)    (2075.9)



Effect: High Access (1 + 2 )                     631.0            504.0                0.00612                    0.0143            559.2       -15.13       -3.060     -874.9       325.0
P-val: High Access                             0.0000616          0.358                 0.577                     0.404             0.121       0.217        0.827       0.451       0.816

Baseline mean (DV)                               154.7            5476.4                0.0193                    0.0252            1952.0      18.25        154.6      7696.3     15039.3
Observations                                    22289             22289                 22289                     22289             22289       22289        22289      22289       22289
Adj. R-Squared                                  0.0495            0.154                 0.141                     0.0702            0.163       0.578        0.716       0.783       0.624

                                            Panel B: Effects of the shocks by age of ill household member ( prime age 18-60)

                                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)                       (4)                (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)
                                            Health Spending   Total spending    Prob. Gift (in village)   # of Gifts (in village)    Gifts    Hired labor   HH Labor    Costs      Revenues



Post X Treatment (1 )                          698.3***          1209.4*               0.00562                   0.00491            584.4        3.194       -6.243    -1714.7*    -2869.6**
                                                (195.4)          (618.9)               (0.0112)                  (0.0181)           (379.3)     (2.699)      (14.53)    (901.8)    (1292.8)


Post X Treatment X Prime-working age (2 )       -344.8*          -1081.4               0.00924                   0.00979            -286.3      -31.88*      10.46      -674.4      1578.2
                                                (200.3)          (772.2)               (0.0149)                  (0.0213)           (450.1)     (17.48)      (19.28)   (1729.6)    (2229.9)



Effect: Prime-working age (1 + 2 )               353.5            128.0                 0.0149                    0.0147            298.1       -28.69       4.222      -2389.1     -1291.4
P-val: Prime-working age                         0.00              0.78                  0.15                      0.24              0.22        0.09         0.74       0.13        0.51

Baseline mean (DV)                               138.2            5064.4                0.0171                    0.0223            1838.1      19.34        157.6      6891.0     14090.5
Observations                                    17579             17579                 17579                     17579             17579       17579        17579      17579       17579
Adj. R-Squared                                  0.0336            0.155                 0.0747                    0.0380            0.118       0.603        0.722       0.746       0.587

                                                                             p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table reports estimates of 1 and 2 from equation (4) for different outcomes by access to informal
insurance networks, in Panel A, and by whether the shocks relate to illness of non-prime-age or prime-age
family members, in Panel B. Each column reports differences between treatment and placebo households
in changes in outcomes before and after the shock, and interactions of these differences with the relevant
variable capturing heterogeneity. High Access equals to 1 if the number of transfers or loans given/received
to/from other households in the village during the year preceding the shock are above the sample median.
Prime working age equals to 1 if the shock relates to the illness of a family member of age 18 to 60. Hired
and household labor are measured in hours per month. All regressions control for household demographic
characteristics, household and village-month fixed effects as well as flexible time-to-treatment trends by
access to informal insurance. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.




                                                                                         64
                     Table A8: Propagation through village networks (village X month FE)

                                                   Panel A: Propagation through village networks

                                                       (1)                     (2)                  (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
      VARIABLES                                 Input/Output Sales    Hired labor provision   All transactions    Income     Incomig gifts   Consumption


      Post X closeness (village network)            -0.184***              -0.083***             -0.268***       -811.808*     -167.341        -65.344
                                                     (0.045)                 (0.027)              (0.055)        (456.340)    (123.281)       (151.918)


      Observations                                   410,578                410,578               410,578        410,578       410,578         410,578
      R-squared                                       0.499                  0.319                 0.448           0.253        0.187           0.636
      Pre-period Mean                                 0.999                  0.470                 1.469          10486          2339           7265
      Number of events                                 391                    391                   391            391           391             391
                                      Panel B: Propagation through supply-chain and labor-market networks
                                                       (1)                     (2)                  (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
      VARIABLES                                 Input/Output Sales    Hired labor provision   All transactions    Income     Incomig gifts   Consumption


      Post X closeness (supply-chain network)       -0.190***                -0.014              -0.204***       -273.328     -278.366*        -19.238
                                                     (0.049)                 (0.026)              (0.057)        (418.882)    (151.786)       (134.974)
      Post X closeness (labor-market network)         -0.051               -0.144***             -0.195***       -585.115*      80.119         -29.148
                                                     (0.048)                 (0.026)              (0.059)        (342.531)    (113.183)       (126.717)


      Observations                                   410,578                410,578               410,578        410,578       410,578         410,578
      R-squared                                       0.584                  0.357                 0.544           0.363        0.295           0.826
      Pre-period Mean                                 0.999                  0.470                 1.469          10486          2339           7265
      Number of events                                 391                    391                   391            391           391             391
                                                                 p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

Note: The Table presents estimates of  from equation (6). Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the
shocked household during the year preceding the shock to j . Each coefficient captures differences in changes in
outcomes before and after the shock between more- and less-exposed households, through village networks in
Panel A, and through supply-chain and labor-market networks in Panel B. Each regression includes household
(i), event j , and village-month fixed effects, as well as demographic characteristics such as household size,
average age, education and number of male and female adults. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the
household (i) and event (j ) level.




                                                                            65
                                                Table A9: Propagation effects on downstream and upstream transactions

                                                                       Panel A: Effects on downstream and upstream transactions

                                                                      Outgoing transactions (Upstream)                                     Incoming transactions (Downstream)
                                                           (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)
               VARIABLES                                 Input/output sales     Labor provision       Outgoing transactions   Input/output purchases       Labor hiring        Incoming transactions


               Post X closeness (village network)        -0.078*   -0.084**   -0.087***   -0.048***   -0.165***   -0.132***   -0.121***   -0.100***     -0.028      -0.036*    -0.150***   -0.136***
                                                         (0.044)   (0.034)     (0.025)      (0.015)    (0.050)     (0.038)     (0.032)     (0.024)      (0.027)     (0.018)     (0.044)     (0.032)


               Observations                              410,578   410,578    410,578      410,578    410,578     410,578     410,578      410,578     410,578     410,578     410,578     410,578
               R-squared                                  0.574     0.597       0.181       0.271       0.496       0.534       0.369       0.424        0.243       0.285       0.341       0.390
               Pre-period Mean                            0.497     0.497       0.182       0.182       0.679       0.679       0.501       0.501        0.288       0.288       0.790       0.790
               Number of events                           391        391        391          391        391         391         391         391          391         391         391         391
                                      Panel B: Effects on downstream and upstream transactions by exposure in the supply-chain and labor-market network
                                                                      Outgoing transactions (Upstream)                                     Incoming transactions (Downstream)
66




                                                           (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)
               VARIABLES                                 Input/output sales     Labor provision       Outgoing transactions   Input/output purchases       Labor hiring        Incoming transactions


               Post X closeness (supply-chain network)   -0.086*   -0.072*     -0.017       -0.016    -0.103**    -0.088**    -0.142***   -0.118***      0.039       0.002      -0.104*    -0.116***
                                                         (0.047)   (0.040)     (0.016)      (0.011)    (0.048)     (0.040)     (0.040)     (0.030)      (0.031)     (0.021)     (0.054)     (0.038)
               Post X closeness (labor-market network)    0.002     -0.016    -0.109***   -0.059***    -0.107*     -0.075*     -0.036      -0.035      -0.101***   -0.085***   -0.136***   -0.119***
                                                         (0.054)   (0.041)     (0.027)      (0.016)    (0.061)     (0.045)     (0.031)     (0.026)      (0.027)     (0.018)     (0.041)     (0.031)


               Observations                              410,578   410,578    410,578      410,578    410,578     410,578     410,578      410,578     410,578     410,578     410,578     410,578
               R-squared                                  0.575     0.597       0.182       0.271       0.496       0.535       0.369       0.424        0.243       0.286       0.341       0.390
               Pre-period Mean                            0.497     0.497       0.182       0.182       0.679       0.679       0.501       0.501        0.288       0.288       0.790       0.790
               Number of events                           391        391        391          391        391         391         391         391          391         391         391         391
               Village-Month FE                            No        Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes          No         Yes           No         Yes          No         Yes
                                                                                            p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1

     Note: The Table presents estimates of  from equation (6). Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the shocked household during the year preceding
     the shock to j . Each coefficient captures differences in changes in outcomes before and after the shock between more- and less-exposed households,
     through village networks in Panel A, and through supply-chain and labor-market networks in Panel B. Each regression includes household (i), event
     j , month fixed effects (odd columns), and village-month (even columns), as well as demographic characteristics such as household size, average age,
     education and number of male and female adults. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the household (i) and event (j ) level.
         Table A10: Indirect effects of health shocks on gift/transfers to other households


                                                (1)              (2)              (3)

                 VARIABLES               Gifts provided      Total gifts    Gifts+Loans


                 Post X Closeness             -0.007           -45.810         -67.610
                                             (0.007)          (57.812)        (68.728)


                 Observations                410,578          410,578          410,578
                 R-squared                    0.066             0.293           0.216
                 Pre-period Mean              0.0283            903.9            1035
                 Number of events              391               391             391
                                    p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1
Note: The Table presents estimates of the indirect effect of the idiosyncratic health shocks on gifts and
transfers provided to other households in the village. The Table presents estimates of  from equation (6).
Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the shocked household during the year preceding the shock to j .
Each coefficient captures differences in changes in outcomes before and after the shock between more- and
less-exposed households, through village networks. Each regression includes household (i), event j , month
fixed effects (odd columns), and village-month (even columns), as well as demographic characteristics such as
household size, average age, education and number of male and female adults. Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the household (i) and event (j ) level.




                                                      67
                     Table A11: Effects of indirect shocks on Savings and Assets


                               (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)

      VARIABLES              Savings     Cash in Hand      Livestock      Inventories    Fixed assets


      Post X Closeness       417.250      -18,216.659      -2,201.766    -11,883.668**    -3,579.940
                            (990.391)     (19,842.938)     (2,081.598)    (4,958.028)    (4,087.105)


      Observations           410,578        410,578         410,578        410,578         410,578
      R-squared               0.070          0.818           0.802          0.864            0.777
      Pre-period Mean         5612          400531           29204          125374          92866
      Number of events         391            391             391            391             391
                                        p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1
Note: The Table presents estimates of  from equation (6). Closenessi,j denotes inverse distance to the
shocked household during the year preceding the shock to j . Each coefficient captures differences in changes
in outcomes before and after the shock between more- and less-exposed households through village networks.
Each regression includes household (i), event j , month fixed effects, as well as demographic characteristics
such as household size, average age, education and number of male and female adults. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the household (i) and event (j ) level.




                                                      68
