                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TECHNOLOGY WITHIN AND ACROSS FIRMS

                                         Xavier Cirera
                                        Diego A. Comin
                                         Marcio Cruz
                                        Kyung Min Lee

                                      Working Paper 28080
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28080


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020

We thank Bill Maloney, Caroline Freund, Najy Benhassine, Denis Medvedev, Mary Hallward-
Driemeier, Paulo Correa, Mark Dutz, Ana Margarida Fernandes, Leonardo Iacovone, Jorge Meza,
Silvia Muzi, Doug Staiger, and participants at seminars at the World Bank, Innovation Growth
Lab Conference, and Dartmouth College for comments and feedback on the survey questionnaire,
as well as on earlier drafts of the paper. We especially thank João Belivaqua Basto, Tanay
Balantrapu, and Carmen Contreras for their help through the data collection and preparation of
the questionnaire, as well as the inputs from several external sector and production experts (an
extended list of sector experts is provided in the appendix). We also thank the National Agency of
Statistics and Demography of Senegal (ANSD), the Federation of Industries of the State of Ceará
(FIEC), and the General Statistics Office of Vietnam (GSO) for their partnership in implementing
the survey. Financial support from the Korea World Bank Group Partnership Facility (KWPF)
and the Competitive Industries and Innovation Program (CIIP) for data collection is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the World Bank or its Board. The views and opinions expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Xavier Cirera, Diego A. Comin, Marcio Cruz, and Kyung Min Lee. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technology Within and Across Firms
Xavier Cirera, Diego A. Comin, Marcio Cruz, and Kyung Min Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 28080
November 2020
JEL No. D2,E23,L23,O10,O40

                                          ABSTRACT

We collected data on the sophistication of technologies used at the business function level for a
representative sample of firms in Vietnam, Senegal, and the Brazilian state of Ceará. Our analysis
finds a large variance in technology sophistication across the business functions of a firm.
Specifically, the within-firm variance in technology sophistication is greater than the variance in
sophistication across firms, which in turn is greater than the variance in sophistication across
regions or countries. We document a stable cross-firm relationship between technology at the
business function and firm levels that we name the technology curve. We uncover significant
heterogeneity in the slopes of the technology curves across business functions, a finding that is
consistent with non-homotheticities in firm-level technology aggregators. Firm productivity is
positively associated with the within-firm variance and the average level of technology
sophistication. Development accounting exercises show that cross-firm variation in technology
accounts for one-third of cross-firm differences in productivity and one-fifth of the agricultural
versus non-agricultural gap in cross-country differences in firm productivity.

Xavier Cirera                                    Marcio Cruz
The World Bank                                   The World Bank
1818 H ST NW                                     1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433                             Washington, DC 20433
xcirera@worldbank.org                            marciocruz@worldbank.org

Diego A. Comin                                   Kyung Min Lee
Dartmouth College                                The World Bank
Economics Department                             1818 H St., NW
6106 Rockefeller Hall, Room 327                  Washington, DC 20433
Hanover, NH 03755                                klee12@worldbank.org
and CEPR
and also NBER
diego.comin@dartmouth.edu
1       Introduction
    Economists and sociologists have long been interested in studying the technologies in-
volved in production. Going back to the seminal works by Ryan and Gross (1943) and
Griliches (1957) on the diffusion of hybrid varieties of corn, the dominant approach to mea-
suring technology has reflected whether a potential adopter uses an advanced technology. In
addition to studying technology diffusion (e.g., Mansfield, 1961) and the drivers of adoption
(e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995; Duflo, Kremer and Robinson, 2011; Atkin, Khandelwal
and Osman, 2017), this approach has facilitated the study of the effect of technology on
productivity (e.g., Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw, 2007; Juh´  asz, Squicciarini and Voigtl¨
                                                                                         ander,
2020) or on wages (e.g., Krueger, 1993; DiNardo and Pischke, 1997). The relevance of
these questions has motivated researchers to measure the use of (typically a few) advanced
technologies by firms in numerous sectors.1 Recently, the Canadian "Survey of Advanced
Technology" has extended the scope of these measurement efforts to record whether firms use
a significant number (between 41 and 50, depending on the round) of advanced technologies.
Yet, despite all the progress, existing measures of technology still fall short of providing a
comprehensive characterization of technology within firms. From a technological standpoint,
firms largely remain black boxes.
    For starters, the number of technologies covered is rather limited when compared to how
many technologies are involved in production processes. Second, their focus on the presence
of advanced technologies makes it impossible to understand how production takes place in
companies without such advanced technologies. This concern is most relevant in developing
countries where advanced technologies have diffused less. Third, since their unit of analysis
is the firm, existing studies are not designed to study what business functions benefit from
each technology. This drawback is particularly problematic for general technologies that can
be relevant for multiple business functions. Finally, existing surveys largely omit questions
about how intensively a technology is employed in the firm, and therefore, they do not reveal
whether a technology that is present is widely utilized or just marginally.2
    To overcome these limitations, this paper pursues a new strategy to measure technology
that shifts the unit of analysis from the firm to the business function level. Core to our
    1
      For example, Davies (1979) covers 26 manufacturing technologies, Trajtenberg (1990) measures the
presence of CAT-scanners in hospitals, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000); Stiroh (2002); Bresnahan, Brynjolfs-
son and Hitt (2002); Akerman, Gaarder and Mogstad (2015) measure the presence of some ICTs such as
computers or access to internet. This practice has been assimilated by the statistical offices from advanced
economies, including the US Census Bureau (ICTS and ABS), the Eurostat (Community Survey of ICT
Usage), and the Statistics Canada (SAT), who have developed ICT surveys for that purpose.
    2
      One exception is Mansfield (1963), and the papers that have followed him, which study the diffusion of
a technology within a company providing a proxy for the intensity with which the technology is used.



                                                     1
approach is the Firm-level Adoption of Technology (FAT) survey that we have designed and
administered to a representative sample of firms in Senegal, Vietnam, and in the Brazilian
state of Cear´ a. With the assistance of a large number of sector and technology experts,
we have identified the key business functions and the technologies that companies can use
to conduct the main tasks in each of the selected business functions, and have ranked the
technologies according to their sophistication. The FAT survey covers seven general business
functions (GBF) that are common to all companies regardless of the sector where they
operate. In addition, for ten large sectors, we have identified their key sector-specific business
functions (SSBF) and the main technologies that can be used. In total, the FAT survey covers
59 business functions and 287 technologies associated with them.3
    The FAT survey asks firms to list first all the technologies that are used in each business
function, and then which one is the most widely used. With this information, we construct
business function-level measures of the sophistication of the most widely used technology
and of the full array of technologies used in the business function. We use these measures
to explore three broad issues: The variation in technology across firms, the patterns of
technology use within firms, and the relationship between the sophistication of technology
and productivity.
    Our analysis reveals large variation in the sophistication of technologies used in produc-
tion at all levels of aggregation. We document a pattern by which, the variance in sophisti-
cation is larger the more disaggregated is the unit of analysis. Specifically, we find greater
variance in technology sophistication across the business functions of a firm (i.e., within-firm)
than across firms, and greater variance across firms than across countries/regions. Both at
the national and regional levels, we document a positive relationship between cross-firm
variance in technology sophistication and development. Furthermore, the distribution of av-
erage technology sophistication for Brazil shows restricted first-order stochastic dominance
(Atkinson, 1987) to the distribution in Vietnam in most of the distribution, which in turn
shows restricted stochastic dominance to the distribution in Senegal.
    FAT's comprehensive information about the technologies used at the business function
level allows to systematically analyze technology within firms. The large within-firm variance
in technological sophistication we find debunks the notion that technology is uniform within
firms. Within-firm variance increases with the average level of sophistication in the firm
and with firm size. We explore the existence of patterns of technology upgrading within
the firm by studying how the sophistication of technology in a business function varies with
average firm-level sophistication. For each individual business function, we document stable
cross-firm relationship between sophistication at the business function level and average firm
   3
       See Table A.1 for a comparison with other firm-level surveys.


                                                      2
sophistication. We name this relationship the technology curve. The technology curves have
strong predictive power of the cross-firm variation in the sophistication of technology at the
business function level, with an average R2 of 0.39 across business functions. Furthermore, we
uncover large heterogeneity across business functions in the slopes of the technology curves.
For GBFs, the functions with the steepest technology curves are business administration and
planning, while sales has the flattest curve. These findings suggest that a critical driver of
within-firm differences in technology is non-homotheticities in production.
    Firm-level technology measures are strongly correlated with productivity. We find a
positive correlation of average sophistication and productivity. Perhaps more surprisingly,
productivity is also positively correlated with the within-firm variance of technology so-
phistication across business functions after controlling for average firm-level sophistication.
We interpret this correlation as evidence of the value for firms of using more sophisticated
technologies in the most relevant business functions.
    We conclude our analysis by conducting two development accounting exercises that shed
light on two classical debates: the drivers of cross-country productivity differences and the
much larger cross-country productivity dispersion observed in agriculture than in the pro-
ductivity of non-agricultural sectors. We estimate that cross-firm differences in technology
account for a third of the gap that exists between firms at the top 90% and bottom 10%
of the productivity distribution. Cross-country differences in the technology of the average
company in agriculture and in non-agricultural activities account for one fifth of the ratio
between the cross-country gap in productivity in agricultural firms over the cross-country
gap in productivity in non-agricultural firms.
    In addition to the studies on technology measurement cited above, our analysis is re-
lated to various literature. A number of studies have investigated the relationship between
technology and productivity at different levels of aggregation and with varying degree of
comprehensiveness in the technologies covered. Comin and Hobijn (2010) and Comin and
Mestieri (2018) explore the effect of the adoption of a wide range of technologies on the
evolution of the distribution of productivity growth across countries over the last 200 years.
Various articles have linked the adoption of technologies (most prominently information tech-
nologies) to the variation in productivity growth across sectors and over time.4 A third strand
of research, closer to ours, has focused on understanding productivity at the firm level, but,
unlike us, it considers a reduced number of technologies. For example, Hubbard (2003) stud-
ies the effects of adopting on-board computers in trucks, Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007)
study the effects of the adoption of computer numerically controlled (CNC) machines and
   4
     See e.g., Comin (2000), Jorgenson et al. (2005), Jorgenson, Ho and Stiroh (2008), Oliner, Sichel and
Stiroh (2007), Van Ark, O'Mahoney and Timmer (2008).



                                                   3
computer-aided design (CAD) software in the productivity of valve manufacturing. Hjort
and Poulsen (2019) analyzes how the access to fast Internet connection increases firm entry,
productivity, and exports in African countries. Gupta, Ponticelli and Tesei (2020) study how
the adoption of cellphones by Indian farmers increased their productivity by reducing their
informational barriers.
    There is, however, much less prior work studying technology within firms. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to study the magnitude of within-firm variance in technology,
the relationship between within-firm variance and productivity, to document the existence
of technology curves, and the heterogeneity of their slopes across business functions.
    Finally, there are interesting parallels between our contribution to measurement of tech-
nology and the efforts recently made to measure management practices. There is a long
tradition in management and economics documenting and measuring specific management
practices in typically a reduced (often just one!) number of companies. Pathbreaking studies
by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom et al. (2019) have extended the scope of this
literature by conducting firm-level surveys in a large number of firms across countries to
measure the quality of management practices along several dimensions connected to opera-
tions, planning, monitoring and human resources.5 Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) compute a
firm-level index of management quality as the average of the scores across the 18 dimensions
and study how the index relates to firm productivity.
    Despite these similarities, there are also important differences between our paper and
the literature on management practices. The nature of technologies and management prac-
tices are different. While management practices refer to establishing routines to deal with
decision processes, technologies are embodied in machines, software or represent processes
that typically require certain equipment and technological knowledge. More sophisticated
technologies enhance productivity directly, but also indirectly by facilitating and/or inducing
the implementation of certain management practices that make a company more productive.
Beyond differences in the nature of the objects of study, our survey covers a wider range
of business functions - both general and sector-specific - than management studies. This
comprehensive coverage of business functions allows us to provide a richer characterization
of the technologies used within the firm, which is critical to document the variation in tech-
nology sophistication across business functions, to uncover the heterogeneity in the slopes
of technology curves across functions, to explore the relationship between within-firm vari-
ance in technology and productivity and to identify the sectoral variation in the relationship
   5
    These surveys include the World Management Survey (WMS) and the Management and Organizational
Practices Survey (MOPS). While the WMS is a telephone based survey, using double blinded methodologies;
MOPS is an online and paper based survey.



                                                  4
between technology in sector-specific business functions and productivity.6
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the FAT survey. Section
3 explains how we use the information collected with the FAT survey and the advice of the
experts to construct our technology sophistication measures. Section 4 analyzes technology
across firms. Section 5 analyzes technology within firms. Section 6 studies the relation-
ship between technology and productivity. Section 7 conducts two development accounting
exercises and the last section concludes.


2     The Survey
The FAT survey collects detailed information for a representative sample of firms about the
technologies that each firm uses to perform key business functions necessary to operate in
its respective sector of economic activity. The data assembled with the FAT survey has five
desirable properties. First, they provide a granular characterization of productive activities
by covering a wide range of technologies both relevant across sectors as well as specific to
one. Second, the technologies covered include both advanced and older technologies, so that
we can characterize the technological landscape in any firm regardless of its technological
sophistication. Third, since the survey is centered at the business function level, it provides
information about the technologies used in each business function. Fourth, the questions
included in the survey allow us to construct measures that reflect not just the technologies
used but also how intensively they are used in conducting the relevant tasks for the business
function. Fifth, by covering a wide range of sectors, the data produced by the survey allows
for a rich cross-sector characterization of the sophistication of technologies in the economy.
In what follows we describe in detail the survey and the process we have followed to design
it and implement it (see also Appendix A).


2.1     Structure
The FAT survey is composed of five modules. Module A collects information on general
characteristics about the firm.7 Modules B and C collect information on the technologies
used by the firm. Module D collects information on barriers and drivers of technology
adoption, while module E gathers information about the firm's balance sheet and output.
   The survey differentiates between general business functions (module B) which comprise
   6
     One interesting exercise, would be to study whether the sophistication of practices followed by managers
within the firm display similar patterns (e.g., technology curves, within-firm variance, and its correlation
with average sophistication, firm size, etc.) as those we uncover for technology.
   7
     For multi-establishment firms, the survey targets the establishment randomly selected in the sample.


                                                     5
tasks that all firms conduct regardless of the sector where they operate; and sector specific
business functions (module C) which are relevant only for firms in a given sector. All firms
in our sample respond to module B, but only those firms belonging to the sectors for which
we have developed a sector specific module respond to C. To attain a wide coverage that
allows a meaningful study of sector-specific technologies, we develop sector-specific modules
for ten significant sectors in the economy.8 These sectors have been selected to represent
of all three primary sectors (agriculture, manufacturing, and services) and based on their
size in the economies where we have administered the FAT survey, in terms of value-added,
employment, and number of establishments.
    A key aspect of the design of modules B and C is to determine the business functions
and technologies covered in the survey. To this end, we proceeded in three steps. First, we
conducted desk research revising the specialized literature. Second, we held meetings with
experts across the World Bank Group in each of the sectors covered. Third, we reached
out to external consultants with significant experience in the field (at least 15 years).9 This
process helped us identify the main functions, both general and sector-specific, conducted
in companies and the technologies that can be used to perform the key tasks in each of
the identified functions. Figure 1 presents the general business functions considered in the
survey and the possible technologies that can be used to conduct each of them. In total,
we consider 7 general business functions and 36 technologies. Similarly, Figure 2 exemplifies
with food-processing how module C unpacks sector-specific production activities into the
main business functions and the technologies that can be used to accomplish them.10
    Once we have identified the key business functions and relevant technologies, we use
experts' advice to construct measures of technology use at the business function level that
go beyond reporting the presence of a given technology. Specifically, sector experts provided
information on two key aspects. First, they ranked the technologies in each business functions
according to their sophistication.11 Second, they assessed the degree of substitutability or
   8
      The ten sectors for which we have developed sector-specific modules are: agriculture (crops and fruits),
livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, automotive, pharmaceutical, retail and wholesale, banking ser-
vices, land transport services, and health services.
    9
      The external experts in agriculture and livestock were agricultural engineers and researchers from
Embrapa-Brazil. For food processing, wearing apparel, automotive, pharmaceutical, transport, finance,
and retail, as well as for the GBFs, we relied on senior external consultants selected by a large management
consulting organization. For health, the team relied on consultants and physicians with practical experience
in developing countries and advanced economies.
   10
      The Appendix B contains the charts for the other nine SSBFs including agriculture-crops (Figure B.1),
livestock (Figure B.2), wearing apparel (Figure B.3), automotive (Figure B.4), pharmaceutical (Figure B.5),
wholesale and retail (Figure B.6), transportation (Figure B.7), financial services (Figure B.8), health services
(Figure B.9), and other manufacturing (Figure B.10).
   11
      Sophistication was defined along several dimensions: quality of the output, productivity, costs, and
complexity of operation.



                                                       6
               Figure 1: General Business Functions and Their Technologies


complementarity between the technologies that can be used to conduct each task in each
business function. As we discuss in the next section, the degree of substitutability between
technologies in a business function is important to construct measures of the sophistication
of the technologies used in a business function.


2.2    Technology questions
The FAT survey asks two types of questions about the technologies used at a business
function. The first one inquires about the use of each of the technologies listed by the
experts as relevant in a given business function. The answer to these questions characterize
the full array of technologies that the firm uses and, as we discuss in the next section, we
employ them to construct measures of the sophistication of the array of technologies used by
the firm in a given business function. Note that this approach to gather information about
technology has two important advantages. First, by questioning about the full spectrum
of technologies, we overcome the problem of not knowing how a firm conducts a business
function when it does not use the key advanced technology. Second, by focalizing the survey
around the business functions, we automatically learn about the business functions where
the firm uses each technology.
    The second type of question we have included in the survey to gather information on
technology addresses the intensity of use of technology. Specifically, FAT asks what of the


                                             7
      Figure 2: Sector Specific Business Functions and Technologies in Food Processing


relevant technologies in the business function is the one that the firm uses more frequently.12
We use the answers to this question to construct technology measures that reflect the nature
of the main technology in the business function as opposed to the array of technologies
available for production. This distinction is relevant because not all the available technologies
in a business function are used with the same intensity, and the impact of a technology in
the company's productivity surely depends on the importance of the technology used in the
business function.


2.3     Sampling and implementation
For each country, the sampling frame is based on the most comprehensive and updated
establishment-level census data available from the respective National Statistical Office
(NSOs) or similar administrative information.13 The sample frame includes establishments
with five or more employees. The survey is stratified along three dimensions - sector, firm
size, and region - so that we can construct representative measures of technology for aggre-
gates along these dimensions.
   12
      In the pre-pilot stage, we experimented with survey designs that asked about the fraction of
time/output/processes that were conducted with each of the technologies in the business function. We
decided against using this approach to reflect the intensity of use of technologies because it was harder to
answer precisely by respondents and as a result led to a more subjective interpretation that made harder
the comparability of answers across business functions and companies.
   13
      Appendix A provides more details on sampling frame (A.1), survey implementation and data collection
(A.2), and sampling weight (A.3). For Senegal and Vietnam, sampling uses the most recent census data
from their respective national statistical office for sampling. For the state of Cear´
                                                                                     a in Brazil, sampling is
based in the most recent census of employer-employee data from the Ministry of Economy, which provides
annually updated information for every establishment.



                                                     8
    We collected data for 3,996 establishments, including 711 establishments in the State
of Cear´a, in Brazil, 1,786 establishments in Senegal, and 1,499 establishments in Vietnam.
These establishments were randomly selected based on the sampling frame of each country.
The response rate ranges from 39% in Cear´   a, Brazil, 57% in Senegal to 83% in Vietnam.14
    To ensure the accuracy in the responses and the comparability of the data collected across
countries we use a standardized process for all countries. First, we apply the same question-
naire administered through face-to-face interviews with CAPI (computer-assisted personal
interviews) in all countries. Second, we minimize subjective and perception questions when
measuring technology, since these are prone to bias.15 Enumerators were instructed to ver-
ify the information provided during the interviews when possible. Third, we conducted a
standard training in each country with enumerators, supervisors, and managers leading the
data implementation. Fourth, a pre-test pilot of the questionnaire was implemented in each
country with firms out of the sample to assure that interviewers clearly understood the ques-
tionnaire and data collection was smooth. Fifth, we used the same terms of reference to the
organizations that implement the survey across all countries. Finally, the protocol for the
implementation of the survey required that the survey should be ideally answered by the top
manager. In circumstances in which the main respondent did not have information about
a general topic of the questionnaire, especially in modules B and C, they were requested to
consult with other colleagues.
    Quality control was provided at three stages of the data collection process. First, logical
conditions were imposed in CAPI to prevent errors in data inputting.16 Second, supervisors
were required to review all interviews, identifying missing values and abnormal responses.
Third, we continuously revised the collected data using standard algorithms to analyze the
consistency of the data and provide continuous feedback to assure quality control.


3        Technology Sophistication Measures
The starting point to construct measures of technology at the business function level is the
rank of technologies by their sophistication. Let's consider a function f with Nf possible
technologies. Based on the experts' assessment we order the technologies in a function
according to their sophistication, and assign them a rank ri  1, 2, ..., Rf . Because several
    14
      In Vietnam, data collection was implemented by the NSO of Vietnam (GSO). In Cear´         a-Brazil, data
collection was implemented by the State Industry Association (FIEC). In Senegal, data collection was im-
plemented by Kantar-public. Appendix A provides the distributions of the universe of firms (Table A.2,
Table A.4, Table A.6) and the sample (Table A.3, Table A.5, Table A.7).
   15
      See Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001).
   16
      For example, a respondent cannot identify a technology not selected as being used as the most frequently
used.


                                                      9
technologies may have the same sophistication, the highest rank in a function Rf  Nf .17
   Combining the technology rankings with the information collected by the FAT survey
on the technologies used by a firm, we construct three indices of technology at the business
function level that we denote by MOST, EXT and GAP.

MOST The first index reflects the sophistication of the most widely used technology in a
business function, and we call it MOST. The MOST index of a firm j in a business function
f is computed as
                                                 M OST
                                   M OST
                                                rf,j
                                  Tf,j   =1+4                                         (1)
                                                  Rf
        M OST
where rf,j    is the sophistication rank of the technology identified by the firm as being
most widely used for the business function, and Rf is the maximum technology rank in the
function. Therefore, the index reflects the technology sophistication of the most widely used
technology relative to the most sophisticated technology available in the market to conduct
a business function. To no effect, we scale the index so that it is between 1 and 5.

EXT The second index we construct measures the sophistication of the array of technolo-
gies used to conduct a business function, and we call it EXT (an abbreviation of extensive).
In contrast with MOST, EXT does not reflect how much each technology is used but it
reflects the sophistication of all the technologies used in production, rather than just the
most relevant one. To measure the sophistication of the range of technologies, we must first
understand the degree of substitutability between the technologies in the business function.
Figure 3 illustrates four possible structures we encounter in the business functions covered
by FAT and that differ in the substitutability between their technologies. Panel A depicts a
quality ladder or vertical structure (Aghion and Howitt, 1992). In quality ladders there is no
productivity gain from using technologies below the maximum sophistication rank employed
               M AX
in the firm, rf,j    . Therefore, the sophistication of the technologies employed in business
                                                 M AX
functions with a quality ladder structure is rf,j     .
    The technologies in other business functions may have a horizontal relationship (Romer
1990), depicted in panel B. In horizontal structures, the use of less sophisticated technologies
facilitates the fulfillment of the tasks in the function even conditional on using more sophis-
ticated technologies. For example, in marketing the use of less sophisticated technologies
  17
     In a small number of business functions, the technologies covered are used in various subgroups of tasks.
For example, in the body pressing and welding functions of the automotive sector, the survey differentiates
between technologies used for pressing skin panels, pressing structural components and welding the main
body. In cases like this, we construct ranks of technologies for each subgroup of tasks within the business
function, and then aggregate the resulting indices by taking simple averages across the tasks groups.



                                                     10
such as face-to-face communications may allow firms to reach some customers that may not
be reachable by more sophisticated technologies such as customer relationship management
(CRM) software. The sophistication of the array of technologies used in horizontal structures
is measured by the fraction of the possible technologies in the function that the firm uses.
    In addition to quality and ladders and horizontal structures, there are other possible
hybrid structures between the technologies in a business function that combine these two
(see panels C and D, Figure 3). In the Appendix we provide detailed descriptions on these
structures, examples of business functions with each structure, and formulas about how
we construct the EXT index in each case. As with MOST, we scale the sophistication of
technologies employed in a business function by the rank of the most sophisticated technology
available,Rf , and normalize EXT so that it is between 1 and 5.

                             Nf

                             ...


                             2
                                                                              ...
                             1                     1           2                     Nf
                  (a) Quality Ladder                   (b) Horizontal Relationship
                 N1,f                                  r
                                                       ¯f +1        ...             Nf
                                       N2,f
                                                                    r
                                                                    ¯f
                 ...                   ...
                                                                          ...

                 2                     2                                  2
                 1                     1                                  1
                        (c) Hybrid I                       (d) Hybrid II (Tree)

       Figure 3: Taxonomy of Structures among the Technologies in a Business Function



GAP To connect EXT and MOST, we introduce GAP as the difference between the sophis-
tication of the array of technologies used (EXT) and the sophistication of the most widely
used technology (MOST). GAP reflects the capacity of a firm to occasionally conduct certain
tasks of a business function with more sophisticated technologies that those most commonly
used in the business function. Consistent with this interpretation, GAP is virtually always



                                              11
positive.18 The GAP measure opens the possibility of exploring the value for companies of
having the flexibility to occasionally use more sophisticated technologies relative to having
a more sophisticated technology as the most commonly used.

Discussion Technology rankings are ordinal. However, to make algebraic manipulations
and compute statistics it is necessary to treat technology rankings in a cardinal way. This
step involves making assumptions about the cardinal increases associated with each jump in
the ranking scale. As noted by Thorndike (1966, p.124), "it is assumed that the numerals
in which the variables are expressed represent equal increments in some attribute. It is also
recognized that this assumption is usually not well supported. But for `rough and ready'
studies of relationship, the violation of the assumption usually does not hurt much." Next,
we discuss how we intend to go beyond this imperfect approach to transforming an ordinal
relation such as the technology rankings into a cardinal one.
    As first discussed by Pareto (1909, p.541-42), Cardinalizations of ordinal rankings are not
unique. Furthermore, comparisons of population means based on cardinalizations of ordinal
variables may depend on the specific cardinalization unless there is first-order stochastic
dominance (FOSD).19 Fortunately, as we show in section 4.2, the cross-firm distribution of
technology sophistication has (restricted) FOSD when comparing bilaterally the countries in
our sample. This implies that we could make mean comparisons of firm-level sophistication
indices constructed with arbitrary (monotonic) cardinalizations of the technology rankings,
including the sophistication indices presented above.
    Admittedly, the assumption of constant intervals implicit in the technology indices is
arbitrary, but at the same time, it surely is a natural starting point to construct business-
function sophistication indices. To begin with, it is consistent with the production struc-
tures in the canonical models of endogenous technological change (Romer, 1990; Aghion and
Howitt, 1992). Second, as we show in section section 6, indices with constant increments
are strongly correlated with (log) labor productivity at the firm level. Furthermore, even
though we find that quadratic terms are significant, suggesting the possibility that the best
fit would be achieved by a concave technology index (i.e., with diminishing increments), the
quadratic term increases very marginally the explanatory power of firm technology implying
that indices constructed with constant increments capture reasonably well the relationship
between technology sophistication and firm productivity.
    Finally, we consider alternative approaches to constructing technology indices. In the
  18
      The only exception appears in horizontal structures when the firm does not use some of the technologies
below the MOST widely used technology. In these cases, our measure of EXT can be below MOST. This
occurs in less than 1% of the firm-business function observations.
   19
      See Lehmann (1955), Hadar and Russell (1969) and Hanoch and Levy (1969).


                                                     12
light of the concave firm-level relationship we uncover between technology and productivity,
we explore the robustness of our findings to using a log scale to convert the ordinal technology
rankings to business function technology indices. In this way, the scale increases in the
technology indices are larger the lower is the technology ranking. We report in the appendix
the results from redoing the analyses using this alternative scale increases. The main finding
is that our results are completely robust. Given the stark difference in the underlying
assumptions about scale increases in the baseline and alternative indices, our conclusions
should be robust to other reasonable variations in the mapping used to construct technology
sophistication indices at the business function level.

An example We next illustrate how these measures of sophistication can characterize the
technological landscape of firms by conducting a case study of two individual firms. Both
firms operate in the food processing sector in Senegal, but one has 300 employees while the
other only has 20. Figure 4 presents in four spider charts the measures of EXT (right) and
MOST (left) for each of the general (top) and sector-specific business functions (bottom) for
the two firms (big in dashed blue, small in solid red). In general, the large firm uses more
sophisticated technologies than the small one. However, the gap between the sophistication
of technologies used in both companies varies considerably depending on the technology
measure, the type of business function, and the specific business function we consider.
    The top left corner panel shows that, overall, the firm uses a more sophisticated array of
technologies in GBFs as measured by EXT. However, while some business functions, such
as quality control and sales, there are large differences in the EXT measure between the
two firms, in others such as procurement the gap in EXT is much smaller. Additionally,
the differences in sophistication of technologies used decline drastically when instead of
focusing on the whole array of technologies we restrict our attention to the most widely used
technology as measured by MOST. Differences between the two firms in MOST measures for
GBFs are small or non-existent. In particular, the value of MOST in both firms is the same
in marketing, procurement, production planning and business administration. This suggests
that, although the two companies differ in the range of technologies used in production, the
sophistication of the main technologies used in GBFs are very similar in both companies.
    The comparison for SSBFs is similar. When looking at EXT, the big company has
in all business functions higher levels of sophistication than the small one, although the
gap varies considerably with larger gaps in input testing, and food storage and smaller
gaps in packaging and antibacterial. These differences, however tends to shrink and even
reverse when focusing on the sophistication of the most relevant technology in each business
function. In particular, the value of MOST in packaging is the same in both companies


                                              13
                        (a)                                               (b)




                        (c)                                               (d)

               Figure 4: Example of Two Firms in Food Processing in Senegal
    Note: Two firms in Food Processing in Senegal are selected to provide an example of the technology
    indices. The sizes of Firm A and B are 9 and 100 employees, respectively.


and for Mixing/Blending/Cooking the small company has a higher value. One exception to
this pattern is Antibacterial where the gap in sophistication in favor of the large company
is greater for MOST than for EXT. This illustrates how nuanced is the characterization of
technology within companies that the FAT survey and the measures we construct from it
can provide.


4     Cross-Firm Technology Facts
We divide our analysis of the FAT technology measures in two parts. In this section, we
focus on cross-firm differences in technology sophistication and in section 5 we explore the
within-firm differences in technology sophistication.

                                                 14
    To study technology across firms, we start by constructing measures of the average sophis-
tication of technology at the firm level as the simple average of technology sophistication
across all business functions, (ABF), only across general business functions (GBF), and
only across sector-specific business functions (SSBF). With these measures, we explore the
existence of cross-country and cross-regional differences in technology, the distribution of
technology sophistication across firms, and the relationship between firm-level technology
and observable characteristics.


4.1    Cross-regional differences in technology
Our exploration of technology sophistication starts by revisiting, for the three countries
and 16 regions in our sample, the well-established fact that technology varies significantly
across countries/regions (Comin and Hobijn, 2010; Comin and Mestieri, 2018). Table 1
presents the country-level measures of EXT constructed by averaging in each country our
firm-level measures of technology sophistication. The Appendix reports the country-level
values of MOST and GAP. In all cases, we observe that the ranking of countries by per-capita
income levels coincides with that by average level of technology. Furthermore, cross-country
differences in technology are significant. Relative to the maximum possible distance in the
technology indices ­ the difference between the maximum level, 5, and the minimum, 1 ­
the difference between Brazil and Senegal in EXT is 32% for ABFs, 36% for GBFs and 29%
for SSBFs. We further explore the cross-sectional relationship between average technology

 Table 1: Average Technology Sophistication by Country and Type of Business Function

                                                           EXT
                                           ABF             GBF           SSBF
                  Overall                   2.58           2.67           2.30
                  Brazil (BR)               3.16           3.35           2.75
                  Vietnam (VT)              2.70           2.75           2.55
                  Senegal (SN)              1.87           1.92           1.59
                  Gap: BR - SN              1.29           1.43           1.16
                  Relative Gap              32%            36%            29%
   Note: Overall is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. Relative gap is the difference between
   Brazil and Senegal relative to the maximum technology gap of 4 ((Brazil - Senegal)/M aximumGap(4)).
   Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.


sophistication and development by zooming into the 16 regions that make up our sample.
We construct regional measures of average technology and productivity as the weighted



                                                   15
average of firm-level variables.20 Figure 5 presents the scatter plot of the regional measures
of technology sophistication (ABF MOST) against regional productivity. The correlation
between these two variables is 0.93.21




   Figure 5: Region-level Technology Sophistication (MOST) vs. Regional Productivity
   Note: The regional average of ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional productivity is on the x-axis.
   The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per worker based on a representative
   sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal, respectively.
   Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph` ong; Ninh B`
                                                                        inh), Region 2 (Th´
                                                                                          ai Nguy^en; Bc
   Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´  a; H`a T~
                                        inh; B`
                                              inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum; L^am ng), Region 5 (B`
                                                                                               inh Dng;
   ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`
                                                         a Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´i Minh).




4.2     Distribution of firm-level sophistication
Next, we turn our attention to the cross-firm distribution in technology sophistication. Fig-
ure 6 plots the kernel density of the distribution of the firm-level average value of EXT in each
of the three countries. This figure illustrates that the densities of technology sophistication
across firms is different in the three countries. We formally investigate this hypothesis by
conducting Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests with the null that the distributions of EXT are
(pairwise) equal. We reject the equivalence of all the pairwise distributions, which confirms
that the distribution of EXT is different across all three countries.
  20
     See the Appendix B.4 for details.
  21
     The Appendix Table C.6 reports the association between regional productivity and the other measures
of average technology sophistication. Figure D.1 in Appendix D presents the counterpart to Figure 5 using
sophistication indices constructed with a logarithmic transformation of the technology rankings.


                                                   16
    To better understand the differences in the distribution of technology sophistication
across countries, we examine the first-order stochastic dominance of the EXT distribution
across countries. We conduct the KS-based multiple test, introduced in Goldman and Ka-
plan (2018), which takes its null as the equivalence of all cumulative density function (CDF)
values between two distributions.22 The KS test calculates the maximum absolute differ-
ence between the two cumulative distributions with the null hypothesis that the samples
are drawn from the same distribution. Instead of calculating one maximum difference, the
KS-based multiple test computes all the differences between the two cumulative distribu-
tions. Appendix Figure C.1 shows the pairwise comparisons of CDFs and the results of the
KS-based multiple test for each value in the variable of interest. Our tests confirm that
the cross-firm distribution of EXT in Brazil first order stochastic dominates in a restricted
sense23 the distribution of Vietnam for most of the domain of the technology indices, which
in turn also first-order stochastic dominates in a restricted sense the distribution of EXT in
Senegal.24


4.3     A within-between decomposition
Next, we explore the cross-firm dispersion in technology sophistication. Figure 6 establishes
that there is significant dispersion in technology across firms, within each country. Further-
more, the cross-firm dispersion in technology sophistication seems to differ across countries.25
We explore the magnitude of the dispersion of firm-level technology sophistication within
countries by conducting a variance-covariance decomposition. Let Tj,c denote the average
technology sophistication of firm j in country c, Tc the average technology sophistication in
country c, and T the average technology sophistication across all firms. Then,

                                                     W ithin      Between

                                      Tj,c - T = Tj,c - Tc + Tc - T                                          (2)
   22
      We use the STATA discomp package developed in Kaplan (2019). Because of "multiple testing problem"
that increases the Type I error (), the KS-based multiple test uses "familywise error rate" (FWER) that
provides the probability of rejecting at least one true null hypothesis. For the details of this test, please see
Goldman and Kaplan (2018) and Kaplan (2019).
   23
      See Atkinson (1987)
   24
      Specifically for the comparison Brazil-Vietnam, we find stochastic dominance for the domain of the
distribution of EXT between [1.74, 4.70], which includes 97% of Cear´    a firms and 96% of Senegal firms. For
the pair of distributions Brazil-Senegal we reject the test of equality for the domain of EXT [1.10, 4.70],
which includes 98% of the firms in both countries' samples; and for Vietnam-Senegal the domain of EXT
where we reject equality of the distributions is [1.08, 3.97] that include 95% and 97% of firms in the sample
respectively. The test is also rejected for some values above that range, but not for others.
   25
      Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) find a similarly large cross-firm dispersion in management practices.




                                                       17
                 Figure 6: Distribution of Technology Sophistication (EXT)


We compute the within country component of firm variance as the ratio of the variance
of the first term to the variance of the total (as, by construction, the two terms in the
right-hand-side of (2) are independent). Table 2 presents the variances of the between (first
row) and within (second row) terms, where the within variance is the simple average of the
within variances in each of the three countries.26 Row 6 presents the contribution of the
within-country component to the total variance of the technology index.
    The within-country component of cross-firm variance in technology is larger than the
between-country component. For example, for MOST measures, the within component rep-
resents 55% of total for ABFs, 51% for GBFs and 83% for SSBFs. The contributions of the
within component are also larger for the EXT and GAP measures. We therefore conclude
that cross-firm differences in technology sophistication are larger than cross-country differ-
ences, regardless of the technology measures we consider and whether we focus on general,
sector-specific or all business functions.
    Figure 6 and Table 2 suggest the existence of a positive association between cross-firm
dispersion in technology sophistication and development. To further explore this hypothesis,
we turn to our regional disaggregation and plot in Figure 7 the cross-firm variance in each
region against the regional productivity level. The figure confirms the strong association
between the two variables with a correlation of 0.83.27
  26
     Rows 3-5 report the within variance in each country.
  27
     See the Appendix Table C.7 for the association with the cross-firm variance of other measures of
technological sophistication. Table D.1 and Figure D.2 in Appendix D present the counterpart to Table 2


                                                  18
4.4      Role of observable characteristics
We next consider the contribution of other firm-level observable variables to the cross-firm
variance of technology sophistication. The list of observable variables include size groups
(5-19, 20-99, 100+ employees), sector (agriculture, manufacturing and services), age (0-5,
6-10, 11-15, and 16+ years), export and foreign ownership status. We regress the firm-level
average technology measure on the country dummies and the full set of dummies that capture
the firm observable characteristics. The last row of Table 2 reports the within-country
variance in technology across firms after controlling for the observable characteristics. The
explanatory power of the controls is rather limited, and the contribution of the within-country
component does not decline much after purging the variation in technology accounted for by
firm controls.

                     Table 2: Cross-firm variance in technology sophistication

                                              MOST                   GAP                    EXT
                                      ABF GBF         SSBF   ABF     GBF    SSBF     ABF    GBF    SSBF
 V ar(Tc - T )                         0.17   0.24    0.06    0.02   0.01    0.05    0.28   0.34    0.26
 V ar(Tj,c - Tc )                      0.21   0.25    0.29    0.19   0.23    0.43    0.42   0.47    0.64
 V ar(Tj,Brazil - TBrazil )            0.36   0.48    0.39    0.15   0.19    0.48    0.52   0.58    0.78
 V ar(Tj,V ietnam - TV ietnam )        0.13   0.14    0.24    0.22   0.23    0.59    0.35   0.36    0.68
 V ar(Tj,Senegal - TSenegal )          0.13   0.14    0.21    0.20   0.26    0.24    0.40   0.47    0.48
 Contribution within                   0.55   0.51    0.83    0.93   0.95    0.89    0.60   0.58    0.71
 Contribution within with controls     0.46   0.43    0.72    0.89   0.93    0.81    0.51   0.50    0.62
    Note: Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights. Contribution within with controls is
    estimated after controlling for size group small, medium and large), sector (agriculture, manufacturing
    and services), age (0-5, 6-10, 11-15, and 16 years or more), export and foreign ownership status.


    We conclude our analysis of cross-firm technology by exploring how the firm-level average
technology sophistication varies with observable characteristics.28 Table 3 reports the esti-
mates of the regression of the average technology indices at the firm-level on the observables.
Controlling for other observables, technology sophistication increases with firm size, but it
does not vary significantly with firm age. Foreign owned firms and exporters have higher
levels of technology sophistication. There is also significant variation in technology measures
across sectors. For GBFs we find higher levels of both EXT and MOST in services than in
manufacturing, and in manufacturing than in agriculture. For SSBFs, instead, we find that
the levels of EXT and MOST are higher in agriculture.
and Figure 7 using sophistication indices constructed with a logarithmic transformation of the technology
rankings.
   28
      The Appendix reports the estimates for the GAP measure of technology.



                                                     19
Figure 7: Cross-firm Variance of Technology Sophistication (MOST) vs. Regional Produc-
tivity
    Note: The regional level cross firm variance of the ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional productivity
    is on the x-axis. The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per worker based
    on a representative sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil, Vietnam, and
    Senegal, respectively. Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph` ong; Ninh B`inh), Region
    2 (Th´ai Nguy^en; Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´    a; H`a T~
                                                                inh; B`
                                                                      inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum; L^  am ng),
    Region 5 (B`inh Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~    inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´ i
    Minh).


5      Technology within Firms
The granularity of the information collected in the FAT survey offers a unique opportunity to
study technology inside firms. From a research standpoint, this is largely uncharted territory.
We tread into this new area by exploring three issues. In models of firm dynamics, technology
is often characterized by a single firm-specific parameter. Implicit in this approach is the
notion that there are good and bad firms and that good firms tend to use good technologies
in all their functions and contrariwise for bad firms. The first question we investigate is
whether technology sophistication is relatively uniform across the business functions of a
firm or whether there is ample variation in sophistication across business functions. 29
    After quantifying the magnitude of the variation of technology sophistication within
firms, we study what firm-level observable characteristics correlate with within-firm technol-
   29
      Recall, that despite our use of the word firm, the fact that for multi-plant firms our data covers only one
plant suggests that, it would be more appropriate to refer to observations in our dataset as plants rather than
firms. Furthermore, the dispersion across business functions in technology that we study is very different in
nature from cross-plant variation in technology studied in the literature (e.g., Fort, Pierce and Schott, 2018).


                                                       20
                 Table 3: Technology Sophistication and Firm Characteristics

                                 (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)
                                           MOST                              EXT
            VARIABLES           ABF         GBF       SSBF        ABF        GBF        SSBF


            Vietnam            -0.40***   -0.55***   -0.11***   -0.46***   -0.58***    -0.20***
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)
            Senegal            -0.93***   -1.07***   -0.62***   -1.18***   -1.27***    -1.17***
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)
            Manufacturing       -0.09**      0.04    -0.36***    0.14**     0.35***    -0.31***
                                 (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.07)
            Services              0.05    0.30***    -0.26***    0.25***    0.63***    -0.39***
                                 (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.07)
            Medium             0.20***    0.22***     0.09***    0.26***   0.26***      0.24***
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)      (0.03)
            Large              0.53***     0.59***    0.32***   0.65***     0.63***     0.77***
                                 (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.06)
            Age 6 to 10           -0.02      -0.03      0.00     -0.06**      -0.04     -0.09**
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)
            Age 11 to 15          -0.01      -0.01      0.01       -0.05      -0.01     -0.10**
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)
            Age 16+               0.02       0.03       0.02       0.00        0.04       -0.02
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)
            Foreign Owned       0.25***    0.27***   0.22***     0.24***    0.26***     0.24***
                                 (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.07)
            Exporter            0.14***   0.12***     0.10***    0.34***    0.30***     0.37***
                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.04)


            Observations        3,896      3,896       3,076      3,893      3,889      3,080
            R-squared            0.54       0.57       0.28        0.49       0.50      0.38
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Reference group
   for country, sector, size, and age categories is Brazil, Agriculture, Small, and Age 0 to 5, respectively.
   Regressions include constant and a dummy for whether a firm has SSBF.


ogy sophistication. Beyond the purely descriptive relevance of this exercise, studying the
correlates of within-firm volatility sheds light on the relative importance of heterogeneity in
adoption costs and benefits of technology sophistication across business functions as sources
of within-firm variation in technology. The third question we study is whether there are sta-
ble relationships across firms between the business function-level and the average firm-level
technology sophistications. In a manner akin to Engel curves in consumption theory, such
relationships can reveal insights about how business-function level technology sophistication
indices aggregate into firm-level TFP.




                                                     21
5.1       Within-firm variance in technology
To quantify the within-firm variance in technology, we decompose technology measures at
the firm-business function level (Tf,j,c ) between a firm component (j ), a business function-
country component (f,c ), and a residual (uf,j,c ), by estimating the following regression:

                                         Tf,j,c = j + f,c + uf,j,c ,                                         (3)

The business-functions dummies remove from the residual the variation generated by differ-
ences across firms in the set of relevant business functions used to calculate the technology
index, such as different SSBFs. By purging this effect, the variance of the residuals, which
we use to measure the within-firm dispersion in technology, are comparable across firms.30
We consider three measures of technology sophistication: MOST, GAP and EXT. Table 4
reports the average within-firm variance in the full sample (row 1). For comparison purposes,
we also report the average cross-firm variance in technology across the three countries (row
2). The main finding, and one of the most surprising in this paper, is that the within-firm
variance in technology is significantly larger than the cross-firm variance in technology. The
ratio of within-firm to cross-firm variances ranges from 1.9 for EXT to 3.9 for GAP.
    Rows 3-5 of Table 4 report the average within-firm variance for each country. In all
countries and technology measures, we confirm the regularity that the within-firm variance
in technology is significantly larger than the cross-firm variance in technology. The average
within-firm variance is highest in Brazil for all three measures, and it is lowest in Senegal
for MOST and GAP, and in Vietnam for EXT.

                    Table 4: Within-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication

                                                            ABF EXT        ABF MOST          ABF GAP
        V ar(Tf,j,c - Tf,c - Tj,c )                            0.80             0.56             0.65
        V ar(Tj,c - Tc )                                       0.42             0.20             0.17
        V ar(Tf,j,Brazil - Tf,Brazil - Tj,Brazil )             0.97             0.93             0.75
        V ar(Tf,j,V ietnam - Tf,V ietnam - Tj,V ietnam )       0.71             0.48             0.69
        V ar(Tf,j,Senegal - Tf,Senegal - Tj,Senegal )          0.72             0.26             0.53
        V ar(Tj,Brazil - TBrazil )                             0.52             0.36             0.15
        V ar(Tj,V ietnam - TV ietnam )                         0.35             0.13             0.20
        V ar(Tj,Senegal - TSenegal )                           0.40             0.12             0.16
    Note: Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.
   30
     Since our goal is to explore the dispersion in technology across business functions, we include all business
functions when estimating equation (3).




                                                       22
   We further explore the relationship between average within-firm variance and develop-
ment by zooming into the regions. Figure 8 plots the average within-firm variance in each of
the 16 regions against the log of regional productivity. The figure reveals a strong positive
correlation between both variables (0.66).31




Figure 8: Within-firm Variance of Technology Sophistication (MOST) vs. Regional Pro-
ductivity
   Note: The regional average of within firm variance of the ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional
   productivity is on the x-axis. The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per
   worker based on a representative sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil,
   Vietnam, and Senegal, respectively. Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`
                                                                                               ong; Ninh
   B`
    inh), Region 2 (Th´ ai Nguy^en; Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´  a; H`
                                                                        a T~inh; B`
                                                                                  inh nh), Region 4 (Kon
   Tum; L^am ng), Region 5 (B` inh Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and
   Region 8 (H Ch´ i Minh).



Role of firm characteristics Next, we explore the relationship between within-firm vari-
ance, and firm characteristics such as the average level of the technology in the firm and the
observable variables introduced above. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:

                                WVarj ,c = c +  Tj +  Xj ,c + uj ,c                                  (4)

where W V ARj,c is the variance of technology within firm j , c is a country fixed effect, Tj
is the average level of MOST across ABFs in firm f , and Xj,c is a vector of firm observable
  31
     In the Appendix Table C.8, we show the robustness of this finding across all measures of technology
sophistication. Table D.2 and Figure D.3 in Appendix D present the counterpart to Table 4 and Figure 8
using sophistication indices constructed with a logarithmic transformation of the technology rankings.

                                                  23
characteristics. Table 5 reports the results.32 For EXT and GAP, we find that within-firm
variance increases with firm size, tends to be higher for firms younger than 6 years, and
is higher for exporters and in services. For MOST, in contrast, these controls (other than
exporter status) become insignificant once we control for the average level of technology in the
firm. The most important finding in the table is that the within-firm variance in technology
is strongly associated with the average level of technology across business functions. The
relationship is positive and concave.


5.2     Sources of within-firm variance in technology
Before continuing with our exploration of technology use within firms, we pause and take
stock of our findings so far. The magnitude of the variation in technology within the firm
confirms the observation that, as we go to a more micro level, the dispersion in technology
across units increases. The comparison between the dispersion in technology across coun-
tries and across firms has been suggested in the literature and we establish it with the FAT
technology measures, which are more comprehensive than previous firm-level measures. To
the best of our knowledge, this study is the first that documents the much greater disper-
sion in technology within firms than across them in a systematic manner. This finding also
refutes the notion that technology is uniform within firms and poses a new question about
the source of disparity in technology sophistication across business functions. In particu-
lar, does the variation in technology reflect heterogeneity across business functions in the
costs of implementing more sophisticated technologies or in the benefits from having those
technologies?
    The estimates from Table 5 help to shed light on this question. Smaller firms are more
likely to suffer from limited technical capacity and access to finance which may create differ-
ences in the use of technologies across business functions; with less sophisticated technologies
being adopted in functions where firms lack expertise or where the sunk costs of adoption
are larger. Conversely, since larger firms tend to face less technical difficulties and lower
costs in adoption, it would be natural for adoption costs to also be less heterogeneous across
business functions for large firms. However, the finding in Table 5 that the variation in tech-
nology sophistication across functions increases with firm size suggests that heterogeneity in
adoption costs is probably not the main driver of within firm variance in technology.
    The finding that within-firm dispersion is positively associated with the average tech-
nological sophistication of a firm is a strong indication that heterogeneity across business
functions in the benefits from improving technology is a key driver of within-firm variance
  32
     In the appendix we show that these findings are robust to replacing the categorical dummies for age
and size by the continuous variables.


                                                  24
  Table 5: Within-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication and Firm Characteristics

                                             (1)             (2)        (3)
                                            EXT            MOST        GAP
                          VARIABLES       Var(ABF)        Var(ABF)   Var(ABF)


                          ABF MOST          1.44***        1.49***    0.50***
                                             (0.09)         (0.07)     (0.11)
                          ABF MOST2        -0.29***       -0.26***   -0.09***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                          Vietnam          -0.26***       -0.35***   -0.07***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                          Senegal           0.12***       -0.17***     -0.05*
                                             (0.03)         (0.02)     (0.03)
                          Manuf             0.24***           0.03    0.17***
                                             (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)
                          SVC               0.26***           0.03    0.13***
                                             (0.04)         (0.03)     (0.04)
                          Medium            0.07***          -0.02      0.01
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                          Large             0.13***           0.04    0.14***
                                             (0.04)         (0.03)     (0.04)
                          Age 6 to 10      -0.09***         0.04**   -0.08***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)
                          Age 11 to 15     -0.11***          -0.01   -0.10***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.03)
                          Age 16+          -0.10***           0.02   -0.08***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                          MNCs              0.12***           0.03      -0.02
                                             (0.03)         (0.03)     (0.04)
                          Exporter          0.05**          0.04**    0.13***
                                             (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                          Constant         -0.92***       -1.09***       0.01
                                             (0.11)         (0.09)     (0.12)


                          Observations       3,888         3,893      3,135
                          R-squared          0.17           0.44      0.09
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Reference group for
   country, sector, size, and age categories is Brazil, Agriculture, Small, and Age 0 to 5, respectively.


in technology. In particular, it is consistent with the presence of non-homotheticities in
production.33 Non-homotheticies affect the relative value of having more sophisticated tech-
nologies across business functions. As average technology in the firm increases, the value of
increasing the sophistication may change at different rates across business functions. This
will lead to business functions whose sophistication of technology increases more steeply
with the average sophistication in the firm (i.e., technology elastic), and others where the
  33
   See Hanoch (1975) and Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2020) for non-homotheticities in demand and
Comin, Dmitriev and Rossi-Hansberg (2020) for non-homotheticities in production.


                                                     25
sophistication of technology increases less steeply with the average sophistication of the firm
(i.e., technology-inelastic). The heterogeneity in the slopes of the expansion paths of tech-
nology (or for brevity of the technology curves) will result in greater within-firm variance in
technology in firms with higher average technology.


5.3     The Technology Curve
We directly explore the relationship across firms between the sophistication of the technology
used at a given business function and the overall sophistication of the firm. We refer to this
relationship as the Technology Curve. We start by plotting technology curves collapsing all
the firms in a decile of the distribution of average firm technology sophistication into one
observation. Figure 9 plots, for each decile of the distribution of average firm sophistication
(measured by the MOST ABF index), the average sophistication in the business function
(vertical) against the average sophistication in the firm (horizontal axis). The top panel plots
these two variables for the seven GBFs, while the other four panels focus on the SSBFs in the
four sectors where we have largest firm samples (crops-agriculture, food processing, apparel,
and retail and wholesale).34 For example, the average sophistication level in "payments"
for firms in the bottom decile of the distribution of average sophistication is 1.7, while their
average sophistication across functions for firms in the bottom decile is 1.1.
    Figure 9 reveals interesting patterns. Not surprisingly, technology curves are upward
sloping. That is, as we move to higher deciles in the distribution of average firm sophisti-
cation, the sophistication in any given business function tends to grow. More interestingly,
the slope of the technology curves varies significantly across business functions. For ex-
ample, among the GBFs, the most technology-elastic functions are business administration
and planning, while the least technology-elastic is sales. SSBFs also display heterogeneity
in the slope of technology curves. The most technology-elastic functions in each sector are
irrigation in agriculture, design and finishing in apparel, packaging in food processing, and
advertising and inventory in retail and wholesale.
    In order to investigate more systematically technology curves, we estimate the following
regression:

                                       Tf,j = f +     f    Tj + uf,j                                    (5)

   where Tf,j is the technology sophistication of firm j in function f , Tj is the average
technology sophistication in firm j , f is a function-specific intercept, f is the technology-
  34
    These are sectors for which the survey was stratified in all countries. Additionally, we plot 95% confi-
dence bands in the technology curves.


                                                    26
                      (a)                                            (b)




                      (c)                                            (d)




                                             (e)

                             Figure 9: The Technology Curve


elasticity of business function f , and uf,j is an error term.
    Each row of the first two columns of Table 6 reports the point estimate of   j,   its standard

                                             27
errors, and the R2 for one of the seven general business functions.The estimates confirm the
existence of strong statistical relationship across firms between the sophistication in a given
business function and the average sophistication in the firm. The point estimates of j in
all cases are positive and significant. Furthermore the explanatory power of the technology
curve is surprisingly high. The R2 of regressions (5) ranges from 12% for sales to 68% for
business administration suggesting that the relation between the average sophistication in
the firm and the sophistication of technology in the business function captures a large part
of the cross-firm variation in the sophistication of the technologies they use at any given
business function.
                  Table 6: Technology Curve for General Business Function

                                   (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)              (5)
                                         Linear                          Nonlinear
                                                                        ABF EXT
     Business Functions        ABF EXT       R-squared    ABF EXT     *Above Median     R-squared
     Business Administration     1.97***          0.68     1.60***        0.21***          0.68
                                  (0.02)                    (0.06)         (0.03)
     Production Planning         1.75***          0.62     1.79***          -0.02           0.62
                                  (0.02)                    (0.06)         (0.03)
     Sourcing                    1.33***          0.51     1.71***        -0.21***          0.52
                                  (0.02)                    (0.05)         (0.03)
     Marketing                   0.71***          0.29     0.66***           0.03           0.29
                                  (0.02)                    (0.05)         (0.02)
     Sales                       0.28***          0.12     0.13***        0.08***           0.12
                                  (0.01)                    (0.03)         (0.02)
     Payment                     0.60***          0.29     0.42***        0.10***           0.29
                                  (0.02)                    (0.04)         (0.02)
     Quality Control             0.60***          0.23     0.58***           0.01           0.23
                                  (0.02)                    (0.04)         (0.02)
   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
   specification, each general business function-level technology (GBF MOST) is regressed on firm-level
   technology (ABF MOST). The coefficient of the ABF MOST and R-squares are presented in column (1)
   and (2), respectively. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF MOST and an
   indicator for ABF MOST above the median. The coefficients of ABF MOST and ABF MOST*Above
   Median, and R-squares are presented in columns (3), (4), and (5), respectively. Robust standard errors
   in parentheses.


    Beyond the statistical significance and explanatory power of the technology curve, Col-
umn 1 of Table 6 confirms the heterogeneity in the slopes of the technology curve across
business functions. The point estimates range from almost 2 in business administration to
0.28 in sales. The ranking of business functions based on the estimated technology-elasticities
is consistent with a visual inspection of Figure 9.
    Appendix E investigates the technology curve for sector-specific technologies (SSBF).
The estimates in Table E.1 to Table E.4 confirm both the goodness of fit as well as the het-

                                                     28
erogeneity in technology-elasticities across business functions.35 Additionally, the Appendix
extends the analysis by documenting the existence of technology curves with heterogeneous
slopes across business functions when using EXT measures of technology sophistication at
the business function- and firm-levels (See Table E.10 - Table E.14).
     Columns 3 through 5 of Table 6 explore the linearity of technology curves, by allowing the
estimate of the technology-elasticity f to differ for companies with an average sophistication
above and below the median level. In the table, we report the estimate of the coefficients
for the average firm-level sophistication (column 3), and for the interaction between average
sophistication and a dummy which takes the value of 1 if the firm is above the median level
(column 4). The last column reports the R2 of this regression. Our estimates reveal that
in three of the seven business functions there is no statistically significant variation in the
technology-elasticity above and below the median. In three others (business administration,
sales and payments), there is a significantly higher technology-elasticity for firms with average
sophistication above the median, and in one (sourcing) there is a lower technology-elasticity
for firms with average sophistication above the median. Of the 29 functions included in our
list of GBFs and SSBFs, in 15 we find a statistical different technology elasticity above than
below the median level of firm-level sophistication. In eight of these 15 cases, the technology
elasticity is higher above the median, while in the remaining seven it is lower.
     Interestingly, even in those cases where we can statistically reject the null that the tech-
nology curve is linear, the magnitude of the changes in the technology elasticity above and
below the median is relatively small. Additionally, the R2 of equation (5) barely increases
after allowing for the non-linearities in the technology curve. This finding suggests that a
linear specification for the technology curve provides, to a first order, a good characterization
of the patterns of technology upgrading that we observe in the data.


Robustness
In this section, we study the robustness of the characterization of the technology curves to
variations in the procedure used to construct the business function-level technology sophisti-
cation indices. Specifically, we consider alternative assumptions about the mapping between
the technology ranking and the indices of technology sophistication, about the nature of
the most sophisticated technology in a business function and about the computation of the
average sophistication in the firm.36
  35
       These results are robust to controlling for country fixed effects (See Table E.5 - Table E.9).
  36
       For brevity, we focus on the technology curves based on MOST measures of sophistication.




                                                       29
                                   Table 7: Technology Curve, Robustness
                                (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)     (9)       (10)
                                 Baseline                Log               Max-1           Observed Max      Excluding BF
 General Business Function   ABF MOST     R2    ABF MOST       R2     ABF MOST     R2     ABF MOST    R2    ABF MOST    R2
 Business Administration      1.97***    0.68    1.70***       0.66    1.98***     0.68    1.92***   0.67    1.87***    0.48
                               (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.03)
 Production Planning          1.75***    0.62    1.53***       0.60    1.75***     0.62    1.69***   0.61    1.59***    0.43
                               (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.03)
 Sourcing                     1.33***    0.51    1.26***       0.50    1.33***     0.51    1.29***   0.51    1.11***    0.34
                               (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.02)
 Marketing                    0.71***    0.29    0.89***       0.34    0.72***     0.29    0.69***   0.28    0.51***    0.17
                               (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.02)
 Sales                        0.28***    0.12    0.46***       0.19    0.26***     0.11    0.27***   0.12    0.18***    0.06
                               (0.01)             (0.02)                (0.01)              (0.01)            (0.01)
 Payment                      0.60***    0.29    0.57***       0.34    0.55***     0.27    0.73***   0.31    0.44***    0.18
                               (0.02)             (0.01)                (0.01)              (0.02)            (0.02)
 Quality Control              0.60***    0.23    0.65***       0.24    0.70***     0.24    0.59***   0.23    0.42***    0.13
                               (0.02)             (0.02)                (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.02)

    Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
    first specification, each general business function-level technology (GBF MOST) is regressed on firm-
    level average technology (ABF MOST). In the second specification, we use log of ABF MOST. In the
    third specification, we compute ABF MOST by changing denominator from max to max-1. In the third
    specification, we compute ABF MOST by using observed max of technology as a denominator. In the
    last specification, we compute each ABF MOST by excluding a business function used in the dependent
    variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses.


Alternative cardinalization of sophistication index First, we explore the robustness
of the technology curve to constructing business function technology indices by using a loga-
rithmic transformation of the technology ranking. 37 Clearly, the difference with the baseline
is that an increase by one step in the ranking now leads to higher increases in the sophistica-
tion index the lower the initial level of sophistication in the business function is.38 Columns
3 and 4 of Table 7 report the slopes and fit of the technology curves estimated using the log
measures of business function and average firm technology sophistication. The predictive
power of the technology curve as measured by the goodness of fit is virtually unchanged;
and so are the point estimates of the slopes of the technology curves. Consequently, the
heterogeneity in the technology elasticities across business functions is robust to using a
logarithmic mapping to construct sophistication indices.
    Given how starkly different are the baseline and this alternative assumptions about scale
increments, and how robust the technology curves are, we consider that the existence of stable
technology curves with significant heterogeneity in slopes across business functions should
be a robust finding to reasonable variations in the assumptions about scale increments used
to construct technology sophistication indices at the business function level.
   37
      Specifically, we assume that the new business function sophistication index is equal to the logarithm of
                                     M OST
the baseline sophistication index (Tf,j    ).
   38
      Once we have computed the technology sophistication measures of business functions in this way, we
compute average firm-level sophistication as the simple mean across the business functions.


                                                               30
Most sophisticated technology in the business function A second potential concern
about the technology curves may originate from the presence of measurement error in the
definition of the maximum possible sophistication across business functions. Measurement
error could arise if experts used different criteria to determine the best possible technologies
across business functions. For example, in some business functions, they may consider pos-
sible technologies that are more experimental.39 We explore the relevance of measurement
error in the best possible technologies conducting two exercises. The first consists in scaling
the sophistication ranking of the most widely used technology by the maximum sophisti-
cation ranking minus one (instead of by the maximum sophistication ranking as we do in
the baseline). In this way, we reduce the concern that in some function the best possible
technology is still too experimental and not fully developed while in others it is not. The
second exercise consists in scaling the sophistication ranking of technology by the highest
sophistication observed in the sample for that specific business function. So what defines
whether a technology is possible is the requirement that it is the most widely used technology
by at least one firm in the sample.
    Columns 5 through 8 of Table 7 report the estimates of the technology curves in these
two exercises. Again, both the goodness of fit and the point estimates of the slopes of the
technology curves are very robust to these alternative calculations. Heterogeneity in the
technology curves across BFs is robust to potential errors in the identification of the most
sophisticated technologies.

Firm-level sophistication A final concern is that the slope of the technology curve may
reflect the differential effect that business functions may have on the firm-level average tech-
nology sophistication, since the business function sophistication index in the LHS is also part
of the calculations of the overall index in the RHS. To explore the sensitivity of the estimates
of the technology curves to the inclusion of the business function index in the overall index,
we recompute the average firm-level sophistication measure in regression (5) excluding the
sophistication of the business function used as dependent variable. Columns 9 and 10 of
Table 7 report the estimates. Both the fit and slopes of the technology curves are robust
to excluding the business function sophistication when computing the firm-level average so-
phistication. Therefore, the technology curve does not reflect the mechanic consequence of
including the LHS variable on the RHS regressor.
    Summing up, the finding that there is a technology curve that capture much of the cross-
   39
     Note however, that the same experts define the range of possible technologies of all the business functions
in a sector (or of the GBFs). Thus, for this to be a relevant concern the same experts should be inconsistent
in their criteria to determine the best possible technologies across the business functions of the sector they
focus on.


                                                      31
firm business function-level sophistication and that the there is great heterogeneity across
business functions in the slope of technology curves is robust and significant.


6        Technology and Productivity
What is the relationship between technology measures and firm-level productivity? This
question is relevant from a number of perspectives. First, showing that our measures of
technology correlate with important firm-level outcomes such as labor productivity will pro-
vide an ex-post validation. Second, estimating the relationship between technology and
productivity will allow us to conduct development accounting exercises and compute, for
example, the dispersion in productivity across firms that can be accounted for by differences
in technology across firms. Third, data limitations have led most studies to construct firm-
level technology indices as simple averages of various firm-level technology measures. This
practice is potentially flawed as in general the average across the function-level measures
of technology is far from being a sufficient statistic of the entire distribution of technology
across functions (within a firm). By exploring what moments of the distribution of tech-
nology across business functions are significantly associated with firm productivity we will
gather information to construct technology indices that better reflect the actual production
structure of the firm.
    We study the relationship between productivity (V AP W )40 and technology by estimating
the following regression:

                        ln(V AP W )f,c = c + s +   Tf,c +   Xf,c + vf,c                                (6)

where c and s are country and sector fixed effects,41 Tf,c is a vector of firm-level technology
measures and Xf,c a vector of controls that includes the observables discussed above plus
twelve dummies for the sectors for which we have sector-specific technologies plus other
services.42 Before presenting the estimates, we stress that we interpret them as reflecting
associations between various technology measures and firm productivity, and avoid making
causal interpretations.
    We start by exploring the conditional relationship of productivity and the mean level of
technology in the firm across business functions. Column 1 of Table 8 focuses on EXT, and
shows that the average technology level is significantly associated with firm productivity.
Column 2 introduces a quadratic term and shows that the relationship between productivity
    40
       We measure firm-level productivity as nominal value added in USD divided by the number of employees.
    41
       We include one sector effect for each of the SSBFs. The left-out group is agriculture.
    42
       The left-out sector is crop agriculture.


                                                    32
and the average level of EXT across the business functions of a firm is concave, with the
maximum predicted productivity being attained when firms reach a level of EXT of 4 that
corresponds to the 95th percentile of the distribution of average EXT across firms. Column
3 splits EXT between MOST and GAP. We find that both are positively associated with
firm-productivity and that the relationship between MOST and productivity is quadratic.
In regressions not reported in the table we find that the coefficient on the quadratic term of
GAP is insignificant.

                        Table 8: Productivity and Technology Sophistication
                             (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
 VARIABLES               ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)    ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)


 ABF EXT                  0.64***     2.51***                  2.14***                           2.04***
                           (0.07)      (0.33)                   (0.37)                            (0.36)
 ABF EXT2                            -0.32***                  -0.27***                         -0.22***
                                       (0.06)                   (0.06)                            (0.06)
 ABF MOST                                       2.67***                   2.18***     2.11***               2.27***
                                                 (0.48)                     (0.49)     (0.48)                (0.47)
 ABF MOST2                                      -0.45***                  -0.34***   -0.33***              -0.30***
                                                 (0.10)                     (0.10)     (0.10)                (0.10)
 ABF GAP                                        0.54***                   0.45***     0.43***               0.72***
                                                 (0.11)                     (0.11)     (0.11)                (0.13)
 Var(ABF EXT)                                                   0.24**     0.34***    0.72***    1.05**     1.44***
                                                                (0.11)      (0.10)     (0.27)    (0.42)      (0.38)
 Var(ABF EXT)2                                                                          -0.16
                                                                                       (0.10)
 Var(ABF EXT)*ABF EXT                                                                            -0.28**   -0.39***
                                                                                                  (0.13)    (0.12)

                                                                                                              
 Firm Characteristics
 Observations              2,746      2,746       2,746          2,746      2,746      2,746      2,746      2,746
 R-squared                 0.49       0.50        0.49           0.50       0.50       0.50       0.50       0.50

   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. The regressions
   controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
   agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
   and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
   11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.


    Next, we move beyond firm-level averages of technology across business functions, and ex-
plore the relationship between the within-firm variance of technology and firm productivity.
Columns 4 and 5 report a positive conditional association of the within-firm variance in the
EXT measure (across all business functions) and firm productivity.43 , 44 Column 6 through 9
further explore the conditional relationship between firm productivity and within-firm vari-
ance. Column 6 includes the quadratic term of within-firm variance in technology and finds
   43
      This finding is distinct from the positive association between within-firm variance and the average
technology level, as regression (6) includes measures of the average technology (in MOST and GAP) as
controls.
   44
      We obtain similar findings if instead of the within-firm variance of EXT, we include the within-firm
variance of MOST or GAP.


                                                          33
that the coefficient of this term is negative though significant only at the 10% level. Columns
7 through 8 consider the possibility that the relationship between within-firm variance in
technology and productivity varies with the average level of technology in the firm. The
two columns find strong evidence that the relationship between the within-firm variance in
technology and productivity is less positive for firms with higher average technology levels.
    Why is within-firm variance in technology positively associated with productivity, after
controlling for the average technology level? One hypothesis is that, within-firm variance
reflects the firm's ability to use different levels of technology across business functions. For a
given average level of technology, a greater within-firm variance may lead to higher produc-
tivity if firms use better technologies in the business functions that are more relevant for the
firm's operations. This strategic upgrading of technology may be particularly productive in
firms that have a lower level of average technology, as it allows them to concentrate their
limited capacity to implement better technologies in the key business functions. Hence, the
negative coefficient of the interaction between within firm variance in technology and average
firm technology in the productivity regression.
    Next, we separate the average technology index in ABFs between GBFs and SSBFs to
explore their relationship with firm productivity. Table 9 reports the estimated coefficients.
The main take away is that both the average technology in GBFs and SSBFs matter, but
that while the relationship of technology in GBFs and productivity is similar across sectors,
the relationship with SSBFs differs significantly across sectors. Column 1 shows that firm
productivity is positively related to the average technology in GBFs though the relationship
is concave. Additionally, this specification includes the average level of SSBF in the firm.
We allow the coefficient on SSBF to differ by sector to reflect both differences in the nature
of sector-specific business functions as well as in the potential relevance of sector-specific
technologies for productivity across sectors.45 We find that the average level of technology
in SSBFs has positive significant coefficient in agriculture, apparel, and other services, and
find insignificant effects in other manufacturing and retail and wholesale. Column 2 shows
the robustness of these findings to separating the average level of technology in GBFs between
MOST and GAP measures, and column 3 explores the possibility that the coefficient of the
average technology level in GBFs on productivity differs by broad sectors, but we do not
find any statistical or economic differences.46
    We further explore the relationship between firm-technology measures and productivity
by investigating whether this relationship operates through TFP. To this end, we include as
  45
      In the Appendix, we present estimates where we allow for one different coefficient for each sector
(Table F.8).
   46
      In the Appendix, Table F.1 shows the robustness of these findings to using MOST measures of technology
in SSBF.


                                                    34
              Table 9: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, Continued

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
               VARIABLES                              ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)


               GBF EXT                                  1.72***
                                                         (0.32)
               GBF EXT2                                -0.20***
                                                         (0.05)
               GBF MOST                                                1.93***
                                                                        (0.45)
               GBF MOST2                                              -0.28***
                                                                        (0.09)
               GBF GAP                                                 0.38***
                                                                        (0.10)
               GBF EXT*AGRI                                                          0.46**
                                                                                     (0.23)
               GBF EXT*MANF                                                         0.61***
                                                                                     (0.08)
               GBF EXT*SVC                                                          0.49***
                                                                                     (0.09)
               SSBF EXT*Agriculture                      0.33*        0.42**          0.43*
                                                         (0.20)        (0.19)        (0.25)
               SSBF EXT*Food Processing                  0.30*         0.32*           0.28
                                                         (0.18)        (0.18)        (0.18)
               SSBF EXT*Apparel                         0.44***       0.40***       0.36***
                                                         (0.11)        (0.10)        (0.11)
               SSBF EXT*Retail and Wholesale              -0.02         -0.07         -0.05
                                                         (0.11)        (0.11)        (0.12)
               SSBF EXT*Other Manufacturing               0.07          0.05           0.02
                                                         (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)
               SSBF EXT*Other Services                  0.55**        0.58**        0.61***
                                                         (0.23)        (0.23)        (0.23)
               Var(ABF EXT)                             0.29***       0.36***       0.39***
                                                         (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                       
               Firm Characteristics
               Observations                               2,746        2,746          2,746
               R-squared                                   0.50        0.50            0.50
  Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.


controls in regression (6) the book value of capital per employee in the firm and the cost of
labor per worker as a proxy for the average human capital per worker. The results from this
exercise are reported in the Appendix in Table F.2 (which controls for capital per worker)
and Table F.3 (which includes the controls for both capital and human capital per worker).


                                                     35
The main finding is that the results reported in Table 8 and 9 are robust to controlling for
firm-level capital per worker and average human capital. Hence, we conclude that the strong
relationship between productivity and firm technology measures in the data largely reflects
the relationship between technology and firm TFP.


7        Development Accounting
We conclude our analysis by conducting two development accounting exercises. First, we
study the share of the dispersion in productivity that can be accounted for by the observed
dispersion in technology measures across firms. Second, we explore the possibility that differ-
ences in technology may help explain the fact that cross-country differences in productivity
are much larger in agricultural than non-agricultural sectors.


7.1      Cross-firm dispersion in productivity
There is a long tradition going back at least to Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) studying
how different factor account for cross-country differences in productivity. This methodology
has been recently extended to explore cross-firm differences in productivity. For example,
Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) explore the contribution of firm management practices to
variation in firm productivity. We next use the productivity regressions reported in Table 8
and Table 9 to explore how much of the cross-firm dispersion in productivity firms can be
accounted for the observed cross-firm variation in technological sophistication.
    To answer this question, we first use the estimates of the productivity regression (6), and,
for each specification, we compute the predicted values of residual productivity for all firms.
These are the predicted productivity levels after filtering out the effect of observable variables
other than the technology sophistication measures. Then we calculate the gap between the
10th and 90th percentiles of residual predicted productivity, and define this as the gap in
productivity generated by differences across firms in the sophistication of technology, or for
brevity the predicted productivity gap.47
    Second, we regress firm productivity on the same observables as in regression (6). We
compute the actual productivity gap as the difference in residual productivity between the
productivity levels of the firms at 10th and 90th percentiles of distribution of residual pro-
ductivity. Finally, we compare the predicted productivity gap to the actual productivity
    47
     Note that we are relying on the productivity regression (6) to construct a firm-level technology index
as the projection of the vector of technology measures on firm productivity. recall that the productivity
regressions, include both first and second moments of the firm distribution of technology sophistication as
regressors.


                                                    36
gap.This ratio reflects the fraction of the actual dispersion of productivity that can be ac-
counted for by the dispersion in technology across firms. Table F.12 in the Appendix reports
the predicted productivity levels at the 10th and 90th percentiles and the ratio of predicted
over actual productivity gaps for each of the specifications we have estimated of regression
6. This ratio ranges from 31% to 37%. Therefore, we conclude that differences in firm-level
measures of productivity account for one third of the gap in productivity between the firms
at the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution.


7.2     Cross-country productivity gap in agriculture
One of the big puzzles in the productivity literature is the large sectoral variation we ob-
serve in cross-country productivity differences. In particular, Caselli (2005) shows that cross-
country differences in productivity are ten times larger in agriculture than in non-agricultural
sectors.48 Table 10 shows that the sample of firms covered by the FAT survey also displays a
larger cross-country productivity gap in agriculture than in non-agriculture. Using employ-
ment weights to compute sectoral productivity in each country, we observe that the ratio of
labor productivity between Brazil and Senegal in agriculture in FAT is 15.3, while in non-
agricultural sectors it is 2.5. Therefore, the relative productivity gap between the Brazilian
State of Cear´a and Senegal in FAT is 6.1 times greater in agriculture than in non-agricultural
sectors.49 Part of these sectoral differences in productivity reflect the larger cross-country
differences in firm size in agriculture than non-agricultural sectors. As smaller production
units tend to be less productive, the greater difference in average size between rich and poor
countries in agriculture vs. non-agriculture explains some of the cross-sector difference in
the relative productivity gap, in productivity. To filter the effect of firm-size variation we
focus on raw (rather than employment weighted) firm productivity measures. The first two
columns of Table 10 report the average productivity of FAT firms in each country and broad
sector without using employment weights. In this case, the gap in firm productivity between
Brazil and Senegal in agriculture is 11.4, while in non-agriculture is 2.9. Therefore, the ratio
of the cross-country firm-productivity gaps in agriculture vs. non-agriculture is 4.
    Lagakos and Waugh (2013) show that selection of labor across sectors coupled with a
minimum subsistence requirement for agricultural products may generate cross-country dif-
ferences in productivity that are twice larger in agriculture than in non-agricultural sectors.
   48
      Unlike our data, Caselli, uses PPP adjustments to compute sectoral productivity which may induce
additional discrepancies in cross-country productivity gaps across sectors if the PPP price index differs more
across countries in agriculture than in non-agricultural sectors.
   49
      Using World Bank Data on value added per worker by sector, the productivity ratios between these two
countries in 2019 are 4.6 for agriculture and 3.1 for non-agriculture, resulting in a significantly smaller ratio
than what we find in our survey (1.5 vs. 6.1).


                                                       37
                                 Table 10: Average Firm Productivity

                                                 Unweighted                   Employment Weighted
 Country                                  AGRI            Non-AGRI             AGRI               Non-AGRI
 Brazil                                 16,865               20,389           18,681                 34,098
 Vietnam                                1,310                22,290            9,790                 31,721
 Senegal                                1,476                7,062             1,222                 13,697
 Brazil/Senegal                           11.4                2.9                15.3                    2.5
 Ratio: AGRI/Non-AGRI                               4.0                                     6.1


However, the bulk of the cross-country productivity gap in agriculture remains unexplained.
A natural hypothesis that we explore next is that the cross-country gap in agricultural
productivity reflects a the cross-country gap in the technologies used in production in agri-
cultural vs. non-agricultural sectors.

             Table 11: Cross-country Average Technology Sophistication by Industry

                              ABF MOST                      GBF MOST                       SSBF MOST
                        AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC            AGRI      MANF              SVC
 Overall                 1.93      1.75      1.89     1.76       1.76     1.97     2.17           1.60         1.68
 Brazil (BR)             2.52      2.12      2.38     2.32       2.16     2.60     2.81           1.90         1.89
 Vietnam (VT)            2.02      1.86      1.92     1.79       1.89     1.93     2.32           1.64         1.89
 Senegal (SN)            1.25      1.26      1.36     1.16       1.23     1.38     1.39           1.26         1.25
 Gap: BR - SN            1.27      0.86      1.02     1.16       0.93     1.22     1.42           0.64         0.64
 Relative Gap            32%       22%       26%      29%        23%      31%      36%            16%          16%
   Note: AGRI, MANF, and SVC represent agriculture, manufacturing, and services, respectively. Overall
   is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. For the columns on SSBF, the sample is restricted to the
   firms having sector-specific technologies. Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.

   Consistent with this hypothesis, Table 11 and Table C.4, in the appendix, document
the existence of larger gaps in technology between Brazil and Senegal in agriculture than in
non-agricultural sectors for virtually all measures we compute. To explore the potential for
technology differences to account for cross-country productivity differences across sectors,
we estimate the following regression.


                                                   ^  Tf,c +   Xf,c + vf,c
                          ln(V AP W )f,c = c + s + s                                                             (7)

where we allow the coefficient of technology on productivity to differ between firms in agri-
                                                  ^).50
cultural and non-agricultural sectors (indexed by s
  50
       s indexes the finer sectoral disaggregation we have used in the previous section.

                                                       38
    Table 12 reports the estimates for various specifications of regression (7). Column 1 in-
cludes as technology measures the average level of EXT at the firm level, while column 3
includes the average level of MOST. The main finding is that, for both measures, the coeffi-
cient of technology on productivity is higher for agricultural firms than for non-agricultural
firms. This difference in the coefficients together with the greater cross-country gap in av-
erage technology differences in agriculture than non-agriculture firms opens the possibility
for technology to account for some of the sectoral variation in the cross-country productivity
gap.

      Table 12: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, Industry-heterogeneity

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
 VARIABLES                         ln(VAPW)        ln(VAPW)        ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)        ln(VAPW)

 ABF EXT*AGRI                        0.95***         0.84***
                                      (0.20)          (0.19)
 ABF EXT*NO AGRI                     0.64***         0.56***
                                      (0.07)          (0.07)
 ABF MOST*AGRI                                                       1.18***        1.07***         1.05***
                                                                      (0.30)         (0.31)          (0.36)
 ABF MOST*NO AGRI                                                    0.72***        0.67***         0.67***
                                                                      (0.10)         (0.09)          (0.09)
 ABF GAP*AGRI                                                                                         0.53
                                                                                                     (0.60)
 ABF GAP*NO AGRI                                                                                    0.44***
                                                                                                     (0.11)
 Var(ABF EXT)*AGRI                                     0.35                           0.41            0.33
                                                      (0.30)                         (0.34)          (0.30)
 Var(ABF EXT)*NO AGRI                                0.38***                        0.51***         0.40***
                                                      (0.10)                         (0.10)          (0.10)

                                                                                                       
 Firm Characteristics
 Observations                         2,746           2,746           2,746           2,746          2,746
 R-squared                             0.49            0.49            0.47            0.49          0.49
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. The regressions
   controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
   agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
   and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
   11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.


    The remaining columns in Table 12 and Table 13 explore the robustness of this key
finding. Columns 2, 4 and 5 of Table 12 include as control the within-firm variance in
technology. Column 5, in addition, introduces the average level of GAP in the firm. In all

                                                      39
cases, we allow the coefficients to vary by sector. We find that the coefficient of within-
firm variance in technology and average level of GAP do not differ significantly between
agricultural and non-agricultural firms. Importantly, including these additional controls
does not affect the difference in the coefficient of average technology on productivity between
agricultural and non-agricultural firms.

Table 13: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, Industry-heterogeneity Continued

                                                               (1)              (2)
                      VARIABLES                            ln(VAPW)         ln(VAPW)

                      GBF EXT*AGRI                            0.52**           0.44**
                                                              (0.23)           (0.22)
                      GBF EXT*Non-AGRI                       0.54***          0.50***
                                                              (0.07)           (0.07)
                      SSBF EXT*AGRI                           0.46*            0.42*
                                                              (0.25)           (0.25)
                      SSBF EXT*Non-AGRI                       0.10*             0.04
                                                              (0.06)           (0.06)
                      Var(ABF EXT)*AGRI                                         0.34
                                                                               (0.30)
                      Var(ABF EXT)*Non-AGRI                                   0.41***
                                                                               (0.10)

                                                                                 
                      Firm Characteristics
                      Observations                             2,746           2,746
                      R-squared                                 0.48            0.49
   Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. The regressions
   controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
   agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
   and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
   11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.


    Table 13 further explores the origin of the sectoral variation in the coefficient of average
firm-level technology on productivity by separating GBFs and SSBFs. The main finding
from this table is that the difference in the coefficient comes from SSBFs. Specifically,
we find that the coefficients for the average technology level in GBFs is very similar for
agricultural and non-agricultural firms but, while the coefficient on SSBF in the productivity
of non-agricultural firms is essentially zero, the coefficient on agricultural firms is large and
significant.
    Next, we use the estimates from Table 12 and Table 13 to conduct a cross-sector de-
velopment accounting exercise to assess the fraction of the sectoral gap in cross-country

                                                      40
productivity difference in productivity that can be attributed to sectoral differences in tech-
nology. For each measure of technology considered in Table 12 and Table 13 we calculate
the gap between Brazil and Senegal for agricultural and non-agricultural firms. Then, we
use the estimated coefficients to compute the predicted average productivity gap between
Brazil and Senegal in the average agricultural and non-agricultural firms. Finally, we com-
pute the ratio of the predicted productivity gaps in agriculture vs. non-agriculture, and
compare them to the actual relative cross-country productivity gap in our sample (i.e. 4.0).
For example, using the specification from column 1 in Table 12, we find that the predicted
productivity gap in agriculture between the average firm in Brazil and Senegal is 1.61, while
in non-agriculture it is 0.99. Therefore, the ratio of the Brazil-Senegal productivity gaps
in agriculture vs. non-agriculture is 1.6. This implies that differences in technology across
sectors and countries account for a differential in the Brazil-Senegal productivity gap be-
tween agriculture and non-agriculture of 61% (i.e. (1.61-1)*100) which represents 21% of
the actual differential in the cross-country productivity gap in our sample which is 296%
(i.e. (3.96-1)*100). We conduct equivalent calculations for all the specifications of regression
(7) and report them in the Appendix (Table F.13). They result in similar magnitudes with
a share of the sectoral difference in Brazil-Senegal productivity gap that can be accounted
for by differences in technology which ranges from 21% to 22% (see Appendix Table F.13).
We conclude that about a quarter of sectoral differences in cross-country productivity can
be accounted for by sectoral differences in cross-country technology.


8    Conclusions
In this paper, we have introduced the FAT dataset, a representative firm-level data set that
covers Senegal, Vietnam and the Brazilian state of Cear´  a, and that contains comprehensive
information about the technologies used in each of the key business functions of companies.
Exploiting the FAT data, we have constructed measures of the sophistication of the technolo-
gies employed at the business-function and firm levels. We have then used these measures to
explore the patterns of technology adoption (i) across firms, (ii) across business functions,
within firms, and (iii) the relationship between technology and productivity across firms and
countries.
    Our exploration of the FAT dataset has revealed large cross-firm differences in the so-
phistication of technologies used in production. A variance-decomposition shows that the
within-country component of the average firm-level sophistication of technology represents
between 51% and 95% of the cross-firm variance in the average sophistication of technologies
used. The cross-firm variance in technology sophistication differs across countries/regions,

                                              41
and is higher the more developed is the country/region in our sample.
    We have conducted two development accounting exercises to conclude that variation in
technology sophistication can be important to explain differences in productivity. The first
has shown that cross-firm differences in technology account for a third of the gap we observe
between firms at the top and bottom 10% of the productivity distribution. The second
exercise has revealed that cross-country differences in the technology of the average firm
in agriculture and in non-agricultural activities account for one fifth of the observed ratio
between agricultural and non-agricultural cross-country firm-level productivity gaps.
    The availability of comprehensive function-level information on the technologies used
by companies has allowed us to systematically study technology within firms. We have
documented that the variance of the within-firm component is roughly between twice and
four times larger than the variance of the between company component. This finding debunks
the notion implicit in the literature that "good" companies have uniformly high levels of
technological sophistication across all business functions, and begs for an in depth exploration
of the sources of variation in technology across business functions.
    We have started to explore this question by documenting that the within-firm technol-
ogy variance increases with the average technology sophistication and with firm size. These
findings suggest that variation in the value of technology across business functions may be
more relevant than variation in the costs of adopting the technology to explain within-firm
variance. We have studied more directly this hypothesis by exploring how the sophistication
of technology in a business function varies with the average sophistication of companies. We
have named this relationship the technology curve. We documented that technology curves
account for a large share of the cross-firm variance in business-function sophistication, and
that the slope of technology curves varies greatly across business functions. The resulting pat-
terns of technology expansion across business functions are consistent with representations
of aggregate firm-level TFP that display non-homotheticities in technology sophistication.
    Another surprising finding we have uncovered is that firm productivity is positively corre-
lated with the within-firm variance in technologies after controlling for the average firm-level
sophistication. The slope of this relationship is flatter for firms with higher average sophisti-
cation of technology. We have conjectured that these findings may reflect the value for firms
of using more sophisticated technologies in more relevant business functions.
    We hope that these findings may lay the groundwork for future empirical and theoretical
efforts to better understand the drivers of technology use/adoption within firms. A signif-
icant advancement from this work may be the creation of new firm-level measures of TFP
that directly reflect the technologies used and how they integrate in the firm's production
structure.


                                               42
References
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. "A Model of Growth Through Creative
  Destruction." Econometrica, 60(2): 323­351.
Akerman, Anders, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad. 2015. "The Skill Comple-
  mentarity of Broadband Internet." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1781.
Atkin, David, Amit K Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. 2017. "Exporting and Firm
  Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 132(2): 551­615.
Atkinson, Anthony B. 1987. "On the Measurement of Poverty." Econometrica, 55(4): 749­
  764.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2007. "How does Information
  Technology Affect Productivity? Plant-level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process
  Improvement, and Worker Skills." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1721­
  1758.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. "Do People Mean What They
  Say? Implications for Subjective Survey Data." American Economic Review, 91(2): 67­72.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Man-
  agement Practices Across Firms and Countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  122(4): 1351­1408.
Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Megha Patnaik,
  Itay Saporta-Eksten, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "What Drives Differences in
  Management Practices?" American Economic Review, 109(5): 1648­83.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2002. "Informa-
  tion Technology, Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level
  Evidence." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 339.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt. 2000. "Beyond Computation: Information Tech-
  nology, Organizational Transformation and Business Performance." Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 14(4): 23­48.
Caselli, Francesco. 2005. "Accounting for Cross-country Income Differences." Handbook
  of Economic Growth, 1: 679­741.
Comin, Diego. 2000. "An Uncertainty-Driven Theory of the Productivity Slowdown in
  Manufacturing." PhD diss. Harvard University.
Comin, Diego A, Danial Lashkari, and Mart´         i Mestieri. 2020. "Structural Change
  with Long-run Income and Price Effects." Econometrica, Forthcoming.
Comin, Diego A, Mikhail Dmitriev, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2020. "The


                                          43
  Spatial Diffusion of Technology." Mimeo.
Comin, Diego, and Bart Hobijn. 2010. "An Exploration of Technology Diffusion." Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 100(5): 2031­59.
Comin, Diego, and Mart´     i Mestieri. 2018. "If Technology Has Arrived Everywhere, Why
  Has Income Diverged?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(3): 137­78.
Davies, Stephen. 1979. The Diffusion of Process Innovations. Cambridge University Press.
DiNardo, John E, and J¨      orn-Steffen Pischke. 1997. "The Returns to Computer Use
  Revisited: Have Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?" The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 112(1): 291­303.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. "Nudging Farmers
  to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya." American Economic
  Review, 101(6): 2350­90.
Fort, Teresa C, Justin R Pierce, and Peter K Schott. 2018. "New Perspectives on the
  Decline of US Manufacturing Employment." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(2): 47­
  72.
Foster, Andrew D, and Mark R Rosenzweig. 1995. "Learning by Doing and Learning
  from Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture." Journal of Political
  Economy, 103(6): 1176­1209.
Goldman, Matt, and David M Kaplan. 2018. "Comparing Distributions by Multiple
  Testing across Quantiles or CDF Values." Journal of Econometrics, 206(1): 143­166.
Griliches, Zvi. 1957. "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
  Change." Econometrica, 25(4): 501­522.
Gupta, Apoorv, Jacopo Ponticelli, and Andrea Tesei. 2020. "Information, Technology
  Adoption and Productivity: The Role of Mobile Phones in Agriculture." National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Hadar, Josef, and William R Russell. 1969. "Rules for Ordering Uncertain Prospects."
  The American Economic Review, 59(1): 25­34.
Hanoch, Giora. 1975. "Production and Demand Models with Direct or Indirect Implicit
  Additivity." Econometrica, 395­419.
Hanoch, Giora, and Haim Levy. 1969. "The Efficiency Analysis of Choices Involving
  Risk." The Review of Economic Studies, 36(3): 335­346.
Hjort, Jonas, and Jonas Poulsen. 2019. "The Arrival of Fast Internet and Employment
  in Africa." American Economic Review, 109(3): 1032­79.
Holbrook, Allyson L., Melanie C. Green, and Jon A. Krosnick. 2003. "Telephone
  versus Face-to-Face Interviewing of National Probability Samples with Long Question-
  naires: Comparisons of Respondent Satisficing and Social Desirability Response Bias."


                                          44
  Public Opinion Quarterly, 67(1): 79­125.
Hubbard, Thomas N. 2003. "Information, Decisions, and Productivity: On-board Com-
  puters and Capacity Utilization in Trucking." American Economic Review, 93(4): 1328­
  1353.
Jackle, Annette, Caroline Roberts, and Peter Lynn. 2006. "Telephone versus Face-to-
  face Interviewing: Mode Effects on Data Quality and Likely Causes: Report on Phase II
  of the ESS-Gallup Mixed Mode Methodology Project." Institute for Social and Economic
  Research ISER Working Paper Series 2006-41.
Jorgenson, Dale W, Mun S Ho, and Kevin J Stiroh. 2008. "A Retrospective Look at
  the US Productivity Growth Resurgence." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1): 3­24.
Jorgenson, Dale W, Mun S Ho, Kevin J Stiroh, et al. 2005. "Productivity, Volume
  3: Information Technology and the American Growth Resurgence." MIT Press Books, 3.
Juh´asz, R´eka, Mara P Squicciarini, and Nico Voigtl¨     ander. 2020. "Technology Adop-
  tion and Productivity Growth: Evidence from Industrialization in France." National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research.
Kaplan, David M. 2019. "distcomp: Comparing Distributions." The Stata Journal,
  19(4): 832­848.
Krueger, Alan B. 1993. "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence
  from Microdata, 1984­1989." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1): 33­60.
Lagakos, David, and Michael E Waugh. 2013. "Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-
  country Productivity Differences." American Economic Review, 103(2): 948­80.
Lehmann, Erich Leo. 1955. "Ordered Families of Distributions." The Annals of Mathe-
  matical Statistics, 399­419.
Mankiw, N Gregory, David Romer, and David N Weil. 1992. "A Contribution to the
  Empirics of Economic Growth." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 407­437.
Mansfield, Edwin. 1961. "Technical Change and the Rate of Imitation." Econometrica,
  741­766.
Mansfield, Edwin. 1963. "Intrafirm Rates of Diffusion of an Innovation." The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 348­359.
Oliner, Stephen D, Daniel E Sichel, and Kevin J Stiroh. 2007. "Explaining a Pro-
  ductive Decade." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2007(1): 81­137.
Pareto, Vilfredo. 1909. Manuel D'´   economie Politique. Vol. 38, Giard & Bri`
                                                                             ere.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of political Economy,
  98(5, Part 2): S71­S102.
Ryan, B., and N. Gross. 1943. "The Diffusion of Hybrid Seed Corn in Two Iowa Com-
  munities." Rural Sociology, 8(1): 15­24.


                                          45
Stiroh, Kevin J. 2002. "Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What
  Do the Industry Data Say?" American Economic Review, 92(5): 1559­1576.
Thorndike, Robert L. 1966. "Intellectual Status and Intellectual Growth." Journal of
  Educational Psychology, 57(3): 121.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT
  Scanners. Vol. 160, Harvard University Press.
Van Ark, Bart, Mary O'Mahoney, and Marcel P Timmer. 2008. "The Productivity
  Gap Between Europe and the United States: Trends and Causes." Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 22(1): 25­44.
World Bank. 2009. "Enterprise Survey and Indicator Surveys: Sampling Methodology."
  The World Bank, Manuscript.




                                         46
Contents (Appendix)
A FAT survey                                                                                                                                48
  A.1 Sampling frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    48
  A.2 Implementation and quality control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                      56
  A.3 Survey Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                   57

B Details on the technology measures                                                                                                        58
  B.1 Sector-specific business functions .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    58
  B.2 Hybrid technology structures . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    64
  B.3 EXT index . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    67
  B.4 Regional-level analysis . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    68

C Additional results on cross-firm differences in technology                                                                                70

D Robustness to using indices based on logarithmic transformations of tech-
  nology sophistication rankings                                            78

E Additional results on within-firm technology                                                                                              86

F Additional results on technology and productivity                                                                                         94

G Detailed acknowledgments                                                                                                                 108




                                              47
In the Appendix, we provide supplements to the survey, empirical exercises, and results in the
main text. We begin with describing the sampling framework and weight construction for the
Firm-level Adoption of Technology (FAT) Survey in Appendix A. Then, in Appendix B, we
explain details on the construction of some of technology measures used in empirical exercises
in the main analysis. It also provides additional figures on the structure of business functions
and technologies. Finally, we provide the additional results in Appendix C, Appendix D,
Appendix E, and Appendix F.


A          FAT survey
The Firm-level Adoption of Technologies (FAT) data are based on multi-country, multi-
sector, and representative firm surveys to measure technologies adopted and used by firms.
Table A.1 provides the number of technologies covered in the FAT survey as well as other
existing surveys. Compared to existing surveys, the FAT survey covers a larger number of
technologies and business functions. It also covers the agriculture sector in addition to the
manufacturing and service sectors.
    The survey also provides balance sheet information and selected information on business
owners. Furthermore, the survey collects information on potential drivers of and barriers to
technology adoption. The survey has been conducted by the World Bank in partnership with
public or private local agencies across three countries: Brazil (the state of Cear´
                                                                                  a), Senegal,
and Vietnam. The data were collected between June 2019 and March 2020.51

                      Table A.1: Coverage of firm-level technology surveys

                                                                  # of               # of        Includes Firms
 Surveys                                                       Technologies   Business Functions in Agriculture
 Firm-level Adoption of Technology Survey                          287               59               Yes
 Survey of Advanced Technology (SAT)                                57                3               No
 Community Survey on ICT Usage and E-Commerce in Enterprises        9                 0               No
 Information & Communication Technology Survey (ICTS)               4                 0               No
 Annual Business Survey (ABS) 2019                                  5                 0               No




A.1        Sampling frame
The sampling frames for the Brazilian state of Cear´
                                                   a, Senegal, and Vietnam were based on
the most comprehensive and latest establishment census available from national statistical
  51
     The survey is currently planned to be implemented in other countries including Bangladesh, India (the
states of Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh), Malawi, Kenya, the Philippines, Poland, and the Republic of
Korea.


                                                    48
agencies or administrative business register. For Brazil, the sampling frame was based on
the 2017 Rela¸  c~
                 ao Anual de Informa¸ c~
                                       oes Sociais (RAIS). RAIS is an employer-employee ad-
ministrative registry database managed by the Ministry of Labour (MTE), which covers all
Brazilian formal firms. For Senegal, the sampling frame was based on the 2016 Recense-
ment G´  en´eral des Entreprises (RGE) from the Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la
D´emographie (ANSD). The RGE covers all establishments operating in Senegal. For Viet-
nam, the sampling is based on the 2018 Establishment Census from the General Statistical
Office (GSO), which covers all registered establishments operating in Vietnam.
    The universe of study, which defined the population of firms included in the FAT survey,
covers firms with 5 or more employees in agriculture, manufacturing, and services. The sector
classification is based on the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic
Activities (ISIC), Rev. 4. More specifically, our sample includes firms from the following
ISIC rev 4 sectors: Agriculture (ISIC 01, from Group A); All manufacturing sectors (Group
C); Construction (Group F), Wholesale and retail trade (Group G), Transportation and
storage (Group G), Accommodation and food service activities (Group I), Information and
communication (Group J), Financial and insurance activities (Group K), Financial services
(ISIC, 64), Travel agency (ISIC 79, from group N), Health services (ISIC 86, from group Q),
and Repair services (ISIC 95, from Group S).
    We exclude micro-firms with fewer than 5 employees. Micro firms, particularly in de-
veloping countries, are less likely to be captured in the sampling frame, due to informality,
and they would require further adjustment in the survey instrument and sampling design.52
This decision is aligned with other firm-level standardized surveys with comparability across
countries. The World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES) also uses a threshold of 5 employ-
ees. The World Management Survey (WMS) uses a threshold of 50 employees. In the case
of Senegal, our sampling frame includes all firms registered in the establishment census of
ANSD.53 The RGE in Senegal has 407,882 businesses, but most of them (82%) refers to
individual businesses or self-employees. Firms with 5+ employees represent 6% of total,
but they are responsible for about 50% of total employment and 81% of total sales in the
RGE database. For Brazil, the RAIS has 85,441 establishments formally registered in Cear´    a.
Establishments with 5+ employees represent about 39% of total establishments and 93% of
total employment.
   52
      Establishments below this threshold often lack the organizational structure to respond to some of the
questions.
   53
      The ANSD uses a definition of formality based on the accounting system used by the firms. According
to their definition, formal firms are those with an accounting system that is compatible with the West African
Accounting System (SYSCOA). Our sample includes all firms with 5 or more employees registered under
RGE, given that they tend to be also registered through the num´   ero d'Identification nationale des entreprises
et associations (NINEA), which makes them more comparable with formal firms in Brazil and Vietnam.


                                                       49
    We stratified the universe of establishments by firm size, sector of activity,and geographic
regions.Our sample is representative across these dimensions.54 In the firm size stratifica-
tion, we have three strata: small firms (5-19 employees), medium firms (20-99 employees),
and large firms (100 or more employees). Regarding sector, for all countries, we stratified at
least for agriculture (ISIC 01), food processing (ISIC 10), Wearing apparel (ISIC 14), Retail
and Wholesale (ISIC 45 and 56), other manufacturing (Group C, excluding food processing
and apparel), and other Services (including all other firms, excluding retail). We use this
sector structure of the data for most of the analysis in this paper. Additional sector strat-
ification that were specific for each country included: Motor vehicles (ISIC 29), for Brazil;
Leather (ISIC 15), Pharmaceutical (ISIC 21), and Motor vehicles (ISIC 29), for Vietnam;
and Land transport (ISIC 49), Finance (ISIC 64), and Health (ISIC 86), for Senegal.55 In
the geographic stratification, we use sub-national regions. In Brazil, we cover only Cear´   a. In
Vietnam, we make 8 geographic strata: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`      ong; Ninh B`  inh), Region 2
(Th´ ai Nguy^en; Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´   a; H`a T~
                                                          inh; B`inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum;
L^ am ng), Region 5 (B`  inh Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~      inh Long), Region 7 (H`    a
Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´    i Minh). In Senegal, we have 7 regional strata including Dakar,
Diourbel, Kaolack, Kolda, St. Louis, Thies, and Ziguinchor. For Senegal, we additionally
stratify by formality. To calculate the optimal distribution of the sample, we followed a
similar methodology as described by the World Bank (2009).
    For the state of Cear´ a, our universe includes 24,288 establishments. We collected data
for 711 establishments randomly selected from RAIS. Table A.2 and Table A.3 provide the
information on the distribution of firms in the population and the sample for Cear´     a, by size
group and sectors.

                           Table A.2: Population Distribution, Brazil

                        Agri-      Food        Wearing    Other     Wholesale      Other      Total
 Region    Size        culture   Processing    Apparel    Manuf.    & Retail      Services   Region
 Cear´
     a     Small        240         523          788       2487        9255         5362      24488
           Medium       111         220          295       937         1764         1643
           Large         47          51           54        202         243          266
 Total                  398         794          1137      3626        11262        7271      24488




  54
     An additional dimension was included for Senegal, splitting firms by formality status based on the
ANSD definition.
  55
     These specific stratifications were taken into consideration when determining sampling weights.


                                                  50
                         Table A.3: Sampling Distribution, Brazil

                   Agri-       Food       Wearing   Other    Wholesale    Other      Total
Region   Size     culture    Processing   Apparel   Manuf.   & Retail    Services   Region
Cear´
    a    Small      32           47         51        63        48         47        711
         Medium     24           39         42        52        44         47
         Large      19           29         31        36        29         31
Total               75          115         124      151       121         125       711




                                            51
    For Vietnam our universe includes 179,725 establishments. We collected data on 1,499
establishments randomly selected from the GSO's census. Table A.4 and Table A.5 provide
the information on the distribution of firms in the population and the sample for Vietnam.

                        Table A.4: Population Distribution, Vietnam

                        Agri-       Food       Wearing     Other     Wholesale      Other      Total
 Region     Size       culture    Processing   Apparel     Manuf.    & Retail      Services   Region
 Region 1   Small        29           91           82       2074        4183        3155       13417
            Medium       12           38           61       1225         491         923
            Large         4           28          103        623          44         251
 Region 2   Small        39           49           29        691        1270         897        4354
            Medium       10           22           54        408         208         308
            Large         0            5           60        222          18          64
 Region 3   Small        85           95           46       1001        2330        2547        8572
            Medium       24           31           50        452         327        1042
            Large         7           27           81        167          31         229
 Region 4   Small        117          78           14        164         539         716        2162
            Medium       28           43            7        70           76         206
            Large        12           13            7        12           10          50
 Region 5   Small        89          145          127       3699        4278        2978       17942
            Medium       33          101          134       2494         589         798
            Large        16          100          204       1937         48          172
 Region 6   Small         7          143           31       868         1048         781        4595
            Medium        8           92           46        656         154         253
            Large         0           54           60        340          13          41
 Region 7   Small        279         669          578       9597        34466       22025      77462
            Medium       35          100          126       1463        2954        3064
            Large         7           33           90        536         338        1102
 Region 8   Small        204         564          854       7453        18024       11661      51221
            Medium       36          200          433       2364        3376        3445
            Large         6          111          365       820          469         836
 Total                   1087        2832        3642       39336       75284       57544     179725
  Note: Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`ong; Ninh B`
                                                                            inh), Region 2 (Th´
                                                                                              ai Nguy^
                                                                                                     en;
  Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´   a; H`a T~
                                           inh; B`
                                                 inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum; L^  am ng), Region 5 (B`inh
  Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´i Minh).




                                                 52
                         Table A.5: Sample Distribution, Vietnam

                       Agri-       Food       Wearing     Other     Wholesale      Other      Total
Region     Size       culture    Processing   Apparel     Manuf.    & Retail      Services   Region
Region 1   Small          9           5           5         32          36           28        219
           Medium         3           5           6         30           6            9
           Large          1           5           6         27           2            4
Region 2   Small         11          8            8         15          14           11        134
           Medium         3           7           8         11           5            6
           Large          0           2           8          8           4            5
Region 3   Small         14          9            9         15          25           27        205
           Medium         8           9           9         13           8           14
           Large          2           8           10        12           6            7
Region 4   Small         14          10           4          9          10           12        123
           Medium         8          10           3          6           6            8
           Large          5           4           2          3           3            6
Region 5   Small          6           2           2         43          33           23        227
           Medium         6           2           4         40           3            4
           Large          5           2           3         45           2            2
Region 6   Small          2           6           6         23          10            8        131
           Medium         2           6           5         22           3            3
           Large          0           6           6         19           2            2
Region 7   Small          2           3           4         64          40           40        228
           Medium         3           2           2         17          12           13
           Large          0           2           2         15           2            5
Region 8   Small          2           3           4         53          40           40        232
           Medium         2           2           2         25          14           14
           Large          2           2           2         19           2            4
Total                   110         120          120        566         288         295       1499
 Note: Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`ong; Ninh B`
                                                                           inh), Region 2 (Th´
                                                                                             ai Nguy^
                                                                                                    en;
 Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´   a; H`a T~
                                          inh; B`
                                                inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum; L^  am ng), Region 5 (B`inh
 Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´i Minh).




                                                53
    For Senegal our universe includes 9,631 establishments. We collected data for 1,786
establishments randomly selected from the RGE-ANSD. Table A.6 and Table A.7 provide
the information on the distribution of firms in the population and the sample for Senegal.

                       Table A.6: Population Distribution, Senegal

                        Agri-      Food       Wearing   Other    Wholesale    Other      Total
 Region       Size     culture   Processing   Apparel   Manuf.   & Retail    Services   Region
 Dakar        Small      72         273         809      859       1126        979       4930
              Medium      9          75          19      114        125        281
              Large       9          22           0       48         26         84
 Diourbel     Small      18          84         182      204        214         80       816
              Medium      1           9           1        7          8          5
              Large       1           1           0        0          0          1
 Kaolack      Small      26          36         242      175         91         50       820
              Medium     50          12           3       18         63         26
              Large      11          1           0        0          8          8
 Kolda        Small     480         28          74       87         64         51        819
              Medium     21          1           1        1          4          6
              Large       1           0           0        0          0          0
 St. Louis    Small     125         43          60       116        96         70        688
              Medium     65          3           1        5         21         31
              Large      41          2           0        1          4          4
 Thies        Small      26          66         229      237        292        217       1207
              Medium      2          14           4        4         33         60
              Large       6           3           0        1          5          8
 Ziguinchor   Small      50          15          32       74         46         98       351
              Medium     11          1           0        0          7         12
              Large       1           1           0        0          1          2
 Total                  1026        690        1657      1951      2234       2073       9631




                                              54
                        Table A.7: Sample Distribution, Senegal

                       Agri-      Food       Wearing   Other    Wholesale    Other      Total
Region       Size     culture   Processing   Apparel   Manuf.   & Retail    Services   Region
Dakar        Small      14         48          102      136       160         222       993
             Medium      6         40           8       52         21         89
             Large       5         16           0       27         17         30
Diourbel     Small       2         14          15       22         25          7        102
             Medium      1          4           0        4          2          4
             Large       1          0           0        0          0          1
Kaolack      Small       3          5           23       19        13          15       133
             Medium      4          3           2        1          7          16
             Large       9          1           0        0          6          6
Kolda        Small      54         10           9       11         9          10        124
             Medium      8          1           0        1          4          6
             Large       1          0           0        0          0          0
St. Louis    Small      22         11           7       17         8           7        142
             Medium     10         3            1        4         5          11
             Large      27         2            0        1         3           3
Thies        Small       3          9           22       31        26          34       162
             Medium      1          5           1        0          3          14
             Large       4          2           0        0          4          3
Ziguinchor   Small      11         14           8       18         15         28        130
             Medium     11         1            0        0         7          12
             Large       1          1           0        0          1          2
Total                  198         190         198      344       336         520       1786




                                             55
A.2      Implementation and quality control
To ensure the accuracy in the responses and the comparability of the data collected across
countries we use a standardized process for implementation across all countries. We apply
the same questionnaire administered through face-to-face interviews with CAPI (computer-
assisted personal interviews) in all countries. A multidisciplinary literature has emphasized
that face-to-face is often more accurate than alternative modes.56 Face-to-face mode, de-
spite being more resource intensive, ensures more accurate responses, especially for a long
questionnaire such as FAT. The average interview time can vary between 35 minutes to one
hour.
    We conducted a standard training in each country with enumerators, supervisors, and
managers leading the data implementation. The training was led by team members directly
involved on the elaboration of the questionnaire. The three days training consisted of one
general presentation about the project, covering the main motivation, relevance, coverage,
and protocols that should be used to approach the interviewees and the review of the full
questionnaire (question by question). The training material included pictures of each tech-
nology mentioned in the survey both in general and sector-specific business functions, which
was shared with enumerators. After going over the full questionnaire and clarifying any ques-
tions that emerged, the participants of the training went through a mock interview using
Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI), under the supervision of our team.
    A pilot of the questionnaire was implemented in each country with firms out of the sample.
After the pilot, our teams had the opportunity to discuss with the managers implementing
the questionnaires to clarify any potential question over the implementation process. A
similar check happened after 10% of data collection.
    The same terms of reference to the organizations that implement the survey across all
countries. These included the requirement that both the organizations, as well as the main
team of interviewers, supervisors, and managers, had ample experience on collecting firm-
level data in their respective country and follow similar procedures for implementing the
survey.
    The questionnaire was implemented at the establishment level. In the sample, 86% of
our observations refer to single establishment firms. In the case of multi-establishment firms,
the questionnaire was applied to the specific unit of production that was randomly selected.
    The protocol for the implementation of the survey required that the survey should be
  56
     For example, Holbrook, Green and Krosnick (2003) use data from three experiments in the US and
show that telephone respondents are less likely to cooperate and more likely to present themselves in socially
desirable ways. Jackle, Roberts and Lynn (2006) show in a designed experiment that evaluate the differences
between the two modes of data collection show also that telephone respondents are more likely to give socially
desirable responses, which in our context is likely to result in an upward bias of technology use.


                                                     56
ideally answered by the top manager. About 47% of the survey was answered by the owner or
CEOs, while the other responses included factory managers, other managers, administrative
staff, and accountants. Almost 80% of the interviews were conducted through one visit in
person interview with the main respondent. In circumstances in which the main respondent
did not have information about a general topic of the questionnaire, especially in modules
B and C, they were requested to consult with other colleagues.


A.3     Survey Weight
We construct the sampling weight based on the inverse probability of selecting firms within
each stratum. With the three stratification including industry, size, and region. The proba-
bility of selection in each country is defined as

                                                   nisr
                                          Pisr =                                          (A.1)
                                                   Nisr

where Pisr is the probability of selection in each strata, nisr is the number of collected firms
in survey, and Nisr is the number of firms in the universe. The base weight is defined as

                                               1     Nisr
                                     Wisr =        =                                      (A.2)
                                              Pisr   nisr

where Wisr is the weight for a firm in industry i, size s, and region r.
    Because of the different number of businesses in each country, a global average of three
countries may be driven by one country if that country has significantly larger number of
firms. To address this issue, we construct a composite weight. We first define a country
probability as
                                                Nc
                                          Pc =                                         (A.3)
                                                N
where Pc is the probability of selection in each country, Nc is the number of firms in each
country, and N is the total number of firms across three countries. Using both a selection
probability and a country probability, we construct a composite weight as follows.

                                              1      Nisr  N
                                Wisrc =            =                                      (A.4)
                                          Pisr  Pc   nisr  Nc
where Wisrc is the composite weight for a firm in industry i, size s, region r, and country c.
The composite weight and base weight produce the same statistics for each country. However,
the composite weight produces global statistics by equally weighting all three countries. We
use the composite weight for all the analysis in this study.



                                              57
B     Details on the technology measures
Appendix B describes remaining sector-specific business functions and related technologies.
This section also explains the construction of technology measures in detail, which includes
EXT index, aggregation of technology measures, normalization, and regional-level analysis.
The FAT survey collects granular level of technology information at the business function
level. In the main text, we explained how we constructed MOST, EXT, and GAP indices. In
this section, we describe the technology structure and provide specific formula to construct
the EXT index depending on four different types of technology structures. We also explain
how we aggregate function-level technology measures at the firm-level or higher level (e.g.,
region-level).


B.1     Sector-specific business functions
Modules B and C of the FAT survey collect information on the technologies used in key gen-
eral and sector-specific business functions. In Section 2.1, we displayed two figures (Figure 1
and Figure 2) that portray the general business functions with related technologies for each
business function, and the sector specific business functions in food processing sector with
related technologies.
    Here, we represent the business functions and associated technologies for the remaining
sectors: crops (Figure B.1), livestock (Figure B.2), wearing apparel (Figure B.3), automotive
(Figure B.4), pharmaceutical (Figure B.5), wholesale and retail (Figure B.6), transportation
(Figure B.7), financial services (Figure B.8), health services (Figure B.9), and other man-
ufacturing(Figure B.10). To identify business functions and technologies, we applied the
same procedures. We began with reviewing the journal articles and technical reports to un-
derstand the consensus on definition of business functions and specific technologies. Based
on our research, we had several internal review process with sector specialists at the World
Bank Group to specify business functions and technologies for each sector. Additionally, we
engaged in an external review process with private sector experts outside of the World Bank.
These experts had at least 15 years experience in a specific sector.




                                              58
 Figure B.1: Agriculture - Crops: Business Functions and Technologies




Figure B.2: Agriculture - Livestock: Business Functions and Technologies




                                  59
Figure B.3: Wearing Apparel: Business Functions and Technologies




  Figure B.4: Automotive: Business Functions and Technologies




                              60
  Figure B.5: Pharmaceutical: Business Functions and Technologies




Figure B.6: Wholesale and Retail: Business Functions and Technologies




                                 61
Figure B.7: Land Transportation: Business Functions and Technologies




 Figure B.8: Financial Services: Business Functions and Technologies




                                 62
   Figure B.9: Health Services: Business Functions and Technologies




Figure B.10: Other Manufacturing: Business Functions and Technologies




                                 63
B.2      Hybrid technology structures
Figure 3 illustrates various possible structures among the technologies in a business function.
Different types of technology structures capture substitutability between technologies within
each business function. There are four different types of technology structures defined: (1)
quality ladder, (2) horizontal relationship, (3) hybrid I (i.e., two quality ladders), and (4)
hybrid II (i.e., tree). In the main text, we described the structure of quality ladder (Panel
A of Figure 3) as well as horizontal relationship (Panel B of Figure 3). In this section, we
describe hybrid structures that combine quality ladder and horizontal relationship.
    Panel C of Figure 3 represents a hybrid structure where the technologies in the function
are organized in two quality ladders. In this case, the technological level of each ladder is
defined by the most sophisticated technology used in the ladder, but we need to consider
both ladders to define the technology level of the function. One example of this structure is
the technologies used in molding of plastic injection in the automotive sector. The molding
is used for both interior and exterior components of a car. The molding process can be done
by operators or automated robotics. Because the molding of interior or exterior component
means different process rather than different sophistication, each process has one ladder.
But combined with operators or robotics, each ladder provides different sophistication of
technologies.
    Panel D of Figure 3 illustrates another common, hybrid structure that we refer to as
a tree. Trees are characterized by a quality ladder formed by the technologies with lower
sophistication and, at the top of the ladder, there is a horizontal relationship across the more
sophisticated technologies that can be used in the function. An example of this structure
are the technologies used in fabrication processes. Those at the bottom of the tree (manual
processes and machines controlled by operators) have a clear vertical relationship. The rest
of technologies in the function (machines controlled by computers, robots, additive manu-
facturing, and other advanced manufacturing processes), also have a vertical relationship
with respect to the first two (as once present, they make irrelevant manual processes and
machines controlled by operators). But, for the fours technologies with higher sophistica-
tion, it is possible to find tasks for which each of them most effective. Hence, the horizontal
relationship between them. These four structures characterize all the relationships between
the technologies in the functions covered in the FAT survey.57
    In Table B.1, we provide the technology structure of each business function. We first
show whether each business function is under general vs. sector specific business functions
  57
     Another possible structure that we do not observe in the business functions in FAT is an inverted tree
structure where at the bottom we have a horizontal relationship, and then a ladder of technologies that are
technologically more sophisticated than those in the horizontal portion.


                                                    64
in the first column. Then, we provide the list of business functions. Finally, we specify one
of four technology structures for each business function in the last column. The technology
structure of each business function was, in principle, determined based on substitutability
and complementarity of technologies within each business function.




                                             65
               Table B.1: Technology Structure of Business Function
General vs. Sectors                 Business Functions                                Technology Structure
General Business Function:          Administration                                   Quality Ladder
                                    Production or Service Operations Planning        Quality Ladder
                                    Sourcing Procurement and Supply Chain Management Hybrid I
                                    Marketing and Product Development                Horizontal Relationship
                                    Sales                                            Hybrid II
                                    Payment Methods                                  Hybrid II
                                    Quality control                                  Quality Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function Land Preparation                                    Quality   Ladder
Agriculture Crops:                Irrigation                                          Quality   Ladder
                                  Weeding and Pest Management                         Quality   Ladder
                                  Harvesting                                          Quality   Ladder
                                  Storage                                             Quality   Ladder
                                  Packaging                                           Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Breeding and genetics                             Quality   Ladder
Agriculture Livestock:              Nutrition                                         Quality   Ladder
                                    Anti-bacterial processes                          Quality   Ladder
                                    Herd management and monitoring                    Quality   Ladder
                                    Transport                                         Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Input testing                                     Quality   Ladder
Food Processing:                    Mixing/blending/cooking                           Quality   Ladder
                                    Anti-bacterial processes                          Quality   Ladder
                                    Packaging                                         Quality   Ladder
                                    Food storage                                      Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Design                                            Quality   Ladder
Wearing Apparel/Leather:            Cutting                                           Quality   Ladder
                                    Sewing                                            Quality   Ladder
                                    Ironing                                           Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Assembly                                          Horizontal Relationship
Automotive:                         Body Pressing                                     Hybrid I
                                    Painting                                          Hybrid I
                                    Plastic Injection Molding                         Hybrid I
                                    Productive Asset Management                       Quality Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function Facilities                                          Quality   Ladder
Pharmaceutical:                   Raw Material Weighting and Dispensing               Quality   Ladder
                                  Mixing and Compounding                              Quality   Ladder
                                  Compression and/or Encapsulation                    Quality   Ladder
                                  Quality Control                                     Quality   Ladder
                                  Packaging                                           Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Customer Service                                  Horizontal Relationship
Wholesale and Retail:               Pricing                                           Quality Ladder
                                    Merchandising                                     Quality Ladder
                                    Inventory                                         Quality Ladder
                                    Advertisement                                     Quality Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function Transportation Planning                             Horizontal Relationship
Land Transportation:              Transportation Plan Execution                       Quality Ladder
                                  Transportation Monitoring                           Quality Ladder
                                  Transportation Performance Measurement              Quality Ladder
                                  Fleet Asset Management/Maintenance                  Quality Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function Customer Services                                   Quality   Ladder
Financial Services:               Client Identification                               Quality   Ladder
                                  Loan Applications                                   Quality   Ladder
                                  Approval Process                                    Quality   Ladder
                                  Operational Support                                 Quality   Ladder
Sector Specific Business Function   Scheduling Appointment                            Horizontal Relationship
Health Service:                     Management of Patient Record                      Quality Ladder
                                    Medication Management                             Quality Ladder
                                    Diagnostic and Treatment of Sepsis                Horizontal Relationship
                                    Childbirth                                        Horizontal Relationship
                                    Trauma                                            Horizontal Relationship
                                    Myocardial Infarction                             Horizontal Relationship
Sector Specific Business Function   Fabrication                                       Hybrid II
Other Manufacturing:

                                                          66
B.3     EXT index
In the main text, we defined the MOST index as the mostly used technology, which takes
a value between 1 and 5 based on the sophistication of technology. The EXT index is
different from the MOST index in the following ways. First, the EXT index consider all
technologies instead of the mostly used one following one of four technology structures.
Below we provide equations to compute the EXT indices for each technology structure.
Second, the EXT captures how much a firm explores more sophisticated technologies in each
business function. For example, a firm using a standard computer software mostly for its
business administration function may adopt a new specialized software or ERP system. In
this case, the EXT index captures the more sophisticated technology adopted in that firm.
    Let Nl,f technologies in a given function belong to the same ladder, and let ri,l,f be the
sophistication rank of each of the technologies. Then, we construct the EXT index for the
ladder (in company c) as
                                 T¯l,f,c = M axi {1c (ti,l,f )ri,l,f }                   (B.1)
                                                   Nl,f
where 1c (ti,l,f ) is an indicator function that takes the value of 1 if company c uses technology
ti and 0 otherwise. In words, the EXT index in a ladder structure is the rank of the
most sophisticated technology used by the company in the ladder scaled by the number of
technologies in the ladder (which coincides with the maximum sophistication rank in the
ladder).
    Note that in functions with just one ladder (panel A of Figure 3), expression (1) gives
us the EXT index for the function. If there are multiple ladders in the function (panel C of
Figure 3), we construct the function level index by averaging the indices, T   ¯l,f,c across ladders.
That is, the function-level EXT index is

                                                         ¯l,f,c
                                                         T
                                          ¯f,c =
                                          T             l
                                                                                               (B.2)
                                                        Nl,f

where Nl,f is the number of ladders in the function. For horizontal structures (panel B
in Figure 3), the function level technology adoption index is calculated as the number of
technologies used by company c in function f scaled by the total number of relevant tech-
nologies in the function. Formally, the EXT index for functions characterized by a horizontal
structure is
                                      T¯f,c = i 1c (ti,f )                              (B.3)
                                                Nf
Finally, for tree structures (panel D in Figure 3), the EXT technology adoption index is



                                                   67
calculated as                
                              M axi {1c (ti,f )ri,f }           if maxi {1c (ti,f )ri,f }  r
                                                                                           ¯f
                    ¯f,c =
                    T           r
                                ¯f +
                                         Nf
                                                  1c (ti,f )                                     (B.4)
                                       i|ti >r
                                             ¯f
                             
                                          Nf
                                                                if maxi {1c (ti,f )ri,f } > r
                                                                                            ¯f

where r¯f is the rank of the last technology that conforms the pure ladder. In words, if the
most sophisticated technology that the company adopts in the function is below r      ¯f , then
the EXT is computed as a pure quality ladder. If the company has adopted some technology
that is in the tree top (i.e. with greater sophistication than r
                                                               ¯f ), then the index counts how
many of those technologies the company uses, and adds them as in a horizontal relationship.
We use formulas (B.1) to (B.4) to compute EXT indices at the function, company-level
depending on the structure of the relationship between the technologies in each function.
    All the function-company-level, the EXT indices defined so far take values in the closed
interval [0,1]. This property is inherited by indices at greater levels of aggregation, since
those are simple means of the function-company level indices. For some of the graphical
presentations of our results, it is more appealing to re-scale the technology indices so that
the lower bound is greater than zero. We therefore re-scale the technology indices in the
following way
                                         X
                                        Tj,a =1+4T     ¯X                                 (B.5)
                                                        j,a

      ¯X is the EXT (X equal to the empty set) index for unit j at the level of aggregation
where T j,a
a. Note that, the range of our EXT and MOST technology indices will be [1,5].


B.4     Regional-level analysis
In this section, we explain how we examine the relationship between technology and regional
productivity. A cross-country analysis of the relationship between technology and produc-
tivity using FAT data would face two limitations. First, we only three countries: Brazil,
Vietnam, and Senegal. In addition, the data for Brazil covers only one region, whereas the
data from Vietnam and Senegal cover the entire country. To overcome these limitations,
we focus on the region level to conduct aggregate cross-sectional analysis. Because all three
surveys are stratified by region, regional aggregates of our technology measures are represen-
tative. Using the sampling weights, we compute the average level, cross-firm variance, and
within-firm variance at the regional level for all technology measures (e.g., EXT, MOST,
and GAP of ABF, GBF, and SSBF).
    Another issue we must confront is that the regional-level data on GDP per capita or labor
productivity is unavailable for both Senegal and Vietnam. We overcome this challenge by
taking advantage of the fact that our sample of companies is representative at the regional
level, and use firm-level information on value added per worker to estimate regional labor

                                                               68
productivity from our FAT data set. Specifically, we run the following regression:

                       ln(V AP W )j,s,r =       r Rr +       s Ss +   j,s,r              (B.6)
                                            r            s

where ln(V AP W )j,s,r is the log of value added per worker in firm j , in sector s in region
r, Rr is a dummy variable for region r, and Ss is a dummy for each disaggregated sector
that captures the heterogeneity in industry composition across regions.The regression is
weighted by the sampling weight. The estimate of region's r productivity level is given by
the coefficient r .
    Then, we further examine the relationship between technology and productivity at the
regional-level. We estimate the regressions specified as follows.

                                Tr = µ + ln(V AP W )r + r                                (B.7)

where Tr is the technology for region r and ln(V AP W )r is the regional productivity.




                                                69
C     Additional results on cross-firm differences in tech-
      nology
Appendix C provides additional results on cross-firm differences in technology. In Figure C.1,
we examine the CDFs of ABF EXT across countries and provide the KS-based multiple test
results on the bottom of sub-figures. The KS-based multiple test, introduced in Goldman
and Kaplan (2018), takes its null as follows:

                                     H0r : F (k ) = G(k )                                (C.8)

where F (·) is the first country's CDF for a value of k and G(·) is the second country's CDF.
It tests whether CDFs of two countries are the same for each value of k in the technology
measure. Because of the "multiple testing problem" that make type I error larger than the
desired level, the KS-based multiple testing uses a strong "family wise error rate" (FWER).
For example, if FWER is a 5% level, there is no false positives for 95% of the time. We
provide the ranges of k when the null is rejected.
    To provide a complete picture of our results, we provide the same results for some of
omitted technology measures in the main text. Table C.1 provides descriptive statistics for
the sample we used in this study. Column (1) presents the overall sample, which is the
average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal with the uniform weight. Columns (2) to (4) show
the descriptive statistics for each country. Firm-level characteristics include employment,
firm age, export, multinational corporation (MNC), and sectors. All estimates are weighted
by the sampling weights.
    Table C.2 present the average technology for MOST and GAP measures by country
as well as relative gap. In Table C.3, we provide regression results using GAP measures
as dependent variable. Table C.4 shows the average technology sophistication by sector
and country for EXT and GAP measures. Finally, we compute the cross-firm variance of
technology sophistication by sector and country for of EXT and GAP measures in Table C.5.
    For the regional analysis, we examine the relationship between technology and produc-
tivity at the regional-level. As explained above, we compute both region-level technology
and productivity based on the FAT data, because the region level GDP per capita (or any
other productivity measures) is not available in Senegal and Vietnam. For the region-level
technology, we used three measures including the average, cross-firm variance, and average of
within-firm variance of technology sophistication. Table C.6 presents the regression results of
regional technology sophistication on productivity. Table C.7 shows the relationship between
regional cross-firm variance and productivity. Finally, Table C.8 provides the relationship


                                              70
between regional average within-firm technology sophistication and regional productivity.




                                            71
                     (a)                                                    (b)




                     (c)                                                    (d)

 Figure C.1: CDF of Technology Sophistication with the KS-based Multiple Tests
Note: The ABF EXT technology index is used for technology sophistication. The modified Kolmogorov
Smirnov test results for CDF values in two distributions are provided as bold lines in the bottom of
Panel (b), (c), and (d). The rejected ranges in Panel (b) is [1.74, 4.70], which covers 97% and 96% of
firms in Brazil and Vietnam, respectively. The range [1.10, 4.70] in Panel (c) covers 98% of firms in both
Brazil and Senegal. The rejected range [1.08, 3.97] in Panel (d) covers 95% and 97% of firms in Vietnam
and Senegal, respectively.




                                                 72
                               Table C.1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)
                                               Overall      Brazil        Vietnam    Senegal
           Employment                            39               49         46         22
           S.D. of Employment                   (215)           (229)      (265)      (125)
           P10 of Employment                       5               7         5          5
           P50 of Employment                      12              18         12          8
           P90 of Employment                      57              74         62         35
           Firma Age                              15              19          9         16
           Export                               0.124           0.041      0.169      0.162
           Foreign Owned                        0.059           0.008      0.120      0.048
           Sectors:
            Agriculture                         0.044           0.016      0.006      0.110
            Food Processing                     0.044           0.042      0.016      0.073
            Wearing Apparel/Leather             0.084           0.051      0.028      0.172
            Moto Vehicle                        0.003           0.006      0.002      0.000
            Pharmaceutical                      0.001           0.000      0.002      0.000
            Wholesale & Retail                  0.387           0.495      0.419      0.248
            Finance                             0.003           0.000      0.002      0.007
            Land Transport                      0.006           0.002      0.002      0.016
            Health Service                      0.003           0.003      0.003      0.004
            Other Manufacturing                 0.175           0.138      0.207      0.179
            Other Service                       0.250           0.248      0.314      0.190
Note: Overall is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. Estimates are weighted by the sampling
weights. Standard deviation of employment is reported in parenthesis.

               Table C.2: Average Technology Sophistication by Country

                                           MOST                             GAP
                                   ABF      GBF          SSBF     ABF      GBF      SSBF
               Overall              1.85     1.90        1.66      0.73     0.77    0.63
               Brazil (BR)          2.32     2.49        1.92      0.83     0.85    0.83
               Vietnam (VT)         1.91     1.92        1.80      0.80     0.84    0.74
               Senegal (SN)         1.31     1.29        1.27      0.55     0.61    0.32
               Gap: BR - SN         1.01    1.20         0.65      0.28     0.24    0.51
               Relative Gap         25%     30%          16%       7%       6%      13%
Note: Overall is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. Relative gap is the difference between Brazil
and Senegal relative to the maximum technology gap ((Brazil - Senegal)/M aximumGap(4)). For the
columns on SSBF, the sample is restricted to the firms having sector-specific technologies. Technology
measures are weighted by the sampling weights.




                                                    73
            Table C.3: Technology Sophistication and Firm Characteristics

                                               (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                         GAP
                          VARIABLES           ABF        GBF        SSBF


                          Vietnam           -0.05***      -0.03    -0.09***
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
                          Senegal           -0.26***    -0.20***   -0.55***
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
                          Manufacturing      0.23***    0.32***        0.05
                                              (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.06)
                          Services           0.20***    0.33***     -0.14**
                                              (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.06)
                          Medium            0.06***      0.04**     0.15***
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
                          Large             0.12***        0.05     0.46***
                                              (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.05)
                          Age 6 to 10        -0.05**      -0.02     -0.09**
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.04)
                          Age 11 to 15        -0.04*      -0.00    -0.11***
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.04)
                          Age 16+              -0.02      0.00        -0.03
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)
                          Foreign Owned        -0.01      -0.01        0.01
                                              (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.06)
                          Exporter           0.20***    0.18***    0.27***
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)


                          Observations        3,893      3,888      3,076
                          R-squared            0.11       0.07      0.19
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Reference group
for country, sector, size, and age categories is Brazil, Agriculture, Small, and Age 0 to 5, respectively.
Regression includes constant and a dummy for whether a firm has SSBF.




                                                 74
         Table C.4: Average Technology Sophistication by Country and Sector

                          ABF EXT                      GBF EXT                      SSBF EXT
                  AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC           AGRI      MANF       SVC
Overall            2.51       2.51     2.63     2.37       2.54     2.76     2.71       2.40     2.24
Brazil (BR)        3.23       3.03     3.19     3.17       3.05     3.44     3.34       2.98     2.62
Vietnam (VT)       2.70       2.72     2.69     2.52       2.72     2.76     2.91       2.73     2.44
Senegal (SN)       1.59       1.78     2.02     1.41       1.86     2.09     1.87       1.48     1.66
Gap: BR - SN       1.64       1.25     1.17     1.76       1.19     1.35     1.47       1.50     0.96
Relative Gap       41%        31%      29%      44%        30%      34%      37%        38%      24%
                          ABF GAP                      GBF GAP                      SSBF GAP
                  AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC           AGRI      MANF       SVC
Overall            0.57       0.76     0.74     0.61       0.79     0.79     0.53       0.79     0.56
Brazil (BR)        0.71       0.91     0.81     0.85       0.90     0.84     0.53       1.07     0.72
Vietnam (VT)       0.68       0.87     0.77     0.73       0.84     0.83     0.58       1.09     0.54
Senegal (SN)       0.33       0.51     0.65     0.24       0.63     0.69     0.48       0.22     0.42
Gap: BR - SN       0.38       0.40     0.16     0.61       0.27     0.15     0.05       0.85     0.30
Relative Gap       10%        10%      4%       15%        7%       4%       1%         21%      8%
 Note: AGRI, MANF, and SVC represent agriculture, manufacturing, and services, respectively. Overall
 is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. For the columns on SSBF, the sample is restricted to the
 firms having sector-specific technologies. Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.




                                                 75
Table C.5:    Average Within-firm Variance of Technology Sophistication by Country and
Sector

                          ABF MOST                      GBF MOST                    SSBF MOST
                    AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC           AGRI      MANF       SVC
 Overall             0.54       0.54     0.58     0.48       0.56     0.62     0.54       0.19     0.27
 Brazil (BR)         1.00       1.01     0.90     1.03       1.08     1.00     0.83       0.31     0.39
 Vietnam (VT)        0.42       0.40     0.50     0.34       0.42     0.50     0.50       0.09     0.27
 Senegal (SN)        0.19       0.20     0.34     0.08       0.17     0.35     0.30       0.17     0.15
 Gap: BR - SN        0.81       0.81     0.56     0.95       0.91     0.65     0.53       0.14     0.24
 Relative Gap        20%        20%      14%      24%        23%      16%      13%        4%       6%
                            ABF EXT                      GBF EXT                      SSBF EXT
                    AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC           AGRI      MANF       SVC
 Overall             0.71       0.81     0.83     0.75       0.83     0.87     0.55       0.27     0.37
 Brazil (BR)         0.89       1.09     0.94     1.03       1.15     1.00     0.52       0.36     0.43
 Vietnam (VT)        0.76       0.69     0.72     0.75       0.66     0.72     0.72       0.13     0.40
 Senegal (SN)        0.47       0.66     0.84     0.47       0.68     0.88     0.42       0.31     0.29
 Gap: BR - SN        0.42       0.43     0.10     0.56       0.47     0.12     0.10       0.05     0.14
 Relative Gap        11%        11%      3%       14%        12%      3%       3%         1%       4%
                            ABF GAP                      GBF GAP                      SSBF GAP
                    AGRI      MANF       SVC     AGRI      MANF SVC           AGRI      MANF       SVC
 Overall             0.61       0.71     0.40     0.67       0.72     0.70     0.47       0.20     0.35
 Brazil (BR)         0.85       0.85     0.47     0.97       0.85     0.75     0.67       0.28     0.42
 Vietnam (VT)        0.60       0.72     0.39     0.64       0.70     0.70     0.44       0.11     0.37
 Senegal (SN)        0.38       0.56     0.35     0.41       0.60     0.65     0.30       0.21     0.25
 Gap: BR - SN        0.47       0.29     0.12     0.56       0.25     0.10     0.37       0.07     0.17
 Relative Gap        12%        7%       3%       14%        6%       3%       9%         2%       4%
   Note: AGRI, MANF, and SVC represent agriculture, manufacturing, and services, respectively. Overall
   is the average of Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal. For the columns on SSBF, the sample is restricted to the
   firms having sector-specific technologies. Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.




                                                   76
                Table C.6: Regional Technology Sophistication and Productivity

                           (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)
                                   Avg. EXT                       Avg. MOST                       Avg. GAP
 VARIABLES                ABF        GBF      SSBF        ABF        GBF      SSBF       ABF        GBF       SSBF
 Regional Productivity   0.39***    0.41***   0.38***   0.25***     0.27***   0.21***   0.14***    0.15***   0.17***
                          (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.02)    (0.03)
 Observations              16         16        16         16         16        16        16         16        16
 R-squared                0.93       0.89      0.86       0.86       0.82      0.85      0.82       0.67      0.72
   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The observation is sub-
   region within each country. The firm-level average of technology in each region is regressed on regional
   productivity, which is the log of value-added per worker in each region controlling for disaggregated sector
   dummies.



Table C.7: Regional Cross-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication and Regional Pro-
ductivity

                            (1)        (2)     (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)      (9)
                                   Var(EXT)                       Var(MOST)                       Var(GAP)
 VARIABLES                 ABF       GBF      SSBF       ABF        GBF       SSBF       ABF        GBF       SSBF
 Regional Productivity   0.07***     0.06**    0.02     0.13***    0.14***    0.04***   0.04***    0.07***   0.03**
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)   (0.01)
 Observations               16         16       16        16          16        16        16          16        16
 R-squared                 0.46       0.29     0.10      0.68        0.66      0.34      0.28        0.56      0.24
   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The observation is sub-
   region within each country. The cross-firm variance of technology in each region is regressed on regional
   productivity, which is the log of value-added per worker in each region controlling for disaggregated sector
   dummies.



Table C.8: Regional Average Within-Firm Variance of Technology Sophistication on Re-
gional Productivity

                           (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)          (7)       (8)      (9)
                          Avg. of within Var(EXT)       Avg. of within Var(MOST)        Avg. of within Var(GAP)
 VARIABLES                ABF        GBF      SSBF        ABF        GBF      SSBF       ABF        GBF      SSBF
 Regional Productivity   0.07***    0.06**    0.15***   0.04***     0.05**    0.05***   0.03***    0.03**    0.14***
                          (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.02)
 Observations               16        16        16         16         16        16         16        16        16
 R-squared                 0.51      0.39      0.72       0.44       0.37      0.60       0.49      0.28      0.71
   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The observation is sub-
   region within each country. The within-firm variance of technology in each region is regressed on regional
   productivity, which is the log of value-added per worker in each region controlling for disaggregated sector
   dummies.



                                                        77
D     Robustness to using indices based on logarithmic
      transformations of technology sophistication rank-
      ings
In this section, we redo key parts of our analysis using alternative technology indices. These
are based on business function-level sophistication indices constructed as a logarithmic func-
tion of the ordinal technology sophistication rankings. Relative to the baseline indices, the
alternative indices have diminishing increments in sophistication as firms reach higher so-
phistication ranks in the business function.




                                             78
Figure D.1: Region-level Technology Sophistication (Log MOST) vs. Regional Productivity,
Robustness
   Note: The regional average of Log ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional productivity is on the x-axis.
   The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per worker based on a representative
   sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil, Vietnam, and Senegal, respectively.
   Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph` ong; Ninh B`
                                                                        inh), Region 2 (Th´ai Nguy^ en; Bc
   Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´  a; H`a T~
                                        inh; B`
                                              inh nh), Region 4 (Kon Tum; L^am ng), Region 5 (B` inh Dng;
   ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`
                                                         a Ni), and Region 8 (H Ch´i Minh).




                                                   79
Figure D.2: Cross-firm Variance of Technology Sophistication (Log MOST) vs. Regional
Productivity, Robustness
   Note: The regional level cross-firm variance of the Log ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional
   productivity is on the x-axis. The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per
   worker based on a representative sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil,
   Vietnam, and Senegal, respectively. Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`
                                                                                               ong; Ninh
   B`
    inh), Region 2 (Th´ ai Nguy^en; Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´  a; H`
                                                                        a T~inh; B`
                                                                                  inh nh), Region 4 (Kon
   Tum; L^am ng), Region 5 (B` inh Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and
   Region 8 (H Ch´ i Minh).




                                                  80
Figure D.3: Within-firm Variance of Technology Sophistication (Log MOST) vs. Regional
Productivity, Robustness
   Note: The regional average of within-firm variance of the Log ABF MOST is on the y-axis. The regional
   productivity is on the x-axis. The regional productivity is measured as the average value added per
   worker based on a representative sample of the FAT data for each region. BR, VT, and SN are Brazil,
   Vietnam, and Senegal, respectively. Vietnam regions are as follows: Region 1 (Bc Ninh; Hi Ph`
                                                                                               ong; Ninh
   B`
    inh), Region 2 (Th´ ai Nguy^en; Bc Giang), Region 3 (Thanh Ho´  a; H`
                                                                        a T~inh; B`
                                                                                  inh nh), Region 4 (Kon
   Tum; L^am ng), Region 5 (B` inh Dng; ng Nai), Region 6 (Long An; V~  inh Long), Region 7 (H`a Ni), and
   Region 8 (H Ch´ i Minh).




                                                  81
         Table D.1: Cross-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication, Robustness

                                             MOST                      GAP                   EXT
                                      ABF GBF        SSBF       ABF    GBF    SSBF    ABF    GBF    SSBF
V ar(Tc - T )                         0.04   0.05       0.03    0.00   0.00    0.01   0.06   0.07   0.07
V ar(Tj,c - Tc )                      0.04   0.05       0.07    0.03   0.04    0.08   0.07   0.08   0.12
V ar(Tj,Brazil - TBrazil )            0.07   0.08       0.10    0.03   0.04    0.08   0.08   0.09   0.13
V ar(Tj,V ietnam - TV ietnam )        0.03   0.04       0.07    0.03   0.04    0.10   0.05   0.05   0.11
V ar(Tj,Senegal - TSenegal )          0.03   0.04       0.05    0.04   0.05    0.06   0.08   0.10   0.12
Contribution within                   0.51   0.48       0.73    0.95   0.98    0.91   0.55   0.54   0.64
Contribution within with controls     0.49   0.52       0.27    0.05   0.02    0.09   0.45   0.46   0.36
   Note: Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights. Contribution within with controls is
   estimated after controlling for size group small, medium and large), sector (agriculture, manufacturing
   and services), age (0-5, 6-10, 11-15, and 16 years or more), export and foreign ownership status.



        Table D.2: Within-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication, Robustness

                                                         ABF EXT        ABF MOST        ABF GAP
     V ar(Tf,j,c - Tf,c - Tj,c )                               0.14           0.12           0.13
     V ar(Tj,c - Tc )                                          0.07           0.04           0.03
     V ar(Tf,j,Brazil - Tf,Brazil - Tj,Brazil )                0.16           0.18           0.15
     V ar(Tf,j,V ietnam - Tf,V ietnam - Tj,V ietnam )          0.12           0.12           0.13
     V ar(Tf,j,Senegal - Tf,Senegal - Tj,Senegal )             0.14           0.07           0.11
     V ar(Tj,Brazil - TBrazil )                                0.08           0.07           0.03
     V ar(Tj,V ietnam - TV ietnam )                            0.05           0.03           0.03
     V ar(Tj,Senegal - TSenegal )                              0.08           0.03           0.03
   Note: Technology measures are weighted by the sampling weights.




                                                    82
Table D.3: Within-firm Variance in Technology Sophistication and Firm Characteristics,
Robustness

                                            (1)             (2)        (3)
                                           EXT            MOST        GAP
                         VARIABLES       Var(ABF)        Var(ABF)   Var(ABF)


                         ABF MOST          0.35***        0.50***    0.13***
                                            (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.02)
                         ABF MOST2        -0.30***       -0.37***   -0.14***
                                            (0.02)         (0.01)     (0.02)
                         Vietnam          -0.06***       -0.07***   -0.03***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         Senegal           0.01***       -0.04***   -0.04***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.01)
                         Manuf             0.03***           0.00    0.02***
                                            (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.01)
                         SVC               0.04***           0.01    0.03***
                                            (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.01)
                         Medium             0.01**          -0.00      0.00
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         Large             0.02***        0.02***    0.02***
                                            (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.01)
                         Age 6 to 10      -0.01***         0.01**   -0.01***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         Age 11 to 15     -0.01***           0.00   -0.02***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         Age 16+          -0.01***         0.01*    -0.01***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         MNCs              0.02***           0.00      -0.01
                                            (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.01)
                         Exporter          0.01**          0.01**    0.02***
                                            (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
                         Constant         0.06***         0.03***    0.12***
                                            (0.01)         (0.01)     (0.01)


                         Observations       3,893         3,893      3,135
                         R-squared          0.14           0.38      0.08
  Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Reference group for
  country, sector, size, and age categories is Brazil, Agriculture, Small, and Age 0 to 5, respectively.




                                                    83
                       Table D.4: Technology Curve Robustness for Agriculture
                          (1)       (2)               (3)                (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)
                           Baseline                         Log                           Max-1                 Observed Max         Excluding BF
Business Functions    ABF MOST         R2     ABF MOST                   R2       ABF MOST           R2        ABF MOST     R2      ABF MOST     R2
Land Preparation        1.29***       0.57          1.41***          0.53             1.30***      0.57         1.24***     0.56     1.16***     0.44
                         (0.07)                      (0.08)                            (0.07)                    (0.07)               (0.08)
Irrigation              1.92***       0.70          1.65***          0.64             1.80***      0.69         1.86***     0.70     1.86***     0.56
                         (0.08)                      (0.08)                            (0.08)                    (0.08)               (0.11)
Pest Control            0.93***       0.55          1.11***          0.59             0.94***      0.55         1.23***     0.57     0.85***     0.46
                         (0.06)                      (0.06)                            (0.06)                    (0.07)               (0.06)
Harvesting              1.05***       0.39          1.06***          0.36             1.06***      0.39         1.01***     0.38     0.86***     0.26
                         (0.09)                      (0.10)                            (0.09)                    (0.09)               (0.10)
Storage                 1.33***       0.64          1.31***          0.62             1.35***      0.64         1.29***     0.64     1.25***     0.54
                         (0.06)                      (0.07)                            (0.07)                    (0.06)               (0.08)
Packing                 0.29***       0.09          0.35***          0.08             0.35***      0.10         0.28***     0.08     0.19**      0.04
                         (0.08)                      (0.10)                            (0.09)                    (0.08)               (0.07)

   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
   first specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Agriculture is
   regressed on ABF MOST. In the second specification, we use log of ABF MOST. In the third specification,
   we compute ABF MOST by changing denominator from max to max-1. In the third specification, we
   compute ABF MOST by using observed max of technology as a denominator. In the last specification,
   we compute each ABF MOST by excluding a business function used in the dependent variable. Robust
   standard errors are provided in the parentheses.




                     Table D.5: Technology Curve Robustness for Food Processing
                                  (1)       (2)              (3)               (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)
                                   Baseline                        Log                       Max-1               Observed Max         Excluding BF
Business Functions         ABF MOST          R2       ABF MOST                 R2     ABF MOST            R2    ABF MOST      R2    ABF MOST     R2
Input Test                   0.76***         0.29       0.97***                0.33      0.84***       0.30       0.75***    0.29     0.61***    0.20
                              (0.07)                     (0.08)                           (0.07)                   (0.07)              (0.07)
Mixing/Blending/Cooking      0.68***         0.12       0.66***                0.11      0.78***       0.13       0.67***    0.12     0.34***    0.03
                              (0.10)                     (0.10)                           (0.11)                   (0.10)              (0.10)
Anti-bacterial               0.81***         0.20       0.88***                0.21      0.90***       0.21       0.81***    0.20     0.56***    0.10
                              (0.10)                     (0.10)                           (0.11)                   (0.10)              (0.10)
Packaging                    1.16***         0.36       1.19***                0.36      1.27***       0.38       1.14***    0.36     0.91***    0.22
                              (0.08)                     (0.08)                           (0.08)                   (0.08)              (0.09)
Food Storage                 1.30***         0.33       1.21***                0.32      1.44***       0.34       1.29***    0.33     0.97***    0.18
                              (0.10)                     (0.09)                           (0.10)                   (0.10)              (0.11)
Fabrication                  0.54***         0.41       0.77***                0.45      0.48***       0.41       0.53***    0.41     0.52***    0.31
                              (0.03)                     (0.04)                           (0.03)                   (0.03)              (0.02)

   Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
   specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Food Processing is
   regressed on ABF MOST. In the second specification, we use log of ABF MOST. In the third specification,
   we compute ABF MOST by changing denominator from max to max-1. In the third specification, we
   compute ABF MOST by using observed max of technology as a denominator. In the last specification,
   we compute each ABF MOST by excluding a business function used in the dependent variable. Robust
   standard errors are provided in the parentheses.




                                                                               84
                   Table D.6: Technology Curve Robustness for Wearing Apparel
                        (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)     (9)       (10)
                         Baseline                Log                  Max-1           Observed Max      Excluding BF
Business Functions   ABF MOST     R2    ABF MOST       R2     ABF MOST        R2     ABF MOST    R2    ABF MOST    R2
Design                1.43***    0.51    1.38***       0.55       2.16***     0.57    0.94***   0.47    1.26***    0.37
                       (0.08)             (0.07)                   (0.11)              (0.06)            (0.09)
Cutting               1.13***    0.52    1.32***       0.58       1.07***     0.52    1.16***   0.52    1.02***    0.41
                       (0.05)             (0.06)                   (0.05)              (0.06)            (0.06)
Sewing                0.45***    0.08    0.50***       0.10       0.42***     0.07    0.47***   0.08     0.20**    0.02
                       (0.08)             (0.08)                   (0.08)              (0.08)            (0.08)
Finishing             0.99***    0.30    0.92***       0.24       0.95***     0.29    1.00***   0.29    0.73***    0.17
                       (0.08)             (0.09)                   (0.08)              (0.08)            (0.09)
Fabrication           0.55***    0.47    0.81***       0.53       0.49***     0.47    0.56***   0.47    0.52***    0.31
                       (0.03)             (0.04)                   (0.03)              (0.03)            (0.02)

  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
  specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wearing Apparel is
  regressed on ABF MOST. In the second specification, we use log of ABF MOST. In the third specification,
  we compute ABF MOST by changing denominator from max to max-1. In the third specification, we
  compute ABF MOST by using observed max of technology as a denominator. In the last specification,
  we compute each ABF MOST by excluding a business function used in the dependent variable. Robust
  standard errors are provided in the parentheses.




                Table D.7: Technology Curve Robustness for Wholesale and Retail
                        (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)     (9)       (10)
                         Baseline                Log                  Max-1           Observed Max      Excluding BF
Business Functions   ABF MOST     R2    ABF MOST       R2     ABF MOST        R2     ABF MOST    R2    ABF MOST    R2
Customer Service      0.28***    0.06    0.50***       0.12       0.27***     0.06    0.41***   0.08    0.15***    0.02
                       (0.04)             (0.06)                   (0.04)              (0.06)            (0.04)
Pricing               0.88***    0.30    0.98***       0.32       0.89***     0.30    0.86***   0.30    0.67***    0.18
                       (0.06)             (0.06)                   (0.06)              (0.05)            (0.06)
Merchandising         0.64***    0.18    0.79***       0.21       0.74***     0.19    0.63***   0.18    0.43***    0.09
                       (0.06)             (0.07)                   (0.07)              (0.06)            (0.06)
Inventory             1.03***    0.50    1.21***       0.58       1.03***     0.50    1.01***   0.50    0.91***    0.40
                       (0.04)             (0.04)                   (0.04)              (0.04)            (0.04)
Advertisement         0.98***    0.22    1.05***       0.22       0.89***     0.21    0.97***   0.23    0.62***    0.09
                       (0.10)             (0.12)                   (0.10)              (0.10)            (0.11)

  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
  first specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wholesale
  and Retail is regressed on ABF MOST. In the second specification, we use log of ABF MOST. In the
  third specification, we compute ABF MOST by changing denominator from max to max-1. In the third
  specification, we compute ABF MOST by using observed max of technology as a denominator. In the
  last specification, we compute each ABF MOST by excluding a business function used in the dependent
  variable. Robust standard errors are provided in the parentheses.




                                                             85
E     Additional results on within-firm technology
Appendix E presents additional results on within-firm differences in technology. In Table 6,
we provides the estimates from the regression (5). In this section, we examine the robustness
of the estimates and additional results on each sector specific business functions in agricul-
ture, food processing, wearing apparel, and wholesale and retail sectors. For each business
function, we estimate the following regression:

                                Tf,j,c = f + c + f Tj + uf,j,c                            (E.9)

where Tf,j,c is the technology sophistication of firm j in function f in country c, f is a
function-specific intercept, c is country fixed effects, f is the technology-elasticity of busi-
ness function f, Tj is the average technology sophistication in firm j, and uf,j,c is an error
term.
   To study whether the technology elasticity is constant, we introduce an interaction term
between firm-level technology and an indicator that takes the value of 1 if average firm
technology is above median:

                        Tf,j,c = f + c + 1f Tj + 2f Tj Abovej + uf,j,c                   (E.10)

where Above is an indicator that firm-level technology sophistication is above the median.
    We provide additional technology curve results for agriculture in Table E.1, food pro-
cessing in Table E.2, wearing apparel in Table E.3, and wholesale and retail in Table E.4.
Technology curves for both general and sector-specific business functions are robust to con-
trolling for country fixed effects (see Table E.5 to Table E.9). We also estimate technology
curve using EXT instead of MOST measures. Technology curves using EXT measures pro-
vide similar results for both general and sector-specific business functions (See Table E.10 to
Table E.14). Finally, the results for sector-specific business functions are robust to different
types of ABF MOST measures (see Table D.4 to Table D.7).




                                              86
                       Table E.1: Technology Curve for Agriculture

                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                     Linear                                 Nonlinear
                                                                            ABF EXT
    Business Functions    ABF EXT          R-squared       ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
    Land Preparation       1.29***            0.57          1.35***            -0.04         0.57
                            (0.07)                           (0.19)           (0.10)
    Irrigation             1.92***            0.70          2.07***            -0.09          0.70
                            (0.08)                           (0.23)           (0.12)
    Pest Control           0.93***            0.55          0.51***          0.24***          0.56
                            (0.06)                           (0.16)           (0.09)
    Harvesting             1.05***            0.39          1.09***            -0.02          0.39
                            (0.09)                           (0.27)           (0.15)
    Storage                1.33***            0.64          1.04***           0.17*           0.65
                            (0.06)                           (0.17)           (0.09)
    Packing                0.29***            0.09          0.93***          -0.37**          0.12
                            (0.08)                           (0.27)           (0.15)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
first specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Agriculture
is regressed on ABF MOST. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF MOST
and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.



                    Table E.2: Technology Curve for Food Processing

                                    (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)                (5)
                                          Linear                               Nonlinear
                                                                              ABF EXT
 Business Functions          ABF EXT          R-squared      ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
 Input Test                    0.76***             0.29        0.76***             0.00         0.29
                                (0.07)                          (0.16)           (0.08)
 Mixing Blending Cooking       0.68***             0.12        1.41***         -0.38***          0.15
                                (0.10)                          (0.24)           (0.11)
 Anti-bacterial                0.81***             0.20        0.93***            -0.06          0.20
                                (0.10)                          (0.24)           (0.11)
 Packaging                     1.16***             0.36        1.43***            -0.14          0.37
                                (0.08)                          (0.20)           (0.09)
 Food Storage                  1.30***             0.33        1.68***           -0.19*          0.33
                                (0.10)                          (0.25)           (0.12)
 Fabrication                   0.54***             0.41        0.68***          -0.08**          0.42
                                (0.03)                          (0.08)           (0.04)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Food Processing
is regressed on ABF MOST. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF MOST
and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      87
                    Table E.3: Technology Curve for Wearing Apparel

                             (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)
                                   Linear                            Nonlinear
                                                                     ABF EXT
    Business Functions   ABF EXT       R-squared        ABF EXT    *Above Median   R-squared
    Design                 1.43***          0.51         0.61***       0.44***       0.53
                            (0.08)                        (0.23)        (0.12)
    Cutting                1.13***          0.52         0.79***        0.18**        0.53
                            (0.05)                        (0.15)        (0.07)
    Sewing                 0.45***          0.08         1.85***      -0.72***        0.20
                            (0.08)                        (0.20)        (0.09)
    Finishing              0.99***          0.30         1.86***      -0.46***        0.33
                            (0.08)                        (0.22)        (0.11)
    Fabrication            0.55***          0.47         0.52***         0.02         0.47
                            (0.03)                        (0.08)        (0.04)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wearing Apparel
is regressed on ABF MOST. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF MOST
and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                  Table E.4: Technology Curve for Wholesale and Retail

                             (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)
                                   Linear                            Nonlinear
                                                                     ABF EXT
    Business Functions   ABF EXT       R-squared        ABF EXT    *Above Median   R-squared
    Customer Service       0.28***          0.06           0.07        0.12**        0.07
                            (0.04)                        (0.10)       (0.05)
    Pricing                0.88***          0.30         1.25***      -0.20***        0.31
                            (0.06)                        (0.13)       (0.07)
    Merchandising          0.64***          0.18         0.74***        -0.05         0.18
                            (0.06)                        (0.15)       (0.07)
    Inventory              1.03***          0.50         1.11***        -0.04         0.51
                            (0.04)                        (0.09)       (0.05)
    Advertisement          0.98***          0.22          0.55**       0.24**         0.23
                            (0.10)                        (0.24)       (0.12)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wholesale and
Retail is regressed on ABF MOST. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF
MOST and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                   88
Table E.5: Technology Curve for General Business Function, Country Fixed Effects

                                (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
                                      Linear                              Nonlinear
                                                                          ABF EXT
  Business Functions         ABF EXT         R-squared     ABF EXT      *Above Median   R-squared
  Business Administration     1.81***          0.69         1.39***        0.24***         0.69
                               (0.03)                        (0.06)         (0.03)
  Production Planning         1.56***          0.66         1.49***           0.04         0.66
                               (0.03)                        (0.06)         (0.03)
  Sourcing                    1.36***          0.52         1.68***        -0.18***        0.53
                               (0.03)                        (0.06)         (0.03)
  Marketing                   0.71***          0.34         0.76***          -0.03         0.34
                               (0.02)                        (0.05)         (0.02)
  Sales                       0.31***          0.20         0.25***         0.04**         0.21
                               (0.02)                        (0.03)         (0.02)
  Payment                     0.48***          0.31         0.37***        0.06***         0.32
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
  Quality Control             0.78***          0.26         0.77***           0.00         0.26
                               (0.02)                        (0.05)         (0.02)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each general business function-level technology (GBF MOST) is regressed on ABF MOST
and country fixed effects. The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF MOST
and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.



          Table E.6: Technology Curve for Agriculture, Country Fixed Effects

                              (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                    Linear                              Nonlinear
                                                                        ABF EXT
    Business Functions    ABF EXT       R-squared        ABF EXT      *Above Median   R-squared
    Land Preparation        1.64***          0.60         1.57***          0.05         0.60
                             (0.11)                        (0.19)        (0.10)
    Irrigation              1.54***          0.72         1.84***         -0.19          0.72
                             (0.13)                        (0.23)        (0.12)
    Pest Control            0.56***          0.61          0.29*         0.17**          0.61
                             (0.09)                        (0.16)        (0.08)
    Harvesting              1.55***          0.46         1.34***          0.13          0.46
                             (0.14)                        (0.26)        (0.14)
    Storage                 0.83***          0.70         0.81***          0.01          0.70
                             (0.10)                        (0.16)        (0.09)
    Packing                 0.83***          0.21         0.98***         -0.11          0.22
                             (0.13)                        (0.26)        (0.16)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
first specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Agriculture
is regressed on ABF MOST and country fixed effects. The second specification includes an interaction
term between ABF MOST and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.



                                                    89
      Table E.7: Technology Curve for Food Processing, Country Fixed Effects

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)                (5)
                                         Linear                               Nonlinear
                                                                             ABF EXT
 Business Functions          ABF EXT         R-squared      ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
 Input Test                   0.66***             0.30        0.68***            -0.01         0.30
                               (0.08)                          (0.17)           (0.08)
 Mixing Blending Cooking      1.02***             0.18        1.56***          -0.31***         0.19
                               (0.12)                          (0.24)           (0.12)
 Anti-bacterial               0.92***             0.24        1.25***            -0.19          0.25
                               (0.12)                          (0.25)           (0.12)
 Packaging                    1.15***             0.36        1.47***           -0.17*          0.37
                               (0.10)                          (0.20)           (0.10)
 Food Storage                 1.44***             0.39        1.38***             0.03          0.39
                               (0.12)                          (0.25)           (0.12)
 Fabrication                  0.51***             0.44        0.73***          -0.12***         0.45
                               (0.04)                          (0.08)           (0.04)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Food Processing
is regressed on ABF MOST and country fixed effects. The second specification includes an interaction
term between ABF MOST and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.




      Table E.8: Technology Curve for Wearing Apparel, Country Fixed Effects

                             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                    Linear                                 Nonlinear
                                                                           ABF EXT
    Business Functions   ABF EXT          R-squared       ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
    Design                 1.16***           0.52          0.61***           0.43***        0.53
                            (0.15)                          (0.24)            (0.14)
    Cutting                0.82***           0.54          0.72***             0.07          0.54
                            (0.10)                          (0.15)            (0.08)
    Sewing                 1.13***           0.14          2.04***          -0.63***         0.22
                            (0.14)                          (0.20)            (0.10)
    Finishing              1.35***           0.34          1.77***          -0.33***         0.35
                            (0.15)                          (0.22)            (0.12)
    Fabrication            0.24***           0.53          0.40***          -0.11***         0.54
                            (0.05)                          (0.08)            (0.04)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first
specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wearing Apparel
is regressed on ABF MOST and country fixed effects. The second specification includes an interaction
term between ABF MOST and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.




                                                     90
   Table E.9: Technology Curve for Wholesale and Retail, Country Fixed Effects

                              (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)
                                    Linear                              Nonlinear
                                                                        ABF EXT
    Business Functions    ABF EXT       R-squared        ABF EXT      *Above Median    R-squared
    Customer Service        0.47***          0.18         0.30***          0.09*         0.19
                             (0.05)                        (0.10)         (0.05)
    Pricing                 1.12***          0.34         1.50***        -0.21***         0.35
                             (0.07)                        (0.14)         (0.06)
    Merchandising           1.00***          0.34         1.19***          -0.10          0.35
                             (0.07)                        (0.14)         (0.07)
    Inventory               0.91***          0.54         1.03***          -0.07          0.54
                             (0.05)                        (0.10)         (0.04)
    Advertisement           0.98***          0.23          0.52**         0.28**          0.25
                             (0.12)                        (0.24)         (0.12)
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the
first specification, each sector specific business function-level technology (SSBF MOST) in Wholesale
and Retail is regressed on ABF MOST and country fixed effects. The second specification includes an
interaction term between ABF MOST and an indicator for ABF MOST above the median. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.




              Table E.10: Technology Curve for General Business Function

                                (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)
                                      Linear                               Nonlinear
                                                                          ABF EXT
  Business Functions         ABF EXT         R-squared     ABF EXT      *Above Median    R-squared
  Business Administration     1.43***          0.574        1.20***        0.12***          0.65
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
  Production Planning         1.35***          0.63         1.20***        0.08***          0.63
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
  Sourcing                    1.08***          0.49         1.04***           0.02          0.49
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
  Marketing                   0.63***          0.36         0.73***        -0.05***         0.36
                               (0.01)                        (0.03)         (0.02)
  Sales                       0.98***          0.42         1.01***          -0.02          0.42
                               (0.02)                        (0.05)         (0.02)
  Payment                     0.72***          0.28         0.83***        -0.06***         0.28
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
  Quality Control             0.90***          0.42         0.85***           0.03          0.42
                               (0.02)                        (0.04)         (0.02)
Note: Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first specification, each general business
function-level technology (GBF EXT) is regressed on firm-level technology (ABF EXT). The second
specification includes an interaction term between ABF EXT and an indicator for ABF EXT above the
median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.



                                                    91
                        Table E.11: Technology Curve for Agriculture

                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                     Linear                                  Nonlinear
                                                                             ABF EXT
     Business Functions    ABF EXT         R-squared        ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
     Land Preparation       0.82***           0.574          1.07***           -0.17**        0.44
                             (0.06)                           (0.12)            (0.07)
     Irrigation             1.35***           0.59           1.76***          -0.27***         0.60
                             (0.07)                           (0.16)            (0.09)
     Pest Control           0.77***           0.42           1.03***           -0.17**         0.43
                             (0.06)                           (0.14)            (0.08)
     Harvesting             0.99***           0.44           1.29***            -0.19*         0.45
                             (0.08)                           (0.19)            (0.11)
     Storage                1.16***           0.53           0.92***             0.17*         0.53
                             (0.07)                           (0.15)            (0.09)
     Packing                  0.07            0.00             0.20              -0.08         0.01
                             (0.08)                           (0.23)            (0.13)
Note: Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first specification, each agriculture sector-
specific business function-level technology (SSBF EXT) is regressed on firm-level technology (ABF EXT).
The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF EXT and an indicator for ABF EXT
above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                    Table E.12: Technology Curve for Food Processing

                                    (1)              (2)             (3)          (4)                (5)
                                          Linear                                Nonlinear
                                                                               ABF EXT
 Business Functions           ABF EXT         R-squared       ABF EXT        *Above Median    R-squared
 Input Test                    1.30***             0.574        1.01***            0.16**        0.59
                                (0.06)                           (0.16)            (0.08)
 Mixing Blending Cooking       0.71***             0.27         1.14***          -0.24***         0.30
                                (0.06)                           (0.14)            (0.07)
 Anti-bacterial                0.64***             0.26         0.70***             -0.03         0.26
                                (0.06)                           (0.17)            (0.09)
 Packaging                     0.97***             0.38         0.67***            0.17**         0.38
                                (0.06)                           (0.15)            (0.07)
 Food Storage                  1.01***             0.30         1.44***           -0.23**         0.31
                                (0.08)                           (0.20)            (0.10)
 Fabrication                   0.83***             0.45         1.18***          -0.20***         0.46
                                (0.05)                           (0.10)            (0.05)
Note: Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first specification, each food processing
sector-specific business function-level technology (SSBF EXT) is regressed on firm-level technology (ABF
EXT). The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF EXT and an indicator for
ABF EXT above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                       92
                     Table E.13: Technology Curve for Wearing Apparel

                               (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)
                                     Linear                             Nonlinear
                                                                        ABF EXT
     Business Functions    ABF EXT       R-squared         ABF EXT    *Above Median   R-squared
     Design                 1.24***           0.574          0.29**      0.55***         0.64
                             (0.06)                          (0.14)       (0.07)
     Cutting                0.94***           0.50          0.65***      0.17***         0.51
                             (0.05)                          (0.11)       (0.06)
     Sewing                 0.47***           0.13          0.74***      -0.15**         0.15
                             (0.06)                          (0.13)       (0.07)
     Finishing              0.85***           0.31          1.12***      -0.16**         0.32
                             (0.07)                          (0.14)       (0.08)
     Fabrication            1.06***           0.55          1.06***        -0.00         0.55
                             (0.05)                          (0.11)       (0.06)
Note: Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first specification, each wearing apparel
sector-specific business function-level technology (SSBF EXT) is regressed on firm-level technology (ABF
EXT). The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF EXT and an indicator for
ABF EXT above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                   Table E.14: Technology Curve for Wholesale and Retail

                               (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)
                                     Linear                             Nonlinear
                                                                        ABF EXT
     Business Functions    ABF EXT       R-squared         ABF EXT    *Above Median   R-squared
     Customer Service       0.99***           0.574         0.83***        0.09*         0.46
                             (0.05)                          (0.10)       (0.05)
     Pricing                0.95***           0.42          1.23***      -0.15***        0.43
                             (0.05)                          (0.10)       (0.05)
     Merchandising          0.98***           0.35          1.31***      -0.18***        0.35
                             (0.06)                          (0.13)       (0.06)
     Inventory              0.93***           0.50          0.98***        -0.03         0.50
                             (0.04)                          (0.08)       (0.04)
     Advertisement          0.97***           0.38          0.86***         0.06         0.38
                             (0.07)                          (0.15)       (0.07)
Note: Dependent variables are presented in each row. In the first specification, each wholesale and retail
sector-specific business function-level technology (SSBF EXT) is regressed on firm-level technology (ABF
EXT). The second specification includes an interaction term between ABF EXT and an indicator for
ABF EXT above the median. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      93
F     Additional results on technology and productivity
In Appendix F, we present additional analysis on the technology and productivity. To check
the robustness of the estimates in productivity regressions, we estimate several additional
specifications. Table F.1 provides the additional results from the productivity regressions
with separate technology indices between GBFs and SSBFs. Here, the regressions included
SSBF MOST, which provide similar estimates as in the regressions with SSBF EXT.
   We further examine whether our main results from the labor productivity stay with the
total factor productivity (TFP) by controlling capital and human capital. We first estimate
the productivity regression controlling for the book value of capital per employer as specified
below.
                 ln(V AP W )j,c = c + s + Tj,c + Xj,c + ln(K/L)j,c + vj,c               (F.11)

where ln(V AP W )j,c is the value added per worker and ln(K/L)j,c is the capital per worker.
The results are provided in Table F.2, Table F.3, and Table F.4.
   We also estimate the productivity regression controlling for both capital per worker and
labor cost per worker. Here, the labor cost per worker is used as a proxy for human capital.
The regression is specified as:

     ln(V AP W )j,c = c + s + Tj,c + Xj,c + ln(K/L)j,c + ln(LC/L)j,c + vj,c             (F.12)

where ln(LC/L)j,c is the labor cost per worker. The regression results are presented in
Table F.5, Table F.6, and Table F.7.
    For the productivity regressions with separate technology indices between GBFs and
SSBFs, we further examine whether more narrowly defined sectors provide similar results.
We separate livestock from agriculture sector in Table F.8 and Table F.9. Then, we separate
motor vehicle and pharmaceutical, financial services, land transportation, health services,
and leather in Table F.10 and Table F.11.
    We also conduct development accounting exercise in Table F.12 to examine how much
dispersion in productivity across firms can be explained by differences in technology across
firms. We first compute the residuals of productivity and technologies using the following
specification.
                                Yj,c = c + s + Xj,c + vj,c                            (F.13)

where Yj,c is productivity (log of value added per worker) or firm-level technology measures,
c and s are country and sector fixed effects, and Xj,c a vector of observable characteristics
including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,11-15, and 16 or more),
export, and multinational status.

                                              94
    We compute the dispersion between 10th and 90th percentiles of the residual productivity
from the regression (F.13). Then, we regress the residual productivity on residual technology
and compute the difference between 10th and 90th percentiles of predicted residual produc-
tivity. Finally, by dividing the dispersion in the residual productivity by the dispersion in the
predicted residual productivity, we compute the percentages of the dispersion in productivity
explained by the dispersion in technology.
    In Table F.13, we conduct a similar development accounting exercise to understand the
how much of the productivity gap between agriculture and non-agriculture sector (e.g., the
ratio of 3.3 in Table 10) can be accounted for by the technology gap. From the regression
(7), we compute the ratio of the predicted gap between Brazil and Senegal in agriculture
to the gap in non-agriculture. Then, we compute the percentage of the actual productivity
ratio between agriculture and non-agriculture explained by the predicted ratio.




                                               95
   Table F.1: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, GBF and SSBF MOST

                                                                (1)           (2)
                    VARIABLES                               ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)


                    GBF EXT                                   1.72***
                                                               (0.32)
                    GBF EXT2                                 -0.20***
                                                               (0.05)
                    GBF EXT*AGRI                                            1.96***
                                                                             (0.45)
                    GBF EXT*MANF                                            -0.29***
                                                                             (0.09)
                    GBF EXT*SVC                                             0.38***
                                                                             (0.10)
                    SSBF MOST*Agriculture                      0.40**        0.48**
                                                               (0.20)        (0.20)
                    SSBF MOST*Food Processing                  0.36**        0.38**
                                                               (0.19)        (0.19)
                    SSBF MOST*Apparel                         0.65***       0.60***
                                                               (0.15)        (0.15)
                    SSBF MOST*Retail and Wholesale              -0.05         -0.15
                                                               (0.15)        (0.16)
                    SSBF MOST*Other Manufacturing               0.15*         0.12
                                                               (0.09)        (0.08)
                    SSBF MOST*Other Services                   0.49*          0.48
                                                               (0.29)        (0.30)
                    Var(ABF EXT)                              0.30***       0.37***
                                                               (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                               
                    Firm Characteristics
                    Observations                               2,746         2,746
                    R-squared                                  0.50           0.50
Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                   96
      Table F.2: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, Controlling for ln(K/L)
                            (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
VARIABLES               ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)    ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)


ln(K/L)                  0.27***    0.26***     0.26***        0.26***    0.25***    0.25***    0.26***    0.26***
                          (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)
ABF EXT                  0.49***     2.30***                  2.02***                           1.91***
                          (0.07)      (0.33)                    (0.38)                           (0.37)
ABF EXT2                            -0.31***                  -0.27***                         -0.21***
                                      (0.06)                    (0.06)                           (0.06)
ABF MOST                                       2.34***                   1.96***     1.86***               2.08***
                                                (0.50)                     (0.51)     (0.50)                (0.49)
ABF MOST2                                      -0.40***                  -0.32***   -0.30***              -0.28***
                                                (0.10)                     (0.11)     (0.10)                (0.10)
ABF GAP                                        0.41***                   0.32***     0.29**                0.61***
                                                (0.11)                     (0.11)     (0.12)                (0.13)
Var(ABF EXT)                                                   0.19*      0.29***    0.91***    1.07**     1.54***
                                                               (0.10)      (0.10)     (0.27)    (0.45)      (0.41)
Var(ABF EXT)2                                                                       -0.26***
                                                                                      (0.09)
Var(ABF EXT)*ABF EXT                                                                            -0.30**   -0.43***
                                                                                                 (0.14)    (0.13)

                                                                                                             
Firm Characteristics
Observations              2,519      2,519       2,519          2,519      2,519      2,519      2,519      2,519
R-squared                 0.53       0.55        0.54           0.55       0.54       0.55       0.55       0.55

  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                         97
Table F.3: Productivity and Technology Sophistication Controlling for ln(K/L), GBF and
SSBF EXT

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
               VARIABLES                              ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)


               ln(K/L)                                  0.26***       0.26***       0.26***
                                                         (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)
               GBF EXT                                  1.66***
                                                         (0.32)
               GBF EXT2                                -0.21***
                                                         (0.05)
               GBF MOST                                                1.81***
                                                                        (0.49)
               GBF MOST2                                              -0.28***
                                                                        (0.10)
               GBF GAP                                                 0.31***
                                                                        (0.10)
               GBF EXT*AGRI                                                            0.25
                                                                                     (0.24)
               GBF EXT*MANF                                                         0.54***
                                                                                     (0.07)
               GBF EXT*SVC                                                          0.38***
                                                                                     (0.08)
               SSBF EXT*Agriculture                       -0.02         0.06           0.18
                                                         (0.27)        (0.26)        (0.33)
               SSBF EXT*Food Processing                    0.15         0.17           0.11
                                                         (0.18)        (0.18)        (0.18)
               SSBF EXT*Apparel                         0.34***       0.30***        0.24**
                                                         (0.11)        (0.10)        (0.11)
               SSBF EXT*Retail and Wholesale              -0.04         -0.08         -0.06
                                                         (0.11)        (0.11)        (0.12)
               SSBF EXT*Other Manufacturing                0.04         0.02          -0.02
                                                         (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)
               SSBF EXT*Other Services                   0.39*        0.44**        0.46**
                                                         (0.21)        (0.20)        (0.21)
               Var(ABF EXT)                             0.22**        0.30***       0.33***
                                                         (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                       
               Firm Characteristics
               Observations                               2,519        2,519          2,519
               R-squared                                   0.55        0.55            0.54
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     98
Table F.4: Productivity and Technology Sophistication Controlling for ln(K/L), GBF and
SSBF MOST

                                                                  (1)           (2)
                      VARIABLES                               ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)


                      ln(K/L)                                   0.26***       0.26***
                                                                 (0.04)        (0.04)
                      GBF EXT                                   1.67***
                                                                 (0.32)
                      GBF EXT2                                 -0.21***
                                                                 (0.05)
                      GBF EXT*AGRI                                            1.84***
                                                                               (0.50)
                      GBF EXT*MANF                                            -0.29***
                                                                               (0.10)
                      GBF EXT*SVC                                             0.30***
                                                                               (0.10)
                      SSBF MOST*Agriculture                        0.08         0.15
                                                                 (0.25)        (0.25)
                      SSBF MOST*Food Processing                    0.28         0.29
                                                                 (0.18)        (0.18)
                      SSBF MOST*Apparel                         0.51***       0.46***
                                                                 (0.15)        (0.14)
                      SSBF MOST*Retail and Wholesale              -0.03         -0.13
                                                                 (0.14)        (0.14)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Manufacturing               0.15*         0.12*
                                                                 (0.08)        (0.07)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Services                    0.18          0.19
                                                                 (0.25)        (0.26)
                      Var(ABF EXT)                               0.22**       0.30***
                                                                 (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                 
                      Firm Characteristics
                      Observations                               2,519         2,519
                      R-squared                                  0.55           0.55
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     99
Table F.5:   Productivity and Technology Sophistication Controlling for ln(K/L) and
ln(Labor Cost/L)
                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
VARIABLES               ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)    ln(VAPW)    ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)   ln(VAPW)


ln(K/L)                  0.14***    0.14***     0.14***     0.14***    0.13***    0.13***    0.14***    0.14***
                          (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
ln(Labor Cost/L)         0.68***    0.66***     0.67***     0.67***    0.67***    0.67***    0.67***    0.67***
                          (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.04)
ABF EXT                  0.28***     1.27***                0.87**                           0.79**
                          (0.07)      (0.31)                 (0.35)                           (0.35)
ABF EXT2                            -0.17***                -0.11**                            -0.06
                                      (0.05)                 (0.05)                           (0.06)
ABF MOST                                       1.61***                 1.25**      1.14**               1.34***
                                                (0.48)                  (0.49)     (0.48)                (0.48)
ABF MOST2                                      -0.30***                -0.22**    -0.20**               -0.19**
                                                (0.10)                  (0.10)     (0.10)                (0.10)
ABF GAP                                        0.27***                  0.19*       0.16                0.38***
                                                (0.10)                  (0.11)     (0.11)                (0.13)
Var(ABF EXT)                                                0.26***    0.28***    0.92***    1.02**     1.10***
                                                             (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.25)    (0.45)      (0.42)
Var(ABF EXT)^2                                                                   -0.26***
                                                                                   (0.08)
Var(ABF EXT)*ABF EXT                                                                         -0.26*     -0.28**
                                                                                             (0.14)      (0.13)

                                                                                                          
Firm Characteristics
Observations              2,496      2,496       2,496       2,496      2,496      2,496      2,496      2,496
R-squared                 0.63       0.63        0.63        0.64       0.64       0.64       0.64       0.64

  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     100
Table F.6:   Productivity and Technology Sophistication Controlling for ln(K/L) and
ln(Labor Cost/L), GBF and SSBF EXT

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
               VARIABLES                              ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)


               ln(K/L)                                  0.14***       0.14***       0.14***
                                                         (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.04)
               ln(Labor Cost/L)                         0.68***       0.68***       0.69***
                                                         (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)
               GBF EXT                                  0.65**
                                                         (0.29)
               GBF EXT2                                  -0.08*
                                                         (0.04)
               GBF MOST                                                0.93**
                                                                       (0.45)
               GBF MOST2                                               -0.16*
                                                                       (0.09)
               GBF GAP                                                  0.12
                                                                       (0.09)
               GBF EXT*AGRI                                                           -0.22
                                                                                     (0.18)
               GBF EXT*MANF                                                         0.24***
                                                                                     (0.07)
               GBF EXT*SVC                                                           0.14*
                                                                                     (0.08)
               SSBF EXT*Agriculture                       -0.23         -0.20          0.10
                                                         (0.23)        (0.23)        (0.26)
               SSBF EXT*Food Processing                    0.25         0.26           0.22
                                                         (0.16)        (0.16)        (0.16)
               SSBF EXT*Apparel                            0.12          0.10          0.06
                                                         (0.09)        (0.09)        (0.09)
               SSBF EXT*Retail and Wholesale              0.10           0.08         0.09
                                                         (0.12)        (0.12)        (0.12)
               SSBF EXT*Other Manufacturing                0.02          0.02         -0.01
                                                         (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)
               SSBF EXT*Other Services                    0.15          0.17          0.17
                                                         (0.13)        (0.13)        (0.14)
               Var(ABF EXT)                             0.27***       0.30***       0.31***
                                                         (0.10)        (0.09)        (0.09)

                                                                                       
               Firm Characteristics
               Observations                                2,496       2,496          2,496
               R-squared                                    0.64       0.64            0.64
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     101
Table F.7: Productivity and Technology Sophistication Controlling for ln(K/L) and ln(Labor
Cost/L), GBF and SSBF MOST

                                                                  (1)           (2)
                      VARIABLES                               ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)


                      ln(K/L)                                   0.14***       0.14***
                                                                 (0.03)        (0.03)
                      ln(Labor Cost/L)                          0.67***       0.67***
                                                                 (0.04)        (0.04)
                      GBF EXT                                    0.66**
                                                                 (0.29)
                      GBF EXT2                                   -0.08*
                                                                 (0.04)
                      GBF EXT*AGRI                                             0.92**
                                                                               (0.45)
                      GBF EXT*MANF                                             -0.16*
                                                                               (0.09)
                      GBF EXT*SVC                                                0.14
                                                                               (0.09)
                      SSBF MOST*Agriculture                       -0.22         -0.20
                                                                 (0.21)        (0.21)
                      SSBF MOST*Food Processing                 0.35**        0.35**
                                                                 (0.17)        (0.17)
                      SSBF MOST*Apparel                         0.26**         0.23**
                                                                 (0.12)        (0.12)
                      SSBF MOST*Retail and Wholesale              0.09           0.06
                                                                 (0.14)        (0.14)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Manufacturing                0.10          0.09
                                                                 (0.08)        (0.08)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Services                    0.08          0.08
                                                                 (0.13)        (0.14)
                      Var(ABF EXT)                              0.28***       0.30***
                                                                 (0.10)        (0.09)

                                                                                 
                      Firm Characteristics
                      Observations                               2,496         2,496
                      R-squared                                  0.64           0.64
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     102
Table F.8: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, GBF and SSBF EXT, Disaggre-
gated Agriculture Sector

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
               VARIABLES                              ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)       ln(VAPW)


               GBF EXT                                  1.72***
                                                         (0.32)
               GBF EXT2                                -0.20***
                                                         (0.05)
               GBF MOST                                                1.93***
                                                                        (0.45)
               GBF MOST2                                              -0.28***
                                                                        (0.09)
               GBF GAP                                                 0.38***
                                                                        (0.10)
               GBF EXT*AGRI                                                          0.46**
                                                                                     (0.23)
               GBF EXT*MANF                                                         0.61***
                                                                                     (0.08)
               GBF EXT*SVC                                                          0.49***
                                                                                     (0.09)
               SSBF EXT*Agriculture                      0.34*         0.44**         0.46*
                                                         (0.21)        (0.20)        (0.26)
               SSBF EXT*Livestock                         0.30          0.37          0.36
                                                         (0.48)        (0.47)        (0.47)
               SSBF EXT*Food Processing                  0.30*         0.32*           0.28
                                                         (0.18)        (0.18)        (0.18)
               SSBF EXT*Apparel                         0.44***       0.40***       0.36***
                                                         (0.11)        (0.10)        (0.11)
               SSBF EXT*Retail and Wholesale              -0.02         -0.07         -0.05
                                                         (0.11)        (0.11)        (0.12)
               SSBF EXT*Other Manufacturing               0.07          0.05           0.02
                                                         (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)
               SSBF EXT*Other Services                  0.55**        0.58**        0.61***
                                                         (0.23)        (0.23)        (0.23)
               Var(ABF EXT)                             0.29***       0.36***       0.39***
                                                         (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                       
               Firm Characteristics
               Observations                                2,746       2,746          2,746
               R-squared                                    0.50       0.50            0.50
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     103
Table F.9: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, GBF and SSBF MOST Technology,
Disaggregated Agriculture Sector

                                                                  (1)           (2)
                      VARIABLES                               ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)


                      GBF EXT                                   1.72***
                                                                 (0.32)
                      GBF EXT2                                 -0.20***
                                                                 (0.05)
                      GBF EXT*AGRI                                            1.96***
                                                                               (0.45)
                      GBF EXT*MANF                                            -0.29***
                                                                               (0.09)
                      GBF EXT*SVC                                             0.38***
                                                                               (0.10)
                      SSBF MOST*Agriculture                     0.55***       0.63***
                                                                 (0.20)        (0.20)
                      SSBF MOST*Livestock                         -0.05         0.04
                                                                 (0.56)        (0.58)
                      SSBF MOST*Food Processing                  0.36**        0.38**
                                                                 (0.19)        (0.19)
                      SSBF MOST*Apparel                         0.65***       0.60***
                                                                 (0.15)        (0.15)
                      SSBF MOST*Retail and Wholesale              -0.05         -0.15
                                                                 (0.15)        (0.16)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Manufacturing               0.15*         0.12
                                                                 (0.09)        (0.08)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Services                   0.49*          0.48
                                                                 (0.29)        (0.30)
                      Var(ABF EXT)                              0.30***       0.37***
                                                                 (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                 
                      Firm Characteristics
                      Observations                               2,746         2,746
                      R-squared                                  0.50           0.50
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.




                                                     104
Table F.10: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, GBF and SSBF EXT Technology,
Disaggregated Sectors

                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)
                   VARIABLES                          ln(VAPW)     ln(VAPW)     ln(VAPW)

                   GBF EXT                              1.70***
                                                         (0.32)
                   GBF EXT2                            -0.20***
                                                         (0.05)
                   GBF MOST                                         1.89***
                                                                     (0.45)
                   GBF MOST2                                        -0.27***
                                                                     (0.09)
                   GBF GAP                                          0.37***
                                                                     (0.10)
                   GBF EXT*AGRI                                                   0.46**
                                                                                   (0.23)
                   GBF EXT*MANF                                                  0.61***
                                                                                   (0.08)
                   GBF EXT*SVC                                                   0.49***
                                                                                   (0.09)
                   SSBF EXT*Agriculture                  0.34*       0.44**        0.46*
                                                         (0.21)       (0.20)       (0.26)
                   SSBF EXT*Livestock                     0.30         0.37         0.36
                                                         (0.48)       (0.47)       (0.47)
                   SSBF EXT*Food Processing               0.30*       0.32*          0.28
                                                         (0.18)       (0.18)       (0.18)
                   SSBF EXT*Apparel                    0.44***       0.40***      0.36***
                                                         (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.11)
                   SSBF EXT*Motor Vehicles              0.64***      0.55***      0.55***
                                                         (0.17)       (0.16)       (0.16)
                   SSBF EXT*Pharmaceuticals               0.29*        0.25          0.22
                                                         (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.16)
                   SSBF EXT*Retail and Wholesale          -0.02        -0.07        -0.04
                                                         (0.11)       (0.11)       (0.12)
                   SSBF EXT*Financial Services           1.15**       1.18**      1.25***
                                                         (0.47)       (0.48)       (0.47)
                   SSBF EXT*Land Transport                0.38         0.44         0.45
                                                         (0.33)       (0.33)       (0.33)
                   SSBF EXT*Health Services              -0.62*       -0.65*       -0.70*
                                                         (0.37)       (0.37)       (0.37)
                   SSBF EXT*Leather                    -0.47***     -0.51***     -0.53***
                                                         (0.16)       (0.15)       (0.16)
                   SSBF EXT*Other Manufacturing            0.07        0.05          0.02
                                                         (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.06)
                   SSBF EXT*Other Services                   -           -             -

                   Var(ABF EXT)                         0.28***      0.36***     0.38***
                                                         (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.10)

                                                                                    
                   Firm Characteristics
                   Observations                          2,746        2,746       2,746
                   R-squared                             0.51         0.50        0.50
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.
                                                     105
Table F.11: Productivity and Technology Sophistication, GBF and SSBF MOST Technol-
ogy, Disaggregated Sectors

                                                                  (1)           (2)
                      VARIABLES                               ln(VAPW)      ln(VAPW)


                      GBF EXT                                   1.70***
                                                                 (0.32)
                      GBF EXT2                                 -0.20***
                                                                 (0.05)
                      GBF EXT*AGRI                                             1.93***
                                                                                (0.45)
                      GBF EXT*MANF                                            -0.28***
                                                                                (0.09)
                      GBF EXT*SVC                                              0.37***
                                                                                (0.10)
                      SSBF MOST*Agriculture                     0.55***        0.63***
                                                                 (0.20)         (0.20)
                      SSBF MOST*Livestock                         -0.05          0.04
                                                                 (0.56)         (0.59)
                      SSBF MOST*Food Processing                  0.36**         0.38**
                                                                 (0.19)         (0.19)
                      SSBF MOST*Apparel                        0.65***         0.60***
                                                                 (0.15)         (0.15)
                      SSBF MOST*Motor Vehicles                  0.90***        0.73***
                                                                 (0.30)         (0.28)
                      SSBF MOST*Pharmaceuticals                    0.26          0.21
                                                                 (0.16)         (0.17)
                      SSBF MOST*Retail and Wholesale              -0.04          -0.14
                                                                 (0.15)         (0.16)
                      SSBF MOST*Financial Services              2.42***        2.44***
                                                                 (0.59)         (0.60)
                      SSBF MOST*Land Transport                     0.44          0.47
                                                                 (0.40)         (0.40)
                      SSBF MOST*Health Services                   -0.56        -0.69**
                                                                 (0.36)         (0.35)
                      SSBF MOST*Leather                        -0.63***       -0.72***
                                                                 (0.15)         (0.16)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Manufacturing               0.16*          0.13
                                                                 (0.09)         (0.08)
                      SSBF MOST*Other Services                       -             -

                      Var(ABF EXT)                              0.30***       0.37***
                                                                 (0.10)        (0.10)

                                                                                 
                      Firm Characteristics
                      Observations                               2,746         2,746
                      R-squared                                  0.51           0.51
  Note: *** p < 0.01, ** p< 0.05, * p <0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The regressions
  controlled for observable firm characteristics including size (i.e., small, medium, and large), sector (i.e.,
  agriculture crops, livestock, food processing, wearing apparel, pharmaceutical, moto-vehicle, wholesale
  and retail, finance, land transport, hospital, other manufacturing, and other services), age (i.e., 0-5, 6-10,
  11-15, and 16 or more), export, and multinational status.

                                                     106
                             Table F.12: Development Accounting

                             (1)    (2)       (3)     (4)     (5)    (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)     (10)    (11)
          P10               -0.45   -0.54    -0.51   -0.55   -0.54   -0.56   -0.57   -0.61   -0.58   -0.58   -0.52
          P90                0.52    0.48     0.51    0.48    0.54   0.56     0.49    0.53   0.51    0.52    0.55
% Productivity Dispersion
Accounted by Technology     31%     33%      33%      33%    35%     36%     34%     37%     35%     36%     34%
  Note: Each row presents development accounting associated with each specification used in Table 8
  columns (1)-(8) and Table 9 columns (1)-(3) in order. For each specification, we run regress ln(vapw)
  and technology measures on firm characteristics to estimate residuals. Then, we run regress the residual
  of ln(vapw) on the residuals of technology measures and compute P10 and P90 of the predicted outcomes.
  First and Second columns provide the P10 and P90 of the predicted residuals of ln(vapw), respectively.
  Third column reports as percentages the difference between p90 and p10 of predicted residuals of ln(vapw)
  divided by the overall difference between between p90 and p10 of the residuals of ln(vapw).




 Table F.13: Ratio of Predicted Average Productivity: Agriculture vs. Non-Agriculture

                                            (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)      (7)
            AGRI                            1.61     1.59    1.64    1.59    1.63     1.62    1.60
            Non-AGRI                        0.99     0.99    0.99    0.99    0.98     0.99    0.99
            AGRI/Non-AGRI                   1.63     1.61    1.66    1.61    1.66     1.64    1.62
            % Accounted by Data             27%      27%     29%     27%     29%     28%      27%
  Note: Each column presents each specification used in Table 12 columns (1)-(5) and Table 13 columns
  (1)-(2) in order.




                                                      107
G     Detailed acknowledgments
The preparation of the Firm-level Adoption of Technology survey questionnaire involved the
contribution of several sector experts within and outside the World Bank.
    First, we would like to thank the following World Bank Group colleagues: Erick C.M. Fer-
nandes (Lead Agriculture Specialist), Holger A. Kray (Manager, Agriculture), Michael Mor-
ris (Lead Agriculture Economist), Madhur Gautam (Lead Agriculture Economist), Robert
Townsend (Lead Agriculture Economist), Ashesh Prasann (Agriculture Economist), Apara-
jita Goyal (Senior Economist, specialized in Agriculture), Harish Natarajan (Lead Financial
Sector Specialist), Erik Feyen (Lead Financial Sector Economist), Laurent Gonnet (Lead
Financial Sector Specialist), Arturo Ardila Gomez (Lead Transport Economist), Victor A
Aragones (Senior Transport Economist), Edson Correia Araujo (Senior Health Specialist),
Irina A. Nikolic (Senior Health Specialist), Brendan Michael Dack (Chief Industry Specialist
at IFC), Emiliano Duch (Lead Private Sector Specialist), Blair Edward Lapres (Economist),
Kazimir Luka Bacic (Operations officer), Justin Hill (Senior Private Sector Specialist), Eti-
enne Raffi Kechichian (Senior Private Sector Specialist), Justin Yap (Private Sector Special-
ist), Austin Kilroy (Senior Economist).
    Similarly, we would like to thank several external experts. From Embrapa-Brazil, we
would like to thank Alexandre Costa Varella (Head of Embrapa research unit in the South
region, expert on livestock), Fl´
                                avio Dessaune Tardin (Researcher, Maize and Sorghum), Edi-
son Ulisses Ramos Junior (Researcher, Soybean), Isabela Volpi Furtini (Researcher, Rice and
Beans), Alberto Duarte Vilarinhos (Researcher, Cassava and Fruits), Carlos Estev~    ao Leite
Cardoso (Researcher, Cassava and Fruits, Technology transfer), and other participants of
the internal seminars to validate the sector specific questionnaire for agriculture and live-
stock. We also would like to thank a group of senior consultants from Patina Solutions,
who contributed with the preparation and validation exercise for several sectors, including
Daren Samuels (Consultant, Manufacturing), Christ Baughman (Consultant, Food Process-
ing), Sandra Aris (Consultant, Wearing Apparel and Lather), Steve Zebovitz (Consultant,
Pharmaceutical sector), Shelly Wolfram (Consultant, Retail and Wholesale), James M. Ked-
ing (Consultant, Transport and Logistics), as well as Justin Barners (Consultant, Automo-
tive). Finally, we would like to thank Sudha Jayaraman (Associate Professor, Department
of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth University), Christina Kozycki (Infectious Disease Fel-
low, NIH), Jonathan Skinner (Health Economist, Dartmouth College), and Elizabeth Krebs
(Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine at the Jefferson Center for Injury Research and
Prevention), for their comments and feedback on health services.




                                            108
