                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 TRADE INTEGRATION, GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS, AND CAPITAL ACCUMULATION

                                          Michael Sposi
                                           Kei-Mu Yi
                                           Jing Zhang

                                       Working Paper 28087
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28087


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas, and the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Sposi, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Integration, Global Value Chains, and Capital Accumulation
Michael Sposi, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28087
November 2020
JEL No. E22,F10,F43,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

Motivated by increasing trade and fragmentation of production across countries since World War
II, we build a dynamic two-country model featuring sequential, multi-stage production and
capital accumulation. As trade costs decline over time, global-value-chain (GVC) trade expands
across countries, particularly more in the faster growing country, consistent with the empirical
pattern. The presence of GVC trade boosts capital accumulation and economic growth and
magnifies dynamic gains from trade. At the same time, endogenous capital accumulation shapes
comparative advantage across countries, impacting the dynamics of GVC trade: a country
becoming more capital abundant concentrates more on the capital-intensive stage of the
production.

Michael Sposi                                  Jing Zhang
Department of Economics                        Research Department
Southern Methodist University                  Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
3300 Dyer St                                   230 S LaSalle Street
Dallas, TX 75275                               Chicago, IL 60604
msposi1981@gmail.com                           Jing.Zhang@chi.frb.org

Kei-Mu Yi
Department of Economics
University of Houston
3623 Cullen Blvd.
Houston, TX 77204
and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
and also NBER
yik.work@gmail.com
1     Introduction
A key feature of post-World War II globalization has been the increase in vertical special-
ization or global value chains (GVCs). Instead of exporting goods produced entirely within
its borders, each country has increasingly specialized in particular stages of a good's produc-
tion. Early evidence of this phenomenon was provided by Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001).
Recently, Johnson and Noguera (2017) document that the domestic value-added embodied
in gross exports (VAX) fell from 82 percent to 69 percent of gross exports from 1970 to 2007.
Moreover, GVC trade grew especially rapidly during the growth miracle period of many
countries, such as the four Asian "Tiger" economies, Ireland, China, and Malaysia. Johnson
and Noguera (2017) show that countries that expanded GVCs more were those with higher
GDP growth in their sample of more than 40 countries over the period 1970­2007.
    In this paper, we build a dynamic two-country model featuring sequential, multi-stage
production and capital accumulation to study the joint dynamics of investment, growth
and GVC trade. Specifically, we introduce capital accumulation and growth into the GVC
trade model of Antr`  as and de Gortari (2020). Consistent with the empirical findings, our
model implies that declining trade costs expand GVC trade across countries, particularly
in the faster growing economy. The expansion of GVC trade further boosts growth rates
of investment and output, and magnifies dynamic gains from trade relative to the standard
trade models. Moreover, endogenous capital accumulation shapes comparative advantage
over time, impacting the dynamics of GVC trade: a country becoming more capital abundant
increasingly specializes in the capital-intensive stage of production.
    In the model there is a large number of varieties, each of which requires multiple stages of
production. In every country and for each variety, there is a lead firm that decides the optimal
supply chain for the production of that variety (i.e., the location for each stage of production).
The lead firm independently draws an efficiency level for any possible chain from a Fr´     echet
distribution. In addition, each country is bestowed with a country-stage-specific productivity
level that also affects the attractiveness of each chain. Moreover, stages differ in the factor
intensity of capital and labor, meaning that capital abundant countries are more likely
to engage in the capital intensive stage of production. Thus, our framework features both
Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) comparative advantage forces. Finally, trade costs are
incurred at each stage when goods cross international borders, further shaping the resulting
pattern of trade. Capital accumulation results from a consumption-saving problem as in the
neoclassical growth model and is influenced by comparative advantage forces across stages


                                                2
whereby the pattern of trade and aggregate growth evolve in an interdependent fashion.
    To clearly elicit the implications of trade integration in such a model, we focus on a
setting with two countries and two stages. Each country starts in the autarky steady state
at period 0. Trade costs decline at a constant rate from period 1 to 50, and remain constant
afterwards. The trade integration process is perfect foresight, and countries endogenously
adjust capital and GVC trade patterns over time before reaching the new steady state. To
highlight the role of GVC trade and capital accumulation, we also study two counterfactual
cases: one without GVC trade, in which trade is allowed only for the last stage, i.e., finished
goods, and one with fixed capital in which investment is exogenous, and in each period,
equal to the value of the depreciated capital. These two counterfactual cases, together with
the baseline, are solved numerically to study the entire transition dynamics.1
    We start with symmetric countries. As trade integration deepens, import shares in each
country and each stage increase. Fragmentation across borders occurs more in earlier stages
of production. This is because trade costs apply to the gross value, and the later stages com-
pound trade costs from all previous stages; hence, trade in earlier stages effectively incurs
lower costs. This pattern is also pointed out by Antr`as and de Gortari (2020). Owing to the
symmetry, the presence of endogenous capital accumulation does not affect the dynamics of
GVC trade, but GVC trade does impact the dynamics of investment and capital accumu-
lation quantitatively and qualitatively. Without GVC trade, investment declines initially in
response to trade integration, lowering capital in the early periods, due to the incentive to
postpone investment. With GVC trade, investment and capital rise throughout the tran-
sition. This is because production efficiencies are realized sooner and to a greater degree,
which more than offsets the incentive to postpone investment.
    We then explore asymmetric countries. In the initial steady state, country 1 has lower
TFP and a lower capital-labor ratio than country 2. As trade integration ensues, country 1
undergoes faster TFP growth than country 2 in the first 50 periods, and then has the same
TFP as country 2 after period 50. For simplicity, TFP is stage-neutral so that it is the same
across the two stages in each country. Differences in the capital-labor ratio across countries
give rise to H-O forces in which the poor country performs more of the stage-2 labor-intensive
production, and the rich country performs more of the stage-1 capital-intensive production.
Over time, as the poor country experiences faster productivity growth, it accumulates more
capital and the H-O comparative advantage diminishes. This shifting comparative advantage
  1
   We employ a similar method as in Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi (2019) to compute the transitional
dynamics in the open economy.



                                                  3
alters the GVC trade patterns substantially, thus providing a channel from growth to trade
patterns. Moreover, the pattern of GVC trade re-enforces the growth patterns: as the fast
growing country moves upstream, it accumulates even more capital.
    We use our model structure to derive an expression for the domestic value-added content
of exports (DCE). During the trade integration process, DCE declines in both countries.
This is because GVC trade becomes increasingly more important, especially for the smaller
country, and international production fragmentation lowers the DCE. More importantly, the
decline in DCE differs across countries according to their comparative advantage, which
is determined by the endogenous capital accumulation process. The country with a lower
capital-labor ratio takes on a greater share of stage 2 production, contributing to a lower
overall DCE. Over time, as the small country accumulates capital at a faster pace, it takes
on a greater share of stage 1 production, dampening the decline in its DCE. Indeed, in a
model with fixed capital, the DCE for the fast growing country would decline even more,
and for the large country, even less.
    Our model's implications for the DCE dynamics are consistent with empirical findings.
First, in our model the small, fast growing country has a comparative advantage in the
labor-intensive final stage, implying a larger reduction in DCEs during the transition. This is
consistent with the above-mentioned empirical pattern documented in Johnson and Noguera
(2017): countries with higher output growth experience larger expansions in GVC trade, i.e.,
bigger reductions in the DCE. Second, our model implies that country 1's DCE rises once the
trade integration process stops (constant trade costs) and productivity growth converges zero,
because capital accumulation persists, further diminishing comparative advantage. This
implication of the non-monotonic dynamics of the DCE is also consistent with the experience
of fast-growing emerging economies. From 2010 to 2016, the DCE increased by about 6
percentage points in China and 8 percentage points in South Korea. With endogenous
capital accumulation, comparative advantage diminishes over time as the faster growing
country accumulates more capital per worker. Once the trade integration process stops
(constant trade costs) and productivity growth converges zero, capital accumulation persists
and the DCE reverses for the fast growing country--it rises over time.
    Lastly, we show that the transition dynamics are important for the gains from trade,
and the presence of GVC trade and capital accumulation amplifies the gains from trade.
The dynamic gains, computed over the entire transition period, are much smaller than the
steady state gains. This is because consumption gradually rises to the new steady state level
owing to consumption smoothing and capital accumulation, if allowed. GVC trade amplifies


                                              4
the dynamic and steady state gains by about four-fold, relative to the no-GVC case, by
promoting greater efficiency gains and capital accumulation. Capital accumulation amplifies
the steady state gains substantially, but not as much for the dynamic gains. This is again
because consumption is postponed to make room for investment during the transition, which
implies much lower dynamic gains than the steady state gains. In addition, the dynamic
gains from trade are greater for the small, fast-growing country: 4.8% compared to 3% for
the larger country
    Broadly, there have been two sets of frameworks embodying intermediate goods: "spi-
ders" and "snakes". The former framework involves "roundabout" production, in which
output of any firm is produced in one stage using a common bundle of all output as interme-
diates. The latter framework involves multiple, sequential, stages of production with each
stage using specific inputs produced in the previous stage. The snake framework allows for
explicit production fragmentation across countries, i.e., the location of production of each
stage is endogenous. Hereafter, "GVC" refers to a snake framework. We compare the gains
from trade in our snake model to those generated by a standard spider model and find that,
under a comparable calibration, the gains in the snake model exceed those from the spider
model. For example, with symmetric countries, when trade costs are reduced to generate an
increase in the import share of GDP from 0 (autarky) to 0.16, the dynamic gains from trade
are twice as large in the snake model relative to the spider model: 3.6% versus 1.8%.
    The trade literature has made substantial progress in modeling GVC trade in recent
years. Yi (2003) demonstrated that production fragmentation across two stages magnifies
the effects of reductions in tariffs and other ad valorem trade costs, relative to standard
trade models with just one stage of production. Most recently, Antr` as and de Gortari (2020)
have extended and generalized the snake framework to many stages and many countries in a
tractable way. Both of the above papers have shown that GVC trade enlarges the gains from
trade. However, existing analyses of the snake framework have abstracted from transitional
dynamics and endogenous capital accumulation. Other recent papers include de Gortari
(2019), Johnson and Moxnes (2019), Lee and Yi (2018), Fally and Hillberry (20018), Antr`   as
and Chor (2013), Costinot, Vogel, and Wang (2013), Yi (2010), and Connolly and Yi (2015).
The latter paper and Yi (2003) incorporate endogenous capital, but their analysis does not
study transition dynamics, and focuses only on steady-states.
    Our paper is also related to the quantitative Eaton-Kortum trade literature. Most of the
studies in this literature model supply chains using a spider framework in a static setting.
Several papers include capital accumulation in multi-country multi-sector trade models (i.e.,


                                             5
Alvarez, 2017; Eaton, Neiman, and Kortum, 2016; Eaton et al., 2016; Levchenko and Zhang,
2016; Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi, 2019). In addition to lower trade costs boosting
investment and capital accumulation, our model has H-O forces, which give rise to cross-
country differences in investment dynamics.
    In the next section, we lay out the model. Then, in section 3, we numerically study
the steady-state, transition dynamics, domestic content in exports, and welfare implications
of the model. We pay particular attention to the interaction between GVCs and capital
accumulation as a propagation mechanism from trade barriers to trade patterns and growth.
In section 4, we further analyze the importance of H-O forces and the snake structure of
production. The final section concludes.


2     Model
Our model extends Antr`     as and de Gortari (2020) to a dynamic setting. Time t is discrete
and infinite. The world economy consists of N countries, indexed by n. Each country is
populated by a representative household and firms. Households decide on final consumption
and investment under perfect foresight. A continuum of varieties, v  [0, 1], are produced
over S stages, indexed by s. Products of intermediate stage s < S are unfinished goods, and
those of the final stage S are finished goods. Both unfinished and finished goods are traded
across borders subject to trade costs, so the production of each variety v can come from
different countries for different stages. Unfinished goods in stage s < S are used directly and
only as an input to produce goods in stage s + 1, capturing the "snake" structure of value
added chains as in Yi (2003). All finished varieties are combined to produce a composite
"retail" good that is used in final demand. The model provides a framework to analyze
endogenous formation and dynamics of global value-added chains (GVC) over time.


2.1    Preferences
A representative household in each country owns primary factors of production: capital
Kn,t and labor Hn,t at the beginning of period t. The household supplies capital and labor
inelastically to domestic firms at competitive rates rn,t and wn,t , respectively. She spends
factor income on consumption Cn,t and investment Xn,t to maximize lifetime utility
                                            
                                                                 Cn,t
                                max                t-1 Hn,t ln          ,                  (1)
                             {Ct ,Xt }t=1
                                            t=1
                                                                 Hn,t


                                                    6
subject to the budget constraint

                                  Pn,t Cn,t + Pn,t Xn,t = rn,t Kn,t + wn,t Hn,t ,                                  (2)

and the law of motion of capital

                                          Kn,t+1 = (1 -  )Kn,t + Xn,t .                                            (3)

The parameter  denotes the discount factor and  denotes the capital depreciation rate.
The variable Pn,t denotes composite, retail good price.


2.2      Technology
Much of the layout here follows the lead-firm approach of Antr`         as and de Gortari (2020).
Production of each variety v involves multiple stages, and these stages can potentially be
produced in different countries. A chain of production is denoted by the sequence =
( 1 , . . . , S ), where s indicates the location that production of stage s occurs. There are N S
such possible paths for each variety, and the set of possible chains is denoted by C .2 Input
sourcing at all stages is determined by a lead-firm that handles production of the finished
variety at stage s = S . The lead firm chooses a production chain n to minimize its final
costs, and the production at stage s has the form:

                                                              s              s   s                s
                       y ss ,t (v ) = a (v ) Ass ,t k ss ,t (v ) hss ,t (v )1-       mss ,t (v )1- ,               (4)

where k ss ,t (v ) and hss ,t (v ) denote the amount of capital and labor, respectively, employed
in stage s country s for variety v . The term mss ,t (v ) is the input from stage s - 1 used in
production of stage s--the snake form. We abstract from the round-about form of input
demands to highlight the role of vertical, or sequential, value-added chains.
    The value added share of production is governed by  s . The snake form of the input chain
implies  1 = 1. The capital share in value-added is given by s . These share parameters
are specific to the stage of production. Hence, owing to potentially varying capital shares,
our framework embeds Heckscher-Ohlin forces, in addition to the primary Ricardian forces.
For parsimony, we assume these parameters are identical across countries. We define a term
   2
     For instance, with three countries and two stages, the set of 8 possible chains is given by C = {(1, 1, 1);
(1, 1, 2); (1, 2, 1); (1, 2, 2) (2, 1, 1); (2, 1, 2); (2, 2, 1); (2, 2, 2)}. Another example is three countries and two
stages, then C = {(1, 1); (1, 2); (1, 3); (2, 1); (2, 2); (2, 3); (3, 1); (3, 2); (3, 3)}.



                                                             7
s = S                  s
         s =s+1 (1 -  ), for s < S , which gives the share of stage-s gross output in the gross
value of the finished good. By definition,  S = 1. Furthermore,  s  s gives the share of
stage-s value-added in the gross value of the finished good. This implies that S         s s
                                                                                     s=1   = 1.
     Production efficiency is described by two terms. One is a country-stage-specific term,
A s ,t which scales the production efficiency of all varieties in country s , stage s, and period
  s

t. The other is a chain-variety-specific component, a (v ), which is randomly drawn from a
Fr´echet distribution captured by a unit location parameter and a shape parameter .3
     Trade in both finished and unfinished goods is subject to iceberg costs that reflect many
barriers including transportation costs owing to geography and technology, as well as policy-
induced costs in the form of tariffs, quotas, and various regulations. The cost of shipping any
stage s variety from origin country i to destination country n at time t is denoted by ds     i,n,t .
That is, to deliver one variety to country n, ds                                          s
                                                  i,n,t varieties must be shipped, and di,n,t - 1
units melt away in transit. We impose the usual restrictions that there is no internal trade
friction: dsn,n,t = 1.
     For each chain, the lead firm takes into account that trade costs must be paid whenever
two adjacent links are located in different countries. That is, the input quantity in stage s
must equal output from the previous stage with adjustments for trade costs:

                                                                   -1
                                      mss ,t (v )dss-1 , s ,t = y ss -1 ,t (v ).                          (5)

   All finished varieties, which are potentially traded internationally, are assembled into a
non-traded composite retail good, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002)
                                                                                
                                                         1                -1    -1

                                      Qn,t =                 qn,t (v )               ,                    (6)
                                                     0


where qn,t (v ) indicates the quantity of the finished (stage S ) variety purchased by country n.
All varieties, regardless of the source, enter symmetrically. As in the tradition of Ricardian
trade theory, varieties are differentiated only by cost from the faced by the purchaser. Retail-
    3
      The assumption of a unit location is without loss of generality, because country-stage-time efficiency
differences that are common to all varieties are captured by Ass ,t . In our framework, for a given country in
                                           s
                       S               s                                   N  -n n
a given time period, s=1 a (v ) (Ass )      corresponds to n=1 (an  l(n) (z ))     in Antr`
                                                                                          as and de Gortari
(2020). Antr` as and de Gortari (2020) show that the lead-firm approach is isomorphic to an alternative
framework with stand-alone producers of different stages making cost-minimizing sourcing decisions for
their input in a decentralized manner, with additional assumptions on information available to producers
at each stage about the exact costs of producers at earlier stages. We describe our model using only the
lead-firm approach.


                                                              8
ers, which offer zero value added, sell the composite retail good domestically to households
for consumption and investment.
    This model setup allows for GVC trade, in which intermediate stages can be produced
offshore and in different countries. If we set trade costs in intermediate stages to infinity,
such trade will disappear, and we are back to the standard Eaton-Kortum trade model in
which only finished goods are traded. We refer to this case as the model without GVC trade.


2.3    Equilibrium
All markets are perfectly competitive so prices are equal to marginal costs. Equilibrium
is characterized by sequences of prices, quantities, and allocations across input chains such
that (i) the quantities maximize household lifetime utility; (ii) input chains are optimal
in minimizing production costs; and (iii) allocations are feasible. We first describe the
household's solution, taking prices as given. Then, we characterize the solution to the prices
that the household faces along with the underlying pattern of trade. Finally, we describe
the market clearing conditions.

   Final demand Given sequences of factor prices and retail prices, {rn,t , wn,t , Pn,t }, the
household maximizes its lifetime utility by choosing consumption and investment in every
period. The solution is governed by a standard Euler equation and budget constraint:

                        Cn,t+1 /Hn,t+1        rn,t+1
                                       =             +1- ,                                (7)
                         Cn,t /Hn,t           Pn,t+1
                                             rn,t
                 Pn,t Cn,t + Pn,t Kn,t+1 =        + 1 -  Pn,t Kn,t + wn,t Hn,t .          (8)
                                             Pn,t

   Prices and trade flows We first define the unit cost of factors in stage s country n as

                                                    s          s
                                us
                                 n,t = B
                                         s
                                           (rn,t ) (wn,t )1-       ,

                   s               s
where B s = (s )- (1 - s )-(1- ) is a constant.
    Next consider a chain demanded by country n. Each country involved in chain adds
to the cost of the finished good. We denote the cost contributed in stage s as U s,n,t . Given




                                                9
the definition of  s (the share of stage-s gross output in the finished good), we can write
                                                                                               s
                                                                            s
                                                          
                                                                  s
                                                              u s ,t
                                          U s,n,t =                             dss , s+1 ,t  ,
                                                              Ass ,t

which incorporates the efficiency adjusted unit cost and the trade cost along chain from
stage s to s + 1. Note that since the chain is demanded by country n, dsS , S+1 ,t = dsS ,n,t .
Under perfect competition, the price of chain in country n for finished variety v is given

                                                                                S
                                                                   1
                                                   p ,n,t (v ) =            U s,n,t .
                                                                 a (v ) s=1

The lead firm for any variety v sources inputs using the chain with the lowest price:

                                               pn,t (v ) = min {p ,n,t (v )}.
                                                                  C


Aggregating all varieties under the relevant probability distribution of prices across varieties
yields the composite retail price index:
                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                          - s - 
                                                                                                         s
                                                1
                                                                                    
                         1                                                      S               s
                                               1-                                            u s ,t
          Pn,t =             pn,t (v )1- dv               = ×                                                dss , s+1 ,t      ,     (9)
                                                                                                                              
                     0                                                  C s=1
                                                                                             Ass ,t


where  =  (1 + (1 -  )/)1/(1-) is a constant, and (·) is the Gamma function.4
     Usual properties the Fr´   echet distribution give rise to equilibrium sourcing shares, ex-
pressed as probabilities of a particular finished variety following a particular path =
( 1 , . . . , S )  C . In other words, the fraction of finished varieties that country n sources
through a particular chain,  C , is given by

                                    S                                   S                       s                    - s
                                                     -                              uss ,t
                                         U s,n,t                                    Ass ,t
                                                                                                    dss , s+1 ,t
                                   s=1                                 s=1
                    ,n,t =           S
                                                              =                                                           - s
                                                                                                                                .   (10)
                                                          -                S                        s
                                           U   s                                      us s ,t
                                  C s=1
                                                   ,n,t
                                                                                     As s ,t
                                                                                                        ds s ,   s+1 ,t
                                                                      C s=1


By construction,              C    ,n,t = 1. Thus, a country on average utilizes a chain more heavily
  4
      The usual restriction requires that (1 -  )/ > -1, beyond which,  plays no substantial role.


                                                                      10
if countries along this chain have either lower unit costs of value added, or higher efficiency,
or lower trade costs, at any stage in the chain.

    Input demand Firms demand inputs so that marginal products of all inputs are
equated. In particular, this implies that revenues are exhausted on the cost of inputs.
Define sn  {  C :
                    s
                      = n} as the set of chains that country n occupies position s. Then

                                                             N
                                s        s s s
                          rn,t kn,t   =                          Pi,t Qi,t  ,i,t ,
                                                  s
                                                  n i=1
                                                                     N
                         wn,t hs          s s s
                               n,t = (1 -  )                              Pi,t Qi,t  ,i,t .
                                                             s
                                                             n      i=1


   Feasibility Factor markets must clear, which pins down equilibrium factor prices. Be-
cause capital and labor are immobile across countries, domestic supply must equal domestic
demand for these inputs:

                                 S                           S
                                       s
                                      kn,t   = Kn,t ,              hs
                                                                    n,t = Hn,t .
                                s=1                          s=1


  Since the composite retail good is not traded across countries, the supply of retail goods
must equal domestic demand:
                                   Qn,t = Cn,t + Xn,t .

   We describe gross trade flows in the model by defining country n's exports and its imports.
For any stage s < S , define the set of chains such that country n occupies stage s and
                                                      s
a different country i = n occupies stage s + 1: En      = { : s = n and s+1 = n} and
 S
En = { : S = n} = S     n . We then compute gross exports in intermediate stage s < S as
the amount of world spending on such chains, discounted by  s (the value of flows passing
through that link):
                                                        N
                                       s
                                      En,t   =               Yi,t  ,i,t  s ,
                                                  s i=1
                                                 En

where Yn,t = Pn,t Qn,t is final demand. Lastly we compute gross exports of finished goods:

                                       S
                                      En,t =                 Yi,t  ,i,t  S .
                                                  S i=n
                                                 En




                                                        11
Now we do a similar accounting for country n's imports. For any stage s < S , define the set
of chains such that country n occupies stage s + 1 and a different country i = n occupies
stage s: Ms n = { :
                      s
                        = n and s+1 = n} and MS   n = { :
                                                            S
                                                              = n} = i=n Si . We compute
gross imports in intermediate stage s < S as the amount of world spending on such chains,
discounted by  s (the value of flows passing through that link):

                                                      N
                                  s
                                 Mn,t   =                 Yi,t  ,i,t  s ,
                                             Ms
                                              n i=1



and gross imports of the finished good as

                                    S
                                   Mn,t =             Yn,t  ,n,t  S .
                                               MS
                                                n



Total exports (imports) is the sum of trade in intermediate plus finished goods:

                                      S                            S
                                             s                           s
                             En,t =         En,t ,    Mn,t =            Mn,t .
                                      s=1                         s=1


Finally, trade is assumed to balance period-by-period, i.e., for any country n

                                            Mn,t = En,t .


3    Model Analysis
This section analyzes implications of trade integration in the GVC trade model. In period
0, countries start at the steady state of closed economies. In period 1, countries receive an
unanticipated trade integration shock, whereby trade costs decline gradually for 50 periods,
and remain constant thereafter. In the baseline model, agents have perfect foresight of this
process as of period 1. In response to the trade integration shock, countries trade and invest,
moving toward a new steady state. In this environment we illustrate how trade integration
impacts endogenous formations of global value-added chains, trade, and growth.
    We first illustrate the welfare implication of trade integration between the initial and
new steady states. To show this transparently and theoretically, we first restrict the model
parameter s to be the same across stages. Next, we investigate numerically the transition
dynamics of the trade integration shock in a two-country, two-stage environment with s


                                                     12
differing across stages. We consider the implications for trade patterns, capital accumulation,
growth, and welfare when the countries are symmetric, and also when the countries differ in
aggregate productivity. In the asymmetric case, we explore how comparative advantage arises
endogenously when stages differ in their capital intensity ­ a Heckscher-Ohlin mechanism to
complement the model's Ricardian features ­ and illustrate how this feature interacts with
differential dynamics for capital accumulation and growth.


3.1     Steady State Analysis
Before analyzing the transition dynamics, we study how welfare is impacted in the new
steady-state of trade integration. We drop the time subscript t and denote variables in the
initial steady-state by x and those in the new steady state by x . We restrict s = 
across stages to deliver a clean and transparent result. In this case the steady-state gains
from trade are captured entirely by changes in the purely domestic GVC share,  n ,n , where
 n = (n, n, n, ..., n) denotes the chain that consists entirely of domestic value added. The

change in consumption and, hence, welfare across the two steady states is given by

                                            - (11
                                                -)
                                                                       -1
                                                                                           - (1-)
                  n   C              n ,n                      n ,n                n ,n
             1+        n =                           =                                                 .
                  100  Cn            n ,n                      n ,n                n ,n
                                                          Static contribution   Capital contribution


The first term on the right-hand side captures the standard Ricardian gains through mea-
sured productivity as in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodr´    iguez-Clare (2012). The second term
captures the gains through changes in capital stocks between the steady states. Because cap-
ital is a reproducible factor of production, in steady-state, it is effectively like an intermediate
input, and thus amplifies the gains from trade in a similar way.
    To drive the point home, consider the gains from trade in our model with symmetric
countries and free trade. In this case, all N S chains are symmetric, implying GVC         n ,n
                                                                                                = N1S .
Without GVC trade, only the final stage is traded, and N chains are available. This is
equivalent to a standard Eaton-Kortum model with one stage of production. Free trade and
                                             1
symmetric countries imply that EK     n ,n
                                           = N . Clearly, GVC
                                                            n ,n
                                                                  < EK  n ,n
                                                                             . Thus, the presence of
GVC trade amplifies the gains from moving from autarky to free trade by a factor of N S -1 .
This also shows clearly the complementarity between the number of countries and stages.5
   5
    A similar result in a static model is derived in Antr`
                                                         as and de Gortari (2020), and demonstrated quanti-
tatively by Yi (2003).



                                                     13
Introducing endogenous capital further amplifies the gains from trade. Relative to a model
                                                                                              1
without reproducible capital, the presence of capital amplifies the gains by a factor of 1-     
                                                                                                 .
    In this simple environment, the amplification from either GVCs, or from capital, is not af-
fected by the presence, or absence, of the other. Of course, this result is based on steady-state
analysis and the assumption of a constant capital share across stages. Below we illustrate
that the effects of the two channels are indeed interdependent in more general settings and,
specifically, along the transition path.


3.2     Transitional Dynamics in a 2 × 2 Model
We numerically evaluate the model in a two-country, two-stage setting: N = 2 and S = 2.
In this environment there are four possible paths for global value chains: C = {(1, 1); (1, 2);
(2, 1); (2, 2)}. For simplicity, we assume that trade costs are identical across countries and
stages in each period: ds           s
                           1,2,t = d2,1,t = dt . Trade cost dt declines at a constant rate over
50 periods from an initial steady state level d to a new steady state level d to capture
the process of trade integration. We set d at 8 to render the world economy effectively in
autarky initially, and d at 1.7 to generate the degree of global trade openness close to the
one observed in 2010s. Specifically, we have

                                                    1/50
                                 dt           d
                                     -1=                   - 1 = gd ,                        (11)
                                dt-1          d

where the growth rate of trade costs over time is about gd = -3% per period.

3.2.1   Symmetric Countries

We set all parameter values to be common across countries in the analysis of symmetric
countries; see in Table 1. The household's period discount factor is set to  = 0.96 and the
rate of depreciation is set to  = 0.06. The shape parameter of the Fr´     echet distribution,
which governs the trade elasticity, is set to  = 4 as in Simonovska and Waugh (2014). The
elasticity of substitution between varieties within the composite retail good is set to  = 2.
For production shares, we set  2 = 0.5. Recall that  1 = 1 by design. This implies that the
gross output of finished, stage 2 varieties consists equally of value added from both stage 1
and stage 2. We set capital's share in stage 1 to 1 = 0.75, and that for stage 2 to 2 = 0.25,
implying that stage 1 production is more capital intensive than stage 2. We set productivity
Asn,t at 1 for all countries, stages, and periods. Labor endowment H is constant at 1 over



                                               14
time in both countries. The initial capital stock K1  K is the steady level under autarky.

                            Table 1: Symmetric Parameter Values

                        Discount factor                                     0.96
                        Depreciation rate                                   0.06
                        Trade costs (equation 11)
                                    Initial:                      d           8
                                   Terminal:                      d          1.7
                        Growth rate for periods 1­50:             gd        -3%
                        Input share in gross output
                                    Stage 1                        1          1
                                    Stage 2                        2         0.5
                        Capital's share in value added
                                    Stage 1                        1        0.75
                                    Stage 2                        2        0.25
                        Value-added productivity                   A        1
                        Labor endowment                            H        1
                        Note: Trade costs remain constant from period 50 onwards.


    Given these parameter values and the process of trade costs, we solve the equilibrium of
the model numerically to trace out the transition dynamics from the initial steady state to the
new steady state. Our goal is to highlight novel results arising from GVC trade and capital
accumulation. To highlight the implications of GVC trade, we conduct a counterfactual
experiment where GVC trade is turned off. Specifically, we assume the trade costs in stage
one are infinite so there is no possibility for trade in stage 1. To highlight the role of
endogenous capital accumulation, we conduct a counterfactual experiment where the capital
stock is fixed at the initial steady state. To be clear, the case with fixed capital is not the
same as a purely static model with exogenous capital, or with no capital. In such purely
static models, all of the output is consumed. In our model with fixed capital, the capital
stock still depreciates each period and some of the output must be allocated to replace the
depreciated stock. This distinction is important when evaluating the welfare implications.

Trade Shares We start with the dynamic trade patterns. Each panel of Figure 1 compares
trade shares for each chain  C in the model with GVC trade versus without GVC trade.
Red lines denote country 1 and blue lines denote country 2. Also, solid lines denote the
baseline model with GVC trade, and dashed lines denote the case without GVC trade.
    Without GVC trade, countries can trade only along chains (1, 1) and (2, 2). By construc-
tion, there is no trade along chains (1, 2) and (2, 1). As trade costs decline, Figure 1 shows


                                                   15
        Figure 1: Trade shares with symmetric countries, with and without GVC trade




Note: Trade shares  ,n,t are plotted for each chain  C . The model without GVC trade imposes infinite trade costs in stage
1 and collapses to the Eaton-Kortum model. Periods up through 0 correspond to the initial steady state. Trade costs decline
from period 1 to 50 and remain constant afterwards. Red lines are for country 1 and blue lines are for country 2. Solid lines
are for the baseline model with GVC trade and dashed lines are for the model without GVC trade.




that country 1's home trade share (1, 1) decreases, and its import share (2, 2) increases.
When the trade costs become constant in period 50, trade shares reach the new steady state
at the same time.
    When GVC trade is allowed, all four chains can be traded, i.e., production stages can be
fragmented across countries. As trade costs decline, country 1's home trade share (1, 1) still
decreases over time, but by much more than in the case without GVC trade. Also, country
1 imports more finished goods with both stages produced in country 2--chain (2,2)--but
not by as much as in the case without GVCs. Instead, country 1's shares of the fragmented
chains (1,2) and (2,1) increase, particularly chain (2,1), as trade costs decline. That is,
country 1 increases its imports of stage-1 unfinished goods to use as inputs for its stage-
2 production at home. In contrast, the chain (1,2), where stage one is produced home,
then shipped abroad to finish stage-2 production abroad, and finally shipped home for final
demand, experiences a much smaller increase over time because trade costs are incurred
twice with this "back-and-forth" trade.


                                                            16
    In general, fragmentation of stages across borders occurs more frequently in earlier stages
of production. This pattern is also pointed out by Antr`    as and de Gortari (2020). This is
because trade costs apply to the gross value, and the second stage compounds trade costs
from every stage, so trade in earlier stages effectively incurs lower costs.
    Interestingly, in this simple symmetric model, there is no impact of endogenous capital
accumulation on the dynamics of trade shares. Trade shares for each chain in the baseline
model with endogenous capital accumulation are identical to those in the model with fixed
capital. This is the artifact of the symmetric country framework. Both countries accumulate
capital over the transition path at the same rate, which leaves no impact on relative factor
prices across countries and no impact on trade shares. In other words, all of the increase in
trade shares is a result of lower trade costs leading to increased specialization via Ricardian
forces. Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) forces play no role. Later, we will study an asymmetric
model, in which capital accumulation will impact trade shares and GVC patterns.

Macroeconomic Growth Now we turn to macroeconomic growth. The dynamics of
capital, investment, income per capita, consumption, the investment rate, and the growth
rate are plotted for the baseline case, the case without GVC trade, and the case with fixed
capital in Figure 2. Let's first look at the long-run impact across the three cases. Start with
the baseline case plotted by solid lines. It is well known that trade integration leads to a
reduction in home trade shares and a rise in production efficiency induced by trade selection.
With endogenous capital, countries accumulate a higher level of capital in the new steady
state. Accordingly, levels of income per capita, consumption and investment are also higher
in the new steady state. On the other hand, the investment rate in the long run is the same
as in autarky, and the long-run growth rate is zero.
    Consider the case without GVC trade plotted as dashed lines. Since the degree of trade
integration is substantially limited, gains in effective efficiency from trade are also limited.
As a result, the long-run capital, investment, consumption and output are much lower than
those in the case with GVC trade. The investment rate and the growth rate in the long run
are the same as the baseline case. Consider the case with fixed capital plotted as dotted
lines. Although capital and investment is fixed, output and consumption rise substantially
in the new steady state due to the presence of GVC trade. These increases are smaller than
those in the baseline case, but quantitatively larger than those in the case without GVC
trade. The investment rate in the long run is lower than the autarky by construction, since
investment is held fixed and output is higher.


                                              17
                    Figure 2: Macroeconomic dynamics with symmetric countries




Note: Consumption is Cn,t ; Investment is Xn,t ; Capital stock is Kn,t ; Income p.c. is Yn,t = (rn,t Kn,t + wn,t Hn,t )/Pn,t .
Each of these variables are in log units. Investment rate is defined as the share of income spent on new investment: Xn,t /Yn,t .
The model with fixed capital restricts investment to equal depreciated capital. Periods up through 0 correspond to the initial
steady state. Trade costs decline from period 1 to 50 and remain constant afterwards. Solid lines are for the baseline model
with endogenous investment, dashed lines are for the model without GVC trade, and dotted lines are for the model with fixed
capital.




    We now focus on transitional dynamics. Given the incentives to smooth consumption
over time, the transition process of capital takes over 100 periods in the baseline model.
Capital continues to rise to the new steady state level for over 50 periods after trade costs
become constant. This pattern of capital accumulation drives the dynamics of consumption
and income per capita. Specifically, before period 50, both rising TFP due to declining trade
costs and capital accumulation contribute to higher output, and post period 50, capital
accumulation drives all the growth in output. Consequently, the investment rate and the
growth rate first rise and then decline over time. Particularly, once trade costs remain
constant, TFP growth shuts down to zero and all growth is through capital accumulation so
there is a discrete decline in aggregate growth. These patterns are similar to the impact of
a series of transitory TFP shocks in a closed economy neoclassical growth model.
    We next look at the dynamics without GVC trade. We observe a similar qualitative


                                                              18
pattern for all variables except investment and capital. Here investment and capital initially
decline as the trade integration process begins. The reason for this is that households
postpone investment knowing that trade costs and prices of investment will decline in the
future, which outweighs the incentives to invest in response to rising efficiencies of production.
Indeed, it takes a while for the trade costs to become low enough for the latter force to
dominate in this case. In the model with GVC trade, the efficiency gains are fast enough
in early periods, so that the return to investment is large enough to increase investment in
these periods. Moreover, the magnitude of the dynamics is much smaller without GVC trade
than with GVC trade. This is because GVC trade leads to large increases in trade shares
and production efficiencies.
    Now let's look at the transition in the case with fixed capital. By construction, capital and
investment are constant over time. Output rises in response to trade integration and trade-
induced efficiency improvement. Given fixed capital, the investment rate declines over time
and all of the additional output goes to consumption. There are no further dynamics post
period 50: output growth drops to zero and consumption remains constant. With endogenous
capital accumulation, consumption is back-loaded to make room for more investment. This
can be seen in the panel for consumption, where the dotted line rises slightly above the solid
line before period 50. After period 50, consumption continues to grow to a higher long run
level in the baseline model. The area between the two curves underpins the additional gains
from trade integration brought through by capital accumulation. Indeed, the dynamic gains
including transition are clearly lower than the steady-state measure of the gains.
    To summarize, with symmetric countries, the presence of endogenous capital accumula-
tion does not affect the dynamics of GVC trade, but GVC trade does impact the dynamics of
investment and capital accumulation, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Without GVC
trade, investment declines initially in response to trade integration, lowering capital in early
periods, due to the incentive to postpone investment. With GVC trade, investment and
capital rise throughout the transition because production efficiencies are realized sooner and
to a greater degree, which more than offsets the incentive to postpone investment.

3.2.2   Asymmetric Countries

We now consider an environment in which trade integration occurs between two asymmetric
countries. This scenario aims to capture a broad picture: a poor country (e.g. China or South
Korea) with low productivity and a low capital-labor ratio initially grows at a faster rate
than the rest of the world (country 2) in a prolonged period of increasing trade integration.


                                               19
Specifically, two countries start with different initial productivity levels so that country 1
is half as productive as country 2: (A1 , A2 ) = (0.5, 1). Over time country 1's productivity
grows for 50 periods, while country 2's does not:

                                                          1/50
                                 An,t              An
                                       -1=                       - 1 = gAn .                    (12)
                                An,t-1             An

Country 1's productivity grows at a constant rate of 1.4%, while country 2's grows at a
constant rate of zero. Starting from period 50, productivity in both countries levels up,
just as the trade costs. This implies that from period 50 onward, country 1 is equally as
productive as country 2: (A1 , A2 ) = (1, 1). Table 2 summarizes the specification of the
model with asymmetric productivity across countries. All other parameters and the process
of the trade costs remain identical to the symmetric case. To highlight the role of endogenous
capital and GVC trade, we compute the outcomes for the fixed capital case and the no GVC
case under this asymmetric calibration.

                             Table 2: Asymmetric Parameter Values

                Value-added productivity (equation 12)
                               Initial:                            (A1 , A2 )      (0.5, 1)
                              Terminal:                           (A1 , A2 )        (1, 1)
                    Growth rate for periods 1­50:                 (gA1 , gA2 )   (1.4%, 0%)
                Note: Productivity remains constant from period 50 onwards. The remaining pa-
                rameters are identical to those in Table 1.


   In the initial steady state, the economies are almost in autarky due to the high trade
costs. Due to its lower productivity, country 1 has lower levels of capital, output and
consumption per capita than country 2. At the new steady state, countries are symmetric
in all dimensions, and the outcomes are identical to those in the new steady state of the
symmetric-country case. We will focus on the transitional dynamics of trade patterns and
macroeconomic growth.

Trade Shares Figure 3 plots trade shares in three cases under the asymmetric calibration:
the baseline case, the no-GVC-trade case, and the fixed capital case. In contrast to the
symmetric calibration, under which capital accumulation has no impact on the patterns
of GVC trade, capital accumulation does influence these patterns under the asymmetric
calibration. We first look at the results in the fixed capital case illustrated by dotted lines.
With fixed capital, country 1 is smaller than country 2, even in the new steady state when


                                                     20
they have the same productivity. As a result, country 1 trades more than country 2: country
1's usage of the purely domestic chain (1,1) is about 0.5 and country 2's usage of chain (2,2)
is about 0.75 in the new steady state. In addition, with factors fixed at the initial steady
state levels in both countries, country 1 has a lower capital-labor ratio than country 2 in all
periods. This difference in relative factor abundance gives rise to the H-O motive of trade:
country 1 specializes in stage 2 ­ the labor-intensive stage, while country 2 specializes in
stage 1 ­ the capital-intensive stage.

                             Figure 3: Trade shares with asymmetric countries




Note: Trade shares  ,n,t are plotted for each chain  C . The baseline model begins with (A1 , A2 ) = (0.5, 1), then imposes
A1,t  (1.04)A1,t-1 for t = 2, . . . , 50, with A1,t = 1 thereafter (A2,t = 1 in every period). The model without GVC trade
imposes infinite trade costs in stage 1 and collapses to the Eaton-Kortum model. The model with fixed capital restricts
investment to equal depreciated capital. Periods up through 0 correspond to the initial steady state. Trade costs decline from
period 1 to 50 and remain constant afterwards. Red lines are for country 1 and blue lines are for country 2. Solid lines are for
the baseline model with endogenous investment, dashed lines are for the model without GVC trade, and dotted lines are for
the model with fixed capital.




    Now let's compare trade patterns in the baseline case with endogenous capital accumu-
lation (solid lines) with the fixed capital case (dotted lines). With capital accumulation in
response to rising productivity, country 1 becomes larger over time and ends up with the
same size and the same capital-labor ratio as country 2 in the new steady state. This implies
that the H-O motive for trade is dwindling over time. As a result, country 1 has larger do-


                                                              21
mestic chain share, chain (1,1), in the baseline case than in the fixed capital case. Moreover,
its GVC trade along chain (2,1) is also greatly reduced in the baseline case as a result of
vanishing H-O forces. The same mechanisms work through country 2. As it becomes small
in relative size, country 2 utilizes chain (2,2) more frequently in the baseline compared to the
case with fixed capital. In addition, as the H-O comparative advantage vanishes, country 2
uses chain (1,2) more frequently by in the baseline case than in the fixed capital case.
    Lastly, we turn to the case with no-GVC trade, plotted as dashed lines. In this case,
as trade costs decline and trade flows grow, the shares of domestic chains ­ chain (1,1) for
country 1 and chain (2,2) for country 2 ­ decline over time. Meanwhile, the declines in
domestic chains are offset by the increases in foreign chains: country 1 increases chain (2,2)
and country 2 increases chain (1,1); Neither country uses fragmented chains, by assumption.
These results are similar to those in the no-GVC case under the symmetric calibration.
Compared to the baseline case, trade openness is much lower with no GVC trade, because
there is no scope for countries to specialize across stages.
    Interestingly, the trade shares in the baseline case continues to adjust even after trade
costs and productivities become constant in period 50. As in the symmetric calibration,
countries continue to accumulate capital even when trade costs and productivities become
constant at period 50 due to consumption smoothing. What is different in the asymmetric
calibration is that capital accumulates at different rates across the two countries. Time-
varying relative size shifts trade patterns by boosting openness in country 2 and reducing
openness in country 1. In addition, as the capital-labor ratio converges across countries over
time, the H-O comparative advantage disappears. As country 1's comparative advantage
in stage 2 dissipates, it increases chain (1,1) and decreases chain (2,1). Similarly, country
2 decreases chain (2,2) and increases chain (1,2). These mechanisms are absent in the case
with fixed capital, in which the trade shares become constant right at period 50.

Macroeconomic Growth Now consider the dynamics of macroeconomic outcomes. Fig-
ure 4 plots the results for the baseline case, the no-GVC case, and the fixed capital case. For
each individual country, the qualitative patterns are similar to those under the symmetric
calibration. Economic growth is rooted in exogenous productivity growth and declining trade
costs, and amplified by endogenous trade selection and capital accumulation. As shown in
Figure 4, the presence of GVC trade and capital accumulation boost investment, capital,
output and consumption for each country. Quantitatively, capital accumulation is important
for country 1's growth dynamics, while GVC-trade induced efficiency gains are important


                                              22
for country 2's growth.

                    Figure 4: Macroeconomic dynamics with asymmetric countries




Note: Consumption is Cn,t ; Investment is Xn,t ; Capital stock is Kn,t ; Income p.c. is Yn,t = (rn,t Kn,t + wn,t Hn,t )/Pn,t .
Each of these variables are in log units. Investment rate is defined as the share of income spent on new investment: Xn,t /Yn,t .
The baseline model begins with (A1 , A2 ) = (0.5, 1), then imposes A1,t  (1.04)A1,t-1 for t = 2, . . . , 50, with A1,t = 1
thereafter (A2,t = 1 in every period). The model without GVC trade imposes infinite trade costs in stage 1 and collapses to
the Eaton-Kortum model. The model with fixed capital restricts investment to equal depreciated capital. Periods up through
0 correspond to the initial steady state. Trade costs decline from period 1 to 50 and remain constant afterwards. Red lines are
for country 1 and blue lines are for country 2. Solid lines are for the baseline model with endogenous investment, dashed lines
are for the model without GVC trade, and dotted lines are for the model with fixed capital.




   What we want to highlight in this asymmetric-country scenario is how the heterogeneity
of macroeconomic outcomes is impacted by capital accumulation and global GVC trade.
Although country 1's productivity converges to that of country 2, it still has a permanent
lower income level in the case with fixed capital. Capital accumulation reduces the income
gap entirely in the long run. This is the outcome of persistently higher investment rates and
growth rates in country 1 than in country 2, as illustrated in the bottom panels of figure 4.
Countries with faster productivity growth have higher investment rates, as in the standard
neoclassical growth model. Trade integration induces further capital deepening as in the
trade literature (see Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi, 2019). What is new here is that
countries with increasing comparative advantage in capital-intensive stages have yet even
higher investment rates.

                                                              23
    We now illustrate the dynamic spillover effects across countries through international
trade by focusing on country 2, which experiences no productivity growth. Country 2,
however, has persistent and positive output growth over time. There are four channels of
spillover. First, lower trade costs boost its output over the transition through efficiency
gains from trade. Second, country 1's productivity growth benefits country 2 exclusively
through international trade. Third, the GVC trade amplifies the benefits of trade through
comparative advantage across stages. Lastly, country 2 benefits also from country 1's capital
accumulation because the gains from trading with a larger partner are bigger. In conclusion,
countries with stagnant productivity growth are able to enjoy positive income growth by
maintaining open trade with faster growing countries. Moreover, fragmentation of production
based on H-O comparative advantage further amplifies the growth effects.


3.3     Value-Added Content of Trade
To measure the extent of the integration in global value chains, we use the domestic value
added contribution to gross exports, which we call "domestic content in exports", DCEn,t .
If there is no GVC trade, gross exports are produced fully with domestic value added,
DCEn,t = 1. If a country's exports are simply re-exports without domestic value added,
DCEn,t = 0. Thus, 1 - DCEn,t gives the foreign value added contribution to gross exports.6
The lower is the domestic content in exports, DCEn,t , the more integrated are the global
supply chains. Other measures, such as the "VAX ratio" from Johnson and Noguera (2012),
as well as the measures developed in Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014), are constructed to
make use of readily-available input-output tables. Our measure cannot be directly applied to
input-output tables, because those data are presented in roundabout form with no explicit
account of vertical linkages.7
    Nonetheless, the goal behind the different approaches of measuring value-added trade is
to gauge every country's contribution to either production or absorption in every country.
Consider the following example of the production of a smartphone. Suppose the U.S. pro-
duces parts like the screen, memory, and processor, and exports these parts to China for
$100 (stage 1). China assembles all the parts, and, in so doing, adds value of $100 (stage 2).
China then exports the assembled smartphone to the U.S. for $200. In gross terms, China
exports $200 to the U.S. In value added terms, however, China has only $100 worth exports,
   6
    1 - DCEn,t is a generalization of the "VS" measure from Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001).
   7
    That said, there would be a mapping from a multi-sector version of our model to an input-output table.
However, as discussed and proved in de Gortari (2019), there is no unique mapping from an input-output
structure to a GVC model with more than two stages.


                                                   24
while the remaining $100 is U.S. content. In this simple example, the domestic content of
China's exports is one half--the ratio of domestic value added in exports to gross exports.
    Specifically, the domestic value-added contribution by country n in our model can be
calculated as follows:
                                                   S     s    s           S         s
                                                   s=1 En,t                        En,t
                                 DCEn,t =            S
                                                                    =                   s ,                   (13)
                                                           s
                                                     s=1 En,t           s=1
                                                                                   En,t

where the denominator is gross exports of country n, the numerator is domestic value-added
in country n's exports.8 The domestic contribution to exports is simply the weighted-average
of value-added shares across stages where the weights are the fraction of gross exports by
each stage. Given the complex trade patterns in the model with GVC trade, we use Table 3
to explain this calculation transparently for country 1 (in our two-country, two-stage case).
The first column gives gross exports of each chain, and the second column gives value-added
in exports of each chain.

                                Table 3: Accounting for country 1's exports

                Chain      Gross exports                            Value added exports
                (1,1)      Y2,t (1,1),2,t                           Y2,t (1,1),2,t
                (2,2)      0                                        0
                (2,1)      Y2,t (2,1),2,t  2                        Y2,t (2,1),2,t  2  2
                (1,2)      (Y2,t (1,2),2,t + Y1,t (1,2),1,t ) 1     (Y2,t (1,2),2,t + Y1,t (1,2),1,t ) 1  1
                Note: Yn,t = P2,t (Cn,t + Xn,t ) is final spending in country n.


    Start with chains (1, 1) and (2, 2). Gross and value-added exports for these chains are
identical, because production is not fragmented across borders. For chain (1,1), country 1's
exports are simply country 2's final spending on that chain, given by Y2,t (1,1),2,t . Chain (2,2)
does not involve flows from country 1 to country 2, by definition, so exports are zero for both
measures. Next, look at chain (2,1), in which gross and value-added exports are different for
country 1 owing to production fragmentation across countries. The gross value of exports
of country 1 is recorded as Y2,t (2,1),2,t . However, country 1's value added exports are only
a fraction  2  2 of the gross value (because we only have two stages and  2 , this fraction is
 2 ). The remaining value is from country 2 at stage 1 (used by country 1 as intermediates).
Lastly, consider chain (1,2), in which country 1 exports the stage 1 good to country 2, then
country 2 sells the finished good to both country 1 and to itself. Thus, final demand in both
  8
      Our measure is closest to the "value added in exports" measure in Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014).



                                                             25
countries generates exports for country 1 in stage 1. Moreover, country 1's gross and value
added exports coincide because all exports of stage 1 are value added.
    Figure 5 shows the dynamics of the DCE over time with asymmetric countries for both
the baseline case (solid lines) and the fixed capital case (dotted lines).9 During the first
50 periods with declining trade costs, countries trade more with each other, GVC trade
becomes increasingly more important, and the DCEs fall over time in both cases and both
countries. The patterns of the DCE ratios are strikingly different post period 50 across the
two countries and across the two cases. In the baseline case, the DCE ratio post period 50
rises in country 1 but declines in country 2. In contrast, these ratios post period 50 are
constant in the fixed-capital case.

               Figure 5: The domestic content of exports with asymmetric countries




Note: DCE is computed using equation (13). The baseline model begins with (A1 , A2 ) = (0.5, 1), then imposes
A1,t  (1.04)A1,t-1 for t = 2, . . . , 50, with A1,t = 1 thereafter (A2,t = 1 in every period). The model with fixed capital
restricts investment to equal depreciated capital. Periods up through 0 correspond to the initial steady state. Trade costs
decline from period 1 to 50 and remain constant afterwards. Red lines are for country 1 and blue lines are for country 2. Solid
lines are for the baseline model and dotted lines are for the model with fixed capital.



    To understand this, first consider the case with fixed capital. There are permanent H-O
effects since country 2 is relatively more capital abundant. As trade costs decline in the first
50 periods, the DCE ratio declines by less in country 2 than in country 1 due to two effects.
The first effect is through comparative advantage across stages. Country 1 has a comparative
advantage in stage 2, which involves both domestic and foreign imports in its production
and exports. Country 2, on the other hand, has comparative advantage in stage 1, which has
   9
       For the no-GVC case, the DCE is of course equal to one, and thus omitted from the figure.

                                                             26
zero foreign content. Therefore, country 2's DCE ratio is higher. The second effect is due to
relative size. Country 1 is permanently smaller so its import share is higher contributing to
an even lower DCE ratio. After period 50, since factors of production and productivity and
trade costs are all constant, the trade shares and DCE ratios are also constant. The DCE
ratio is 0.86 in country 1 and 0.98 in country 2.
    Now consider what happens in the presence of endogenous capital. In the new steady
state the two countries are symmetric, so their GVC shares and DCEs are identical and equal
to 0.94. The interesting differences arise along the transition. First consider periods 1­50.
Relative to the case with fixed capital, the DCE for country 1 is considerably larger, while
it is smaller for country 2. The reason is because H-O comparative advantage that drives
the difference in the DCEs across countries in the fixed capital case diminishes endogenously
over time with capital accumulation. Specifically, comparative advantage shrinks in stage 1
for country 2, and in stage 2 for country 1. Thus, the gap between the DCEs across countries
is smaller in the baseline than in the fixed capital case. After period 50, trade costs and
productivity are constant while capital accumulation persists in both countries, albeit at a
higher rate in country 1. As a result, H-O comparative advantage continues to diminish over
time to zero in the new steady state, which leads to the convergence of the DCEs across the
two countries to the same steady state level.
    The non-monotonic dynamics of country 1's DCE is particularly interesting, and results
from a very simple process of productivity convergence coupled with trade integration. Next
we discuss the empirical relevance of these implications.

Empirical Evidence The numerical exercise underlying Figure 5 is quite stylized. How-
ever, it is consistent with empirical estimates of the DCE in two ways. First, as the figure
shows, the country that is initially smaller, with lower productivity, has a rapid decline in its
DCE, followed by a subsequent partial reversal of that decline. This is consistent with the
experiences of China and South Korea, as shown in Figure 6. Both countries experienced
a decline in their DCE of about 20 percentage points before reversing. Between 2010 and
2016, the DCE rose by about 6 percentage point in China and about 8 percentage points
in South Korea. Second, in Figure 5, country 1 is the more rapidly growing country for
50 periods, and during this time it has a sharper fall in the DCE. Country 2 grows less
rapidly, and has a smaller fall in the DCE. This pattern is consistent with the evidence in
Figure 3b in Johnson and Noguera (2017). The figure shows, as mentioned previously, a
statistically significant negative cross-country correlation of average annual growth of GDP


                                               27
and average annual change in VAX.10 To summarize, our numerical exercise is consistent
with the empirical evidence on both the time series and cross-section dimensions.

                                   Figure 6: Domestic Content of Exports




Note: DCE is measured as VAX from Johnson and Noguera (2012) (red) and trade in value-added from OECD (2019) (black).
VAX is constructed slightly differently from trade in value-added, and from DCE, but, in practice, all these measures yield
similar numbers at the aggregate level.




3.4      Welfare gains from trade
We have illustrated how capital accumulation and GVC trade interact to impact the dy-
namics of trade patterns and economic growth. This section shows how this interaction
influences the welfare gains from trade. We measure the gains from trade by calculation
the consumption equivalence between remaining in autarky and opening up to trade. In
                  aut         trd
particular, let {Cn,t } and {Cn,t } denote equilibrium consumption paths under autarky and
with trade integration, respectively. Following Lucas (2003), the measure of dynamic gains
 dyn
n    is the per-period proportionate increase in consumption required to make the autarky
consumption path yield the same lifetime utility as the stream with trade integration. In
 10
    As mentioned above, the Johnson and Noguera (2012) measure of VAX is similar to our measure of
DCE.




                                                           28
                             dyn
other words, it is the value n   that satisfies
                                               dyn           
                                               n       aut       
                                          1+   100
                                                      Cn,t                                 trd
                                                                                          Cn,t
                         t-1                                              t-1
                               Hn,t ln                       =                  Hn,t ln          .   (14)
                t=1
                                               Hn,t              t=1
                                                                                          Hn,t

For steady state gains, it is simply given by
                                                          trd
                                              nss    lim Cn,t
                                                    t
                                           1+     =       aut
                                                              .                                      (15)
                                              100   lim Cn,t
                                                         t


    Table 4 shows dynamic and steady state welfare gains from trade for symmetric and
asymmetric cases. Start with the symmetric cases. First, the dynamic gains are much
smaller than the steady state gains in all three cases. This is because consumption gradually
rises to the new steady state level due to consumption smoothing and capital accumulation
if allowed. Second, the presence of GVC trade amplifies the dynamic and steady state
gains from trade substantially. In our case, the magnitude is about a four-fold increase.
Lastly, capital accumulation amplifies the steady state gains substantially, but not much
for the dynamic gains. Recall that in Figure 2 consumption is postponed to make room
for investment during the transition in the baseline, although steady state consumption is
higher than that in the case with fixed capital. With discounting, the dynamic gains from
trade in the baseline turn out to be similar to those in the case with fixed capital.
    In section 3.1 we argued that the presence of reproducible capital would amplify the
steady-state gains by a factor of 1/(1 - ). In our symmetric model, aggregate capital share
is 0.5, so the gains should be twice as large compared to a case without capital accumulation.
Clearly, this is not the case according to Table 4. This is because our version of fixed capital
is not the same as a model without investment: even with fixed capital, some portion of
output still gets used to replace depreciated capital. In the baseline model, real income
increases by 22% and with fixed capital, only by 10%. At the same time, the investment
rate in both models begin at 29.5%, and in the new steady state remains at that value
in the baseline model but declines to 26.8% with fixed capital. The lower investment rate
in the model with fixed capital implies a higher consumption share, thus attenuating the
welfare implications of the smaller increase in income since consumption rises by a greater
proportion than income.
    Now let's turn to gains from trade under the asymmetric calibration. We first look at the
steady state gains. In both the baseline case and the no-GVC case, the steady state gains are


                                                       29
                                 Table 4: Welfare gains from trade

                                             Baseline      No GVC trade         Fixed capital
               Symmetric countries
                 Steady state gains           21.9%              5.8%                14.7%
                 Dynamic gains                 3.6%              0.8%                3.6%
               Asymmetric countries
                 Steady state gains
                    Country 1                 21.8%              5.8%                20.2%
                    Country 2                 21.8%              5.8%                9.8%
                 Dynamic gains
                    Country 1                  4.8%              0.9%                5.2%
                    Country 2                  3.0%              0.7%                2.3%
               Note: Dynamic welfare gains are computed using equation (14). Steady state welfare
               gains are computed using equation (15).



identical across the two countries. This is because in the new steady state, both countries
are identical in productivities, capital stocks and trade costs. The gains are substantially
larger for both countries with the GVC trade than without GVC trade: 22% versus 5.8%.
In the fixed capital case, the steady state gains are much greater for country 1 than country
2: 20% versus 10%. This is the outcome of fixed differences in the capital stock, whereby
country 1 permanently smaller in size.
    We now turn to the dynamic gains. In the baseline case, the dynamic gains are larger for
country 1 than for country 2: 4.8% versus 3%. This is because during the transition country
1 is smaller so it realizes a greater increase in openness early on, boosting consumption,
investment, and welfare. Similarly, these benefits accrue to country 2 more slowly over time
given its large initial size. As a result of discounting, the dynamic gains are smaller for
country 2.
    With no GVC trade, the dynamic gains are much smaller for both countries, following
similar intuition in the symmetric calibration. What is interesting is that relative to country
2, country 1's dynamic gains are much larger with GVC trade than without GVC trade. The
key to understand this result is the transitional consumption cost of capital accumulation for
country 1 without the access to the GVC trade. With the GVC trade, country 1 can leverage
its comparative advantage and concentrate more on labor intensive stages during the transi-
tion, which allows slower capital accumulation and less sacrifice in consumption. Moreover,
the GVC trade allows country 1 to import stage 1 products which induces higher efficiency
gains, facilitating capital accumulation. This example illustrates that the fragmentation of
supply chains benefits countries with higher needs for capital accumulation relatively more.


                                                      30
    With fixed capital the dynamic gains are larger for country 1, the smaller country. It is
worth noting that the gains with fixed capital in country 1 exceed the gains in the baseline
with reproducible capital. This is purely mechanical. With fixed capital, the share of income
allocated to investment declines sharply since the level of investment is fixed. Thus, all of
the additional income generated from trade goes directly toward consumption in the case
with fixed capital, so boosts the gains from trade. Of course, the steady state level of
consumption is lower because of the lower productive capacity, but along the transition, the
boost in consumption in early periods generates huge welfare gains.


4     Further Analysis
This section further investigates two features of our theoretical framework. First, because
our framework incorporates both Ricardian and H-O motives for trade, we can evaluate the
relative contribution of the H-O forces versus the Ricardian forces on the dynamic gains from
trade. Second, to understand transparently the impact of the snake-form supply chains, we
compare our model implications with those under the spider-form supply chains, commonly
used in the trade literature.


4.1    Ricardian and H-O Motives for Trade
Our framework captures both Ricardian and H-O motives for trade. To tease out the role of
H-O forces, we study a case where H-O forces are shut off under the asymmetric calibration.
Specifically, we turn off H-O channels by setting the factor intensity  identical across stages.
Consequently, even with time-varying relative input abundance, there are no H-O forces
because the two stages are identical in factor intensity. The remaining incentive for trade is
Ricardian. There are two types of Ricardian comparative advantages in the Eaton-Kortum
trade model. The first type is micro-Ricardian: the productivity differences across countries
for each variety lead to intra-stage trade. The other type is macro-Ricardian: the differences
in average productivity across stages and countries lead to inter-stage trade. One feature of
our asymmetric experiments is that there are no macro-Ricardian forces built in, because
productivity is country-specific, but not stage-specific. Instead, it is the micro-Ricardian
forces that deliver gains from trade in the no H-O case.
    The dynamic gains from trade in the no H-O case are 4.4% and 3.1% for countries 1 and
2 respectively. Recall that these gains in the baseline are 4.8% and 3.0%, respectively. The
first observation is that Ricardian forces are more important than H-O forces in accounting

                                              31
for the dynamic gains in this example of asymmetric countries. We want to point out that
this result is the artifact of our exercise: the two countries become similar over time, so the
H-O effects diminishes over time in the baseline.
    The second observation is that the dynamic gains for country 1 are lower in the no H-O
case than in the baseline case: 4.4% versus 4.8%. The intuition for this result is that country
1 benefits by importing the capital-intensive (stage 1) varieties from country 2 to fuel its
investment demand in the baseline model. Without H-O forces, the fast growing country
satisfies its investment demand by producing stage-1 goods itself, which is more costly as it
requires foregoing more consumption along the transition.
    The third observation is that the dynamic gains for country 2 are slightly higher in the
no H-O case than in the baseline case: 3.1% versus 3%. This is because without the H-O
forces, country 2 concentrates relatively less in stage 1, and therefore require less investment,
allowing higher consumption along the transition.


4.2    Snake versus Spider Networks
We now compare the implications for trade flows and the gains from trade in our model with
snake-form supply chains with those in a model with spider-form supply chains. The latter
form is commonly used in the trade literature. In the typical spider model, there is one stage
of production that uses capital, labor, and a composite intermediate input in a roundabout
way (as in Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Levchenko and Zhang, 2016). The composite good of
all varieties serves as intermediate inputs in each variety's production and final demand for
consumption and investment. With only one stage of production, each variety is potentially
traded and then enters directly into the basket of finished goods.
    For the ease of comparison, we focus on the symmetric-country case. To discipline the
comparison between the spider model and the snake model, we first calibrate the share of
value added in gross production in the spider model,  , to the aggregate value arising from
                            s
                       sVA
the snake model:            s = 2/3.  Second, in the spider model there is only one stage of
                       s GO
production so we set capital's share in value added equal, , equal to the aggregate value
                                     s V A s
arising from the snake model: s V As = 1/2. We then conduct two scenarios in the spider
                                    s
model. In the first scenario, the spider model is given the same exogenous processes of trade
costs, TFPs, and labor endowments as in the snake model. Comparing this scenario with the
snake model, we highlight the impact of the snake input structure on trade flows and gains
from trade. In the second scenario, we re-calibrate the new steady state level of trade costs
in the spider model to generate the same ratio of imports to absorption in the snake model.

                                               32
In particular, this requires a lower trade cost in the new steady state, about 1.5 instead of
about 1.7. Comparing this scenario with the snake model highlights the difference in gains
from trade when both models are disciplined by the same key observable.
    Table 5 reports the summary statistics from these two spider scenarios, together with
the baseline snake model. In our snake model, the steady state gains from trade are 21.8%,
and the dynamic gains are 3.6%. In contrast, when countries experience the same exogenous
processes, the spider model implies the steady state gains of 8.8% and the dynamic gains of
1.16%. When we look at the ratio of imports to absorption in the new steady state, it is
0.16 in the snake model, but only 0.11 in the spider model. Thus, the snake model generates
larger trade flows and offers higher gains from trade than the spider model. Once the trade
costs are lowered in the spider model to deliver the same ratio of imports and absorption in
the snake model, we still find substantially higher gains in the snake model than the spider 2
model: 21.8% versus 13.5% for steady state gains, and 3.6% versus 1.8% for dynamic gains.

                                       Table 5: Snake versus Spider

                                                         Snake           Spider 1           Spider 2
         Steady state gains from trade                    21.8%           8.8%                 13.5%
         Dynamic gains from trade                         3.6%            1.2%                 1.8%
         Steady state imports-to-absorption                0.16           0.11                  0.16
         Note: We consider the symmetric countries in each model specification. The Snake and Spider 1 cases
         have the same exogenous processes of trade costs and TFPs. In the Spider 2 case, we re-calibrate
         the new steady state trade cost to generate the ratio of imports-to-absorption in steady state equal
         to that in the snake model. In both spider cases, the parameter for the ratio of value added to gross
         output is set equal to the aggregate value arising from the snake case.




5    Conclusion
As the world's economies globalized over the past 75 years, there have been increasing
opportunities for these economies to reap the gains from specializing in goods and sectors
of their comparative advantage. Continued reductions in barriers to trade over decades
have pushed specialization to even finer levels than goods ­ increasingly to particular stages
of a good's production sequence. The fragmentation of production chains across multiple
countries has become an important source of gains and gives rise to global value chains
(GVCs). These gains are the primary reason why economies have chosen to globalize in the
first place.


                                                         33
    To understand the dynamics of GVCs over the long horizon during which trade barriers
have fallen, we have studied the implications of trade integration in a two-country model with
Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin comparative advantage forces, GVCs, and capital accumula-
tion. From our model analysis, we identify a two-way interplay from comparative advantage
and GVCs to capital accumulation and from capital accumulation to comparative advantage
and GVCs. The additional aggregate productivity gains from specializing in GVCs induces
a sufficiently large boost to capital accumulation to offset the incentive to delay investment
until trade barriers are even lower. In addition, when the countries are asymmetric, the
dynamics of capital accumulation endogenously affects comparative advantage so that the
country with more rapid capital accumulation increasingly specializes in the capital-intensive
stage. In turn, this provides even more incentive for that country to accumulate capital.
    Eventually, as the capital-labor ratios of the two economies converge, the motive for
Heckscher-Ohlin specialization in particular stages diminishes. As a result, the domestic
content of exports (DCE), which initially declines as GVCs expand, eventually rises again
for the fast growing country. This implication is supported by empirical patterns on the DCE.
We also find that the gains from trade in a framework with GVCs are several times larger
than in a similar dynamic framework without GVCs. Finally, we compare the gains from
our snake GVC framework to the more commonly used "spider" framework with roundabout
production and also find that the gains are two to three times larger.
    In our perfect competition framework, the only frictions preventing the formation of
GVCs are iceberg trade costs. We have abstracted from any frictions associated with market
power and asymmetric information. To the extent capital and labor in emerging economies
are not paid their marginal products, this could hinder the growth-enhancing role of GVCs
and dynamic gains from trade. In addition, as Antr`  as and Chor (2013) has shown, bargaining
and information frictions can affect whether upstream or downstream stages of production
are outsourced. To the extent outsourced stages tend to occur abroad, there would be
implications for GVC formation.
    Our analysis has also focused on trade integration under perfect foresight. It would
be useful to study the effects of trade integration when it embodies an unexpected shock
element. In addition, the effects of shocks, such as pandemics, on GVCs could be studied.
In particular, to the extent tail risks may have increased, this could have implications for
GVC formation.11 Finally, our framework could be thought of as a multi-sector framework
  11
    Caselli et al. (2020) study the effects of increased openness and exposure to global shocks, and find that
international trade, through its diversification channel, can lead to lower income volatility.



                                                     34
with each stage representing a sector. It would be useful to explicitly introduce into our
framework the standard notion of sectors, such as manufacturing and services, as in Lee and
Yi (2018). We leave these and additional analyses for future research.




                                            35
References
Alvarez, Fernando. 2017. "Capital Accumulation and International Trade." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 91 (C):1­18.

Antr`
    as and Davin Chor. 2013.       "Organizing the Global Value Chain."        Econometrica
 81 (6):2127­2204.

Antr`
    as, Pol and Alonso de Gortari. 2020. "On the Geography of Global Value Chains."
 forthcoming, Econometrica.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andr´
                                            es Rodr´
                                                   iguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?" American Economic Review 102 (1):94­130.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro. 2015. "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects
  of NAFTA." Review of Economic Studies 82 (1):1­44.

Caselli, Francesco, Mikl´
                        os Koren, Milan Lisicky, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2020. "Diversification
  Through Trade." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1):449­502.

Connolly, Michelle and Kei-Mu Yi. 2015. "How Much of South Korea's Growth Miracle Can
  be Explained by Trade Policy." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (4):188­
  221.

Costinot, Arnaud, Jonathan Vogel, and Su Wang. 2013. "An Elementary Theory of Global
  Supply Chains." The Review of Economic Studiesw 80 (1):109­144.

de Gortari, Alonso. 2019. "Disentangling Global Value Chains." Working paper.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography, and Trade." Econo-
  metrica 70 (5):1741­1779.

Eaton, Jonathan, Brent Neiman, and Samuel Kortum. 2016. "Obstfeld and Rogoff's Inter-
  national Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment." Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 72:5­26.

Eaton, Jonathan, Brent Neiman, John Romalis, and Samuel Kortum. 2016. "Trade and the
  Global Recession." American Economic Review 106 (11):3401­3438.



                                             36
Fally, Thibault and Russell Hillberry. 20018. "A Coasian Model of International Production
  Chains." Journal of International Economics 114:299­315.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. "The Nature and Growth of Vertical
 Specialization in World Trade." Journal of International Economics 54 (1):75­96.

Johnson, Robert C. and Andreas Moxnes. 2019. "GVCs and Trade Elasticities with Multi-
  stage Production." Working paper.

Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera. 2012. "Accounting for Intermediates: Produc-
  tion Sharing and Trade in Value Added." Journal of International Economics 82 (2):224­
  236.

------. 2017. "A Portrait of Trade in Value-Added over Four Decades." Review of Economics
  and Statistics 99 (5):896­911.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. "Tracing Value-Added and Double
 Counting in Gross Exports." American Economic Review 104 (2):459­494.

Lee, Eunhee and Kei-Mu Yi. 2018. "Global Value Chains and Inequality with Endogenous
  Labor Supply." Journal of International Economics 115:223­241.

Levchenko, Andrei A. and Jing Zhang. 2016. "The Evolution of Comparative Advantage:
  Measurement and Welfare Implications." Journal of Monetary Economics 78 (C):96­111.

Lucas, Robert E. 2003. "Macroeconomic Priorities." American Economic Review 93 (1):1­
  14.

OECD. 2019. "OECD Trade in Value-Added (TIVA) Database." Manuscript, OECD.

Ravikumar, B., Ana Maria Santacreu, and Michael Sposi. 2019. "Capital Accumulation and
  Dynamic Gains from Trade." Journal of International Economics 119:93­110.

Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. "The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and
  Evidence." Journal of International Economics 92 (1):34­50.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. "Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?" Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 111 (1):52­102.

------. 2010. "Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?" American
  Economic Review 100 (1):364­393.

                                           37
