                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO FAMILY POLICIES REDUCE GENDER INEQUALITY? EVIDENCE FROM
                  60 YEARS OF POLICY EXPERIMENTATION

                                        Henrik Kleven
                                       Camille Landais
                                        Johanna Posch
                                      Andreas Steinhauer
                                       Josef Zweimüller

                                      Working Paper 28082
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28082


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Francine Blau, Hilary Hoynes, Emmanuel Saez, Johannes Spinnewijn, Gabriel
Zucman, and seminar participants at the AEA Meetings 2019, Bank of Italy, UC Berkeley,
Bocconi, Crest-Ecole Polytechnique, EIEF, OeGB Innsbruck, PSE, National Bank of Belgium,
Stockholm University, University of Salzburg, and Queen Mary. We gratefully acknowledge
support from the Center for Economic Behavior and Inequality (CEBI) at the University of
Copenhagen, financed by grant #DNRF134 from the Danish National Research Foundation.
Camille Landais gratefully acknowledges support from the LSE International Inequality Institute
and from ERC grant #679704-DYNAMICSS. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef
Zweimüller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Do Family Policies Reduce Gender Inequality? Evidence from 60 Years of Policy Experimentation
Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef Zweimüller NBER
Working Paper No. 28082
November 2020
JEL No. H31,H42,J08,J13,J16,J18,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

Do family policies reduce gender inequality in the labor market? We contribute to this debate by
investigating the joint impact of parental leave and child care, using administrative data covering
the labor market and birth histories of Austrian workers over more than half a century. We start by
quasi-experimentally identifying the causal effects of all family policy reforms since the 1950s on
the full dynamics of male and female earnings. We then map these causal estimates into a
decomposition framework a la Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019) to compute counterfactual
gender gaps. Our results show that the enormous expansions of parental leave and child care
subsidies have had virtually no impact on gender convergence.

Henrik Kleven                                   Andreas Steinhauer
Department of Economics                         University of Edinburgh
Princeton University                            31 Buccleuch Place
238 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building              Edinburgh EH8 9JT
Princeton, NJ 08544                             United Kingdom
and CEPR                                        and CEPR
and also NBER                                   andreas.steinhauer@ed.ac.uk
kleven@princeton.edu
                                                Josef Zweimüller
Camille Landais                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Zurich
London School of Economics                      Schoenberggasse 1
Houghton Street                                 8001, Zurich
London WC2A 2AE                                 Switzerland
United Kingdom                                  josef.zweimueller@econ.uzh.ch
and CEPR
c.landais@lse.ac.uk

Johanna Posch
Analysis Group
1 Angel Court
London
EC2R 7HJ
UK
Johanna.Posch@analysisgroup.com
1    Introduction

Is government intervention critical for reducing gender inequality in the labor market?
Or is gender inequality driven primarily by factors outside the government's control?
Recent research shows that the bulk of gender inequality can be attributed to the un-
equal impacts of parenthood on men and women (Bertrand, Goldin and Katz 2010;
Kleven, Landais and Søgaard 2019; Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller
2019), which suggests that family policies such as parental leave and child care have the
greatest potential to affect gender inequality. A sizeable literature studies the impact of
family policies on female labor market outcomes, typically focusing on the contempo-
raneous impacts of marginal reforms in isolation. Apart from cross-country evidence,
there is little research trying to estimate the aggregate long-run impact of public policy
on gender inequality (Olivetti and Petrongolo 2017). To make progress on this ques-
tion, we investigate the joint impact of parental leave and child care over more than
half a century. Our main conclusion is simple and striking: The enormous expansions
of parental leave and child care subsidies have had virtually no impact on gender con-
vergence.
To reach this conclusion, we rely on exceptional administrative data covering the labor
market and birth histories of Austrian workers from 1953 to 2017. During this era, the
Austrian gender gap in earnings fell by about 30 percentage points, while public poli-
cies supporting families with children were introduced and greatly expanded. Parental
leave was introduced in 1961 and subsequently expanded (and in one instance scaled
back) through a series of major reforms. At the same time, the provision of heavily
subsidized public child care was rolled out across the country. Similar expansions of
family policies have been implemented in other European countries and their impli-
cations for gender inequality is the subject of heated debate: Is access to job-protected
parental leave and subsidized child care instrumental for boosting female labor force
participation and reducing gender gaps? Are generous parental leave schemes counter-
productive by inducing mothers to stay at home rather than investing in their careers?
Or is the emphasis on policy solutions overstated, with gender inequality being driven
mostly by equilibrium features of the labor market such as the temporal flexibility of
jobs (Goldin 2014; Goldin and Katz 2016) and gender norms or culture (Bertrand 2011;
Kleven and Landais 2017; Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller 2019;
Boelmann, Raute and Schönberg 2020)?1
  1 Another hypothesis is that gender gaps are endemic to biological gender differences, but Kleven,

Landais and Søgaard (2020) provide evidence against the importance of such channels.


                                                 1
We take advantage of the richness of the Austrian administrative registers combined
with quasi-experimental techniques to implement a unique, bottom-up approach to
measuring counterfactual gender inequality absent family policies. Our approach pro-
ceeds in two steps. First, we identify the causal effects of all family policy reforms
since the 1950s on the labor market outcomes of men and women. In a second step, we
map these causal estimates into a decomposition framework to compute counterfactual
gender gaps absent policy intervention.
Besides our long-run historical approach, we add two key innovations to the existing
literature. The first innovation is to use "child penalties" in earnings as our main out-
come. This ensures that we identify the full dynamic effect of each policy change on
the labor market trajectories of women relative to men. The second innovation is to
account for the potential interaction effects between parental leave and child care poli-
cies. Family policies are often designed as a bundle, with child care coverage starting
around the time that parental leave eligibility is ending. As a result, we analyze the
effects of parental leave and child care policies jointly, capturing any non-linearities
brought about by their potential interaction.
Leveraging a regression discontinuity design based on cutoff dates of the parental leave
reforms, we first show that parental leave duration has significant negative effects on
the earnings of women relative to men in the short run. We show that these effects
are non-linear, being greater at lower baseline durations. However, for all parental
leave reforms, we find precisely estimated zero effects in the long run. Leveraging
a difference-in-diffences design similar to Duflo (2001) based on large expansions of
locally provided child care, we find precisely estimated zero effects of both nursery care
and pre-school care on the earnings of women relative to men. We provide suggestive
evidence that this null effect is driven by crowding out of other types of informal care,
and the persistence of strong norms for maternal care. Finally, we find no interaction
effect between child care and parental leave policies.
In the second step of our analysis, we use these estimates to back out counterfactual
long-run series of gender inequality. We build on the framework developed by Kleven,
Landais and Søgaard (2019), which decomposes gender inequality using cohort-specific
estimates of child penalties. The intuition is simple: because we know how each pol-
icy reform causally impacted child penalties, we can reconstruct cohort-specific child
penalties (and therefore aggregate gender inequality over time) in the absence of policy
intervention. Our results imply that the dramatic expansion of family policies has had
a remarkably small impact on gender inequality. Due to the negative effects of parental
leave on labor supply in the short-run, family policies have been slightly counterpro-
ductive for gender convergence. The average earnings of Austrian women is 43.5%
lower than the average earnings of men today, while they would have been 41.5% lower


                                            2
if family policies had remained as they were in 1960. Sensitivity analyses suggest that
this null effect is very precise. We also demonstrate that our conclusions are robust to
accounting for frictions, equilibrium/spillover effects, and fertility responses.2
Our paper contributes to the large literature on gender inequality in the labor market
(reviewed by Bertrand 2011 and Olivetti and Petrongolo 2016) and especially to recent
work showing the crucial role of parenthood (Bertrand, Goldin and Katz 2010; Kleven,
Landais and Søgaard 2019; Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller 2019;
Kuziemko, Pan, Shen and Washington 2018; Cortés and Pan 2020). Our paper also con-
tributes to a large literature on the impact of family policies (reviewed by Olivetti and
Petrongolo 2017), including parental leave schemes (see e.g., Lalive and Zweimüller
2009; Schönberg and Ludsteck 2014; Dahl, Løken, Mogstad and Salvanes 2016) and
child care subsidies (see e.g., Baker, Gruber and Milligan 2008; Havnes and Mogstad
2011). We discuss how our findings relate to these literatures in more detail below.
While we are far from the first to study these questions, our paper sheds new light
by studying them within a unified quasi-experimental setting in order to quantify the
aggregate importance of family policies for the long-run historical evolution of gender
inequality.
Our bottom-up counterfactual methodology offers a credible approach to measuring
the impact of policy interventions on the long-run evolution of gender inequality. The
conclusions stand in sharp contrast to those that can be gleaned from cross-country
approaches, which tend to find strong correlations between public policy and female
labor market outcomes (e.g., Ruhm 1998; Blau and Kahn 2013; Kleven 2014; Olivetti
and Petrongolo 2017). The conceptual approach developed here could be used to study
the role of policy intervention in other areas of inequality research (such as income and
wealth inequality).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Austrian in-
stitutional context and data. Section 3 presents quasi-experimental evidence on the im-
pact of parental leave reforms on child penalties. Section 4 presents quasi-experimental
evidence on the impact of local child care expansions on child penalties. This section
also provides evidence on the potential mechanisms behind our null effect. Section 5
lays out our decomposition framework, and provides estimates of the counterfactual
evolution of gender inequality under different policy trajectories. Section 6 concludes.
   2 Our null result is striking given that the subsidies to parental leave and child care in Austria (and
in other European countries) create large changes in participation tax rates (accounting for all taxes,
transfers, and subsidies) during the years following child birth. In fact, the implications of these policies
for the extensive margin incentives of women with young children tend to be much larger than the
implications of, for example, the famed EITC program in the U.S. See Kleven (2014) for a cross-country
analysis of participation tax rates and labor supply.




                                                     3
2     Context and Data

2.1   Institutional Context

A (Typical) Gender-Conservative Environment Austria, like other German-speaking
countries, is characterized by relatively large differences in labor market outcomes be-
tween men and women. The raw gender gap in earnings is roughly 40% and the female
labor force participation rate is about 55% (in 2018). However, it is worth highlighting
two factors that make Austria an interesting laboratory for studying the impact of fam-
ily policies on gender inequality. First, Austria is not an international outlier in terms of
gender gaps. English-speaking countries like the U.S. and the U.K. have broadly sim-
ilar levels of gender inequality in earnings. Moreover, female labor force participation
in Austria is higher than in a number of other European countries such as Italy, Spain,
and France. Second, Austria has experienced a substantial reduction in gender gaps
and a surge in female labor force participation over the past 50 years. This makes it
a very useful setting to study whether this reduction in gender inequality is causally
related to family policy expansions.
In addition to inequality in labor market outcomes, Austria is often singled out, to-
gether with other German-speaking countries, for having very conservative gender
norms. Appendix Figure A.I probes the idea that gender norms are more conserva-
tive in Austria than elsewhere. The evidence presented is based on questions from the
2012 wave of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP) on the attitudes that peo-
ple have towards market work by women with and without children. Two insights
emerge from the figure. One is that gender attitudes are quite traditional in most coun-
tries: large fractions of people hold the view that women should stay at home when
they have young children (panel (a)), and that, if they don't, their children will suffer
(panel (b)). The other insight is that Austrians, while being on the more conservative
side of the spectrum, are not so different from the citizens of other countries. Their
views on whether mothers of young children should stay at home instead of seeking
employment are very similar to the views observed in the U.S., the U.K., and France.
Overall, the evidence in Figure A.I suggests that Austria is gender conservative, but not
a strong outlier internationally. Austria is a typical gender-conservative environment,
and as such, a great setting for our study. We are interested in better understanding
whether family policies can change the evolution of gender inequality when gender
attitudes are still traditional.


Family Policies Over the last 60 years, most developed countries have introduced
and dramatically expanded two sets of family policies: parental leave and child care
provision (Olivetti and Petrongolo 2017). Austria is a case in point.

                                             4
In the aftermath of World War II, there was no system of parental leave in Austria.
Women were simply entitled to Mutterschutz, a maternity insurance period of 8 weeks
following delivery, akin to sick leave. In 1961, a paid and job-protected maternity leave
of 52 weeks was introduced. Since then, the country has implemented four large re-
forms of its parental leave policies (in 1990, 1996, 2000, and 2008), which have con-
siderably expanded the generosity and scope of parental leave.3 Today, the Austrian
parental leave system stands out as one of the most generous in the developed world.
Currently, parents are entitled to up to about 35 months of paid parental leave if that
time is shared, or up to about 28 months if one parent takes the time alone. The replace-
ment rate is relatively high: the median replacement rate is about 40% of net earnings.
The take-up of parental leave comes with a job-protection guarantee of 24 months. The
receipt of parental leave benefits is not subject to any work eligibility requirement prior
to child birth.
Institutional child care in Austria is divided into nursery care (Krippe) covering children
from ages 1 to 2 and pre-school care (Kindergarten) from ages 3 to 5. The provision of
both forms of institutional child care has been greatly expanded over the past 50 years.
In the beginning of the 1970s, less than 2% of children between the age of 1 and 2 at-
tended nursery. Today, this number has risen to 25%. The fraction of children attending
pre-school has risen from 40% to more than 90% over the same time period. Child care
is provided by municipalities, following general guidelines set by state legislation.4
The median number of daily operating hours for Austrian child care institutions is 9
hours, with typical opening hours from 7:30am to 4:30pm.5 Institutional child care has
always been heavily subsidized in Austria: out-of-pocket costs are among the lowest
in developed nations. According to the OECD Family Database, out-of-pocket costs
for a family with two children aged 2 and 3 in full-time daycare was just 3% of family
net income in 2015, compared to an average of 13% across the OECD and 22% in the
U.S.6 Note that subsidized institutional child care encompasses both public and church
provided care. The private market for child care is very limited and essentially consists
of a few private creches and child-minders (Tagesmutter).7
   3 Two   further reforms in 2010 and 2017 provided additional flexibility to parents regarding the length
of leave and the amount of the transfer. We do not evaluate these policy reforms here because the time-
horizon to study future earnings dynamics is too short.
    4 State legislation typically determines the opening hours, the fee structure, and the total number of

children that can be supervised by a teacher. For details see Baierl and Kaindl (2011).
    5 See Baierl and Kaindl (2011).
    6 http://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm. Note that small variations in prices exist across

states, and sometimes across municipalities.
    7 Figures from a microcensus survey in 2002 reveal that less than 3% of children under age two were

taken care of by Tagesmutter.




                                                    5
2.2       Data

Labor Market Outcomes & Birth History Our study relies on unique data covering
the labor market and birth histories of Austrian workers from 1953 to 2017. Our main
data come from the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD, see Zweimüller, Winter-
Ebmer, Lalive, Kuhn, Wuellrich, Ruf and Büchi 2009 for details). This is a matched
employer-employee dataset, which contains detailed information on employment and
earnings by calendar year from 1972 to 2017. The ASSD register covers the universe of
paid employment spells, with the notable exclusion of civil servants, self-employed and
farmers. This means that about 85% of the Austrian population is covered by ASSD,
and this coverage rate has been stable over time.
Earnings recorded in the ASSD correspond to the amount on which workers pay so-
cial security contributions, which is subject to a yearly-adjusted cap. As a result, our
earnings variable is top-coded for about 5% of workers. To deal with top-coding, we
replace all right-censored earnings with mean earnings above the cap predicted from
a Pareto distribution, the parameters of which we obtain by gender and age groups
using uncensored income tax data.8 Besides earnings, the ASSD includes information
on the uptake of all social insurance programs along with demographic variables such
as gender, year of birth, year of death, nationality, and all child birth events of women
(e.g., date of birth of each child).
ASSD data exist before 1972, but has not been digitized. However, detailed tabulations
on earnings by gender, drawn from the original data, were regularly published. This
enables us to consistently compute the evolution of gender inequality on the population
covered by the ASSD since 1953. Furthermore, we use additional micro-level earnings
information before 1972 from the Rueckwirkend Erfasste Versicherungsdaten (REV) reg-
ister. The REV retrospectively digitised, for ASSD workers retiring in the 1980s and
1990s, earnings and employment spells prior to 1972 for the purposes of pension cal-
culations.9 The selective nature of this data means that only certain cohorts are well
covered. Fortunately, for birth cohorts 1920-1950, which are primarily those having
children between 1955-1972, the REV covers about 80% of workers, as shown in Ap-
pendix Figure D.V. Although the REV does not contain direct information on child
births, it has information on the uptake of maternity insurance (Mutterschutz), which
has been available to Austrian women ever since the 1950s. As a consequence, the REV
data enables us to consistently estimate child penalties for women giving birth all the
way back to the mid-1950s. We are not aware of any existing work estimating child
penalties over such a long time period.
   8 We   provide further details on our methodology and its robustness in Appendix section D.1.
   9 The earnings information is provided in the same way as in the ASSD (except there is no information

about the firm), and we adjust for topcoding using the same Pareto estimates.


                                                    6
Importantly, both the ASSD and REV contain child birth information only for women.
We can nevertheless link children to their fathers for a large subset of child births. To
this end, we use the child benefit register (Beihilfedaten). This register contains the uni-
verse of child benefit claims filed between 1995-2012. As the take-up of child benefits is
almost complete, we are able to match around 90% of children born between 1995 and
2012 cohorts. Each claim lists the social security number of the claimant (usually the
mother) as well as that of her partner. We pick the first entry in a child's life and set the
man listed on that claim as the father.


Child Care Provision Our analysis also relies on granular information on child care
provision at the municipal level. We have obtained administrative data collected by
Statistics Austria, which records, for every year since 1988 and for each of the nearly
2,000 Austrian municipalities, the number of child care facilities (broken down by nurs-
eries and pre-schools), their opening hours (full-day or half-day), and the number of
teachers in each facility. From this data, we are able to construct precise measures of
child care supply at the municipal level. We provide details about the construction of
these measures in section 4.


2.3    Child Penalties

Our analysis of the impact of family policies on gender inequality over the last 60 years
relies on two inputs. First, we need to estimate how the full dynamics of parental out-
comes respond to the arrival of children, what we refer to as child penalties. Second, we
need to identify the causal effect of all family policy reforms on these child penalties. In
this section, we describe how child penalties are defined and estimated, and document
their magnitude in the Austrian context.
To estimate the impact of children on the labor market trajectories of mothers and fa-
thers, we adopt the event-study specification proposed by Kleven, Landais and Søgaard
(2019). For each parent in the data, event time t is indexed relative to the year of the
                                 g
first child birth. Denoting by Yist the outcome for individual i of gender g in year s and
at event time t, we run the following regression separately for men and women:

                            g                          Age                 g
                          Yist =  g Dist
                                     Event
                                           +  g Dist +  g DYear
                                                           ist + ist                                   (1)

On the right-hand side, we use boldface to denote vectors. The first term includes event
time dummies, indexed such that t = 0 denotes the year of arrival of the first child.10
  10 For notational convenience, we get rid of the transpose operator and denote by  D   the scalar product
of two vectors of same dimension,  and D.


                                                   7
We omit the event-time dummy at t = -1, implying that the event-time coefficients
measure the impact of children relative to the year just before the first child. The second
term includes age dummies (to control for lifecycle trends) and the third term includes
year dummies (to control for time trends). We are able to identify the effects of all three
sets of dummies because, conditional on age and year, there is variation in event time
driven by variation in the age at which individuals have their first child.11 Our main
outcome variable is gross labor earnings, specified in levels.12 We convert the estimated
                                                            g
level effects into percentages to obtain the child penalty Pt for gender g at event time t:

                                                          g
                                                g      ^t
                                                       
                                              Pt                                                              (2)
                                                      ~g | t
                                                    E Y ist

                g
       ~ is the predicted outcome when omitting the contribution of the event time
where Y ist
                              g
dummies. This implies that Pt can be interpreted as the percentage loss of average
earnings due to having children.13
Figure 1 shows estimated child penalties for different outcomes in our ASSD sample.
The magnitude of earnings penalties for mothers is very large (panel (a)). Ten years
after the birth of the first child, Austrian mothers suffer a 50% earnings drop relative to
fathers. Panels (b), (c) and (d) show that this effect reflects a combination of penalties
along three margins: the extensive margin of labor supply, the intensive margin of
labor supply, and the wage rate. Although these patterns are qualitatively similar to
those documented in Scandinavia, the magnitudes are significantly larger in Austria.
As shown in Appendix Figure A.II, long-run earnings penalties in Scandinavia lie in
the 20-30% range, about half the size of the long-run penalties observed in Austria and
Germany.
On average, over our period of interest, Austrian mothers have thus faced large career
costs from having children. In the next two sections, we turn to analyzing how family
policies have affected the evolution of these large penalties.
   11 Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019) lay out the identification assumptions underlying this approach,

compare its results to alternative approaches in the literature, and provide evidence of its ability to iden-
tify the causal effect of parenthood.
   12 We specify equation (1) in levels rather than in logs to be able to keep the zeros in the data due to

nonparticipation.
                                                                                                      g
   13 Importantly,                                                                                   ^t
                          under the identifying assumptions, equation (2) corresponds to            ~ g |t]    =
                                                                                                 E [Y ist
E[y1,t |t]-E[y0,t |t]
     E[y0,t |t]
                 where y1,t is the actual earnings at event time t and y0,t is the counterfactual earnings
                      ,
absent children. In contrast, a log specification would estimate the average percentage earnings loss,
which differ if treatment effects are correlated with counterfactual earnings. That is, if for example the
effect of children on earnings is higher or lower for women who would have had higher earnings absert
            g
children. Pt is therefore the relevant metric when assessing the effect of children on the aggregate gender
pay gap.




                                                      8
3      The Impact of Parental Leave on Child Penalties

As mentioned above, Austria, like most developed countries, has considerably ex-
panded the scope and generosity of paid parental leave (PL). We now turn to the ques-
tion how the dramatic expansion in parental leave duration since the 1960s affected the
labor market outcomes of Austrian mothers and fathers?
To investigate this question, we start by focusing on the parental leave regime that
was in place in 2008. This regime offered parents the possibility for households to
choose between three PL options: (i) a long parental leave (the "30+6" option), with 30
months for the mother and 6 months for the father at a daily flat benefit of 14.53; (ii) an
intermediate option of 24 months, split between 20 months for the mother and 4 months
for the father, (the "20+4" option), at a daily benefit of 20.8; (iii) a short parental leave
of 18 months, with 15 months for the mother and 3 months for the father at the daily
rate of 26.6 (the "15+3" option).14 In Figure 2, we split parents of children born in 2008
into three groups, according to the PL option they selected into, and report the child
           g
penalty Pt estimated separately on each of the three groups. The figure first shows
that the earnings dynamics of fathers remains unaffected by the arrival of children,
irrespective of the length of the PL option selected by the household. In contrast, the
graph displays stark differences in the child penalties across PL options for mothers.
The magnitude and persistence of the drop in their earnings after child birth strongly
correlates with the length of their PL. Nine years after child birth, women who opted
into the "30+6" option exhibit penalties that are still up to 15 percentage points larger
than women who selected into the "15+3" option.
The large correlation observed in Figure 2 between PL duration and female child penal-
ties raises the question: is it causal? In other words, how much of this large correlation
is explained by the causal effect of PL duration on child penalties? And how much is
due to differential selection of couples into PL options? To answer this, we now turn
to the four large reforms that exogenously changed the duration of parental leave over
the past 60 years.


3.1     The 1990, 1996 and 2000 Reforms

Empirical Strategy We start by focusing on the three reforms that took place in 1990,
1996 and 2000. These reforms share important institutional similarities that allow us to
study them using the exact same empirical strategy.
First, all three reforms focused on the duration of the paid parental leave. The 1990
    14 Households need to choose one of these three options in the 8 weeks following the birth of the child.
Their choice is legally binding and cannot be altered ex-post.


                                                     9
reform increased the potential duration of parental leave from 12 to 24 months. The
1996 reform introduced the rule that each parent had to take at least 6 month of leave,
which meant a reduction in the maximum duration of maternal leave from 24 to 18
months. Finally, the 2000 reform increased again the maximum duration of maternal
leave from 18 to 30 months.15 Importantly, the other key parameters of the PL system,
that is, job protection provisions, and the level of benefits, were all kept constant over
the period 1990 to 2000. In terms of job protection provisions, since 1990, a woman has
the right to return to her previous employer up to 24 months after the birth of her child.
As far as benefits are concerned, they were, until 2008, a flat amount, indexed on wage
inflation, that did not depend on individuals' previous earnings, nor on the duration of
the leave.16 As a result, the 1996 and 2000 reforms identify the effects on child penalties
of both extending and reducing the duration of PL, conditional on all other parameters
of PL policies, while the 1990 reform identifies the effect of extending both the duration
of paid leave and job protection.
A second common feature of these reforms is that their implementation relied on a
strict eligibility cutoff, based on the date of birth of the child, with no grandfathering.
For the 1990 reform for instance, mothers of children born after July 1st 1990 became
eligible to the new regime, and received a maternal leave entitlement of 24 months.
Mothers of children born before this date remained entitled to 12 months of leave. The
corresponding cutoff dates for the 1996 and 2000 reforms are July 1st 1996 and July
1st 2000. This implementation structure naturally lends itself to a regression disconti-
nuity design, using the date of birth of the first child relative to the cutoff date as the
assignment variable.17


Regression Discontinuity Evidence We are interested in the effect of parental leave
reforms on the full dynamics of female outcomes around the event of the first child
  15 Before  1990, the parental leave benefits were only available to mothers. The 1990 reform offered the
possibility for couples to split the total credit of 24 months between the mother and the father. Fathers
were then entitled to take up to 6 months out of the 24 months, but could only take their leave in the
second year of the child. In practice, the take up rate of paternal leave was zero. We therefore treat the
1990 reform as an increase in the potential duration of maternal leave from 12 to 24 months. The 1996
reform kept the total duration of parental leave to 24 months, of which one parent could not take more
than 18 months. We therefore treat the 1996 reform as a decrease in the potential duration of maternal
leave from 24 to 18 months. The 2000 increased the maximum duration of parental leave to 36 months, of
which one parent could not take more than 30 months. We therefore treat the 2000 reform as an increase
in the potential duration of maternal leave from 24 to 18 months.
   16 Note also that prior work history requirements did not change over the period 1990 to 2000, stipu-

lating that an individual needed to have worked (and paid social security contributions) for at least 52
weeks during the two years prior to birth to be eligible to benefits. The 2000 reform introduced the pos-
sibility for mothers without prior work history to collect child benefits for up to 30 months. We restrict
our sample to women meeting the 52 weeks work requirement to make our estimates comparable across
all three reforms.
   17 Density tests systematically confirm the absence of manipulation of the timing of births around the

three cutoff dates.


                                                   10
birth.18 To explore this effect, Appendix Figure B.I starts by displaying, for all event
years t  [-4; 10], the average earnings of mothers by weekly bins of the running
variable, in an 8-months window around the cutoff date of the 1990 reform. Starting
with panel (a), we see that earnings 4 years before birth do not display any sign of
discontinuity at the cutoff date in the running variable. Similarly, panels (b) to (d) show
no sign of discontinuity in earnings in event year -3 to event year -1. The evidence from
these five panels validate the credibility of our RD design, by corroborating that there
is no selection in pre-birth earnings around the cutoff date of the reform. Moving to
panels (f) and (g), corresponding to earnings in event years 1 and 2, we find a strong
discontinuity in earnings at the cutoff. Because earnings are measured at the calendar
year level, these two event years correspond to the moment were the take up of the
parental leave extension has bite.19 The PL extensions appears to cause a significant
drop in annual earnings of more than 1,000 in both of these calendar years. Strikingly,
these significant negative effects fully disappear in event year 3, as shown in panel (h).
And we find no sign of discontinuity in the earnings of mothers for any event year after
that, as evidenced by panels (i) to (o). Note also that in panel (e), we see no evidence of
an effect of the PL extension on earnings in the year of birth of the child.20 This suggests
the absence of any extensive margin response to the reform. In other words, women
who were not taking maternal leave are not more likely to take a leave because of its
longer duration.
To confirm the visual diagnostic from Appendix Figure B.I, we estimate the effects of
the 1990 reform on earnings Ytw for each event year t using the following event-study
specification:



                      w
                     Yit    Event
                         = Dit    +  T Dit
                                        Event
                                              · Treati +  B Dit
                                                             Event
                                                                   · Birthi
                                 Event                             Age
                             +  Dit    · Treati · Birthi +  Dit          + it                          (3)

To leverage the RD design for identification, we estimate this specification on a sam-
ple of mothers who give birth in a narrow window of four months around July 1st,
and compare women who gave birth just after the cutoff date (Treat = 1) to women
  18 We  focus the following analysis on mothers, as fathers' outcomes appear unaffected by PL regimes,
as shown in Figure 2. For completeness, we confirm at the end of this section that the estimated effects
of the PL reforms for fathers are precisely zero.
  19 For women who give birth in July 1990, event year 1 corresponds the period going from January

to Dec 1991, that is the period going from month 6 to month 18 after birth. Similarly, event year 2
corresponds to the period going from 18 to 30 months after birth.
  20 The strong positive slope in the relationship between earnings in event year 0 and the running vari-

able is explained by the fact that earnings are measured at the calendar year level in the ASSD data. Event
year 0 therefore corresponds to calendar year 1990. As women who give birth in the earlier months of
1990 spend more time in parental leave in that calendar year, their earnings level is mechanically lower.



                                                    11
who gave birth just before the cutoff date (Treat = 0). We control for seasonality us-
ing women who gave birth in a similar four-months window around July 1st in 1989
( Birth = 1989). The impact of the reform on earnings at each event time t is identified
by the parameters t . To make magnitudes interpretrable, we scale             ^t by the average
counterfactual earnings E Y     ~ w | t, Birthi = 1990 , obtained from specification 3 when
                                  it
omitting the contribution of the event dummies. The statistic       ^t /E Y
                                                                          ~ w | t captures the
                                                                            it
percentage-point change in the child penalty at event time t caused by the reform. Re-
sults, reported in Panel (a) of Figure 3, first confirm the absence of selection on earnings
prior to child birth. They also confirm the absence of any significant effect of the reform
on earnings in event year 0. The negative effect of the 1990 PL extension is entirely
concentrated in event year 1 and 2, when the take up of the additional leave occurs: for
both years, the extension from 12 to 24 months of maternal leave causes a 10% drop
in female earnings. We find no significant effect of the 1990 reform on the earnings of
women beyond event year 2. Overall, we find that the 1990 PL extension caused an av-
erage 4.04% (0.62%) reduction in the annual earnings of mothers over the first 5 years
after the birth of their first child. In Panel (b) of Figure 3, we draw counterfactual child
penalties under the pre and post 1990 PL regimes. We start from the baseline child
penalties estimated on the sample of mothers who gave birth before the 1990 reform, to
which we add, for each event year, the estimates of the effects of the reform from panel
(a). This gives us the counterfactual child penalty under the 24 months maternal leave
regime. The graph shows clearly that extending maternal leave from 12 to 24 months
causes a larger child penalty in the short run, but has absolutely no impact on the child
penalty in the long run.
Using the same empirical strategy, we can now turn to measuring the effects of the
1996 reform. This reform reversed part of the 1990 extension, by reducing the duration
of maternal leave from 24 to 18 months. Visual inspection of the relationship between
earnings and the assignment variable for all event years in Appendix Figure B.II reveals
no sign of discontinuity at the July 1st 1996 cutoff except for event year 2. In that year,
we see an increase in earnings of more than 2000 for women who gave birth just after
the cutoff date, and are therefore exposed to the shorter maternal leave regime. Panel
(c) of Figure 3 reports the associated dynamic RD estimates of the effects of the 1996
reforms, which confirm three key findings from the 1990 reform. First, we see, once
more, no sign of extensive margin response to the reform. The reduction in parental
leave duration did not significantly affect the earnings of mothers in event year 0 and 1.
Put it differently: mothers did not reduce their propensity to take any leave in response
to the 1996 reform. Second, the effects of the reform are fully concentrated in event year
2, that is, on the period where the variation in parental leave take up has bite.21 Finally,
  21 For women who gave birth around the July 1st 1996 cutoff, event year 2 is defined as calendar year

going from January to December 1998, which corresponds to 18 month to 30 months after birth.


                                                  12
the reform does not seem to have any long term effects on the careers of mothers: the
increase in labor supply and earnings in event year 2 generated by the reform does not
translate into any positive earnings gains in the long run.
Panel E of Figure 3 replicates the same analysis for the 2000 reform, which extended
back the maternal leave duration from 18 to 30 months. The same three striking find-
ings emerge again. The only noticeable difference is the smaller magnitude of the effect
of the 2000 reform overall. Compared to the 1990 reform, which also extended the
duration of the parental leave by one year, we find that the 2000 reform caused a signif-
icantly smaller decline of 2.60%, compared to 4.04%, in the average earnings of mothers
in the first 5 years after the birth.
Finally, for completeness, in Appendix Figure B.IV, we investigate the effect of these
parental leave reforms on the careers of fathers. Since 1990, fathers have been entitled
to take up to 6 months of parental leave. And it is important to investigate whether
variations in the duration of leave available to mothers generated substitution effects
towards paternal care. Following the same methodology as we did for mothers, we
compare fathers of children born on both sides of the eligibility cut-off dates, and find,
for all three parental leave reforms, that they had precisely zero effect on the dynamics
of male earnings.


3.2    The Introduction of Parental Leave in 1961

We now turn to the introduction of paid maternal leave in January of 1961. This reform
entitled mothers to receive maternity benefits for up to one year after the birth of a
child.22 Maternity benefits were set to the level of unemployment insurance benefits,
and receipt was conditional on not working or owning arable land. The maternity
leave scheme came with job protection. Empirical analyses of reforms that introduce
both job protection and pecuniary benefits have been scant.23 The main reason is that
these reforms were implemented a long time ago in most countries, prior to the era
usually covered by administrative registry data. In our context, however, we are able
to leverage the REV register, which has information on labor market outcomes around
the time of the 1961 reform.
To estimate the causal effect of this reform on the earnings dynamics of mothers, we
need to account for the fact that the reform was grandfathered. That is, women who
gave birth before January 1961 were also eligible for the new leave scheme, which they
could use up until the first birthday of their child. As a result, scheme eligibility did not
  22 Maternity benefit payments (Karenzurlaub) technically start at the end of the maternity insurance
period (Mutterschutzgesetz), which covers women for 8 weeks following delivery.
  23 These reforms are nevertheless particularly interesting in the context of current debates in the US

regarding the desirability of a paid and federally mandated maternity leave.

                                                  13
display a sharp discontinuity for mothers of children born after January 1961. Indeed,
Appendix Figure B.V shows that take-up of maternity benefits featured a gradual in-
crease starting with children born in January 1960. To deal with this issue, instead of
the RD approach used above, we analyze the 1961 reform using a DiD approach com-
paring different birth cohorts over time. Specifically, we compare the outcomes Yistw of

women whose first child was born between May and August 1961 and who were there-
fore fully eligible for maternity leave benefits (T = 1) to women whose first child was
born between May and August 1959 and who were fully ineligible (T = 0). We imple-
ment this approach by running the following event-study specification on the sample
of women who had their first child in either 1959 or 1961:

                                                               Age
                     w
                    Yit     Event
                        =  Dit    +  T Dit
                                        Event
                                              · Ti +  Dit            +  DYear
                                                                         it   + it                   (4)

                                                               ^tT
Figure 4 shows the time series of DiD estimates           ~ g           , corresponding to the percentage-
                                                        E[Y it |t,T =1]
point impact on child penalties for women who became eligible to 12 months of mater-
nal leave. Panel A shows the effects for employment, while panel B shows the effects
on earnings. The results indicate that the qualitative effects of the 1961 reform are strik-
ingly similar to those observed for the other parental leave reforms. There is a sharp
negative effect on both employment and earnings, concentrated in the first 12 months
after birth, i.e. in event years 0 and 1.24 These negative effects quickly disappear as
women exhaust their maternal leave entitlement; we observe no significant effect in the
long run.
The causal interpretation of these results relies on the assumption that there is no con-
founding trend in child penalties by birth cohort. To validate this assumption, Ap-
pendix Figure B.VI shows placebo results from specification (4) estimated on a sample
of mothers who gave birth in 1962 (T = 0) or 1963 (T = 1). This figure corroborates
our identifying assumption, showing that there is no significant trend in child penalties
across birth cohorts.25


3.3    Why Does Parental Leave Not Hurt Mothers' Careers?

The lack of systematic evidence on the long-run career effects of parental leave has gen-
erated mixed views among scholars. On the one hand, some have voiced concerns that
generous parental leave schemes, by keeping mothers out of the labor market for too
long, may permanently hurt their careers. This view is predicated on findings that, in
  24 For  women who gave birth between January 1961 and December 1961, the period of the first 12
months after birth spans between the beginning of event year 0 (1961) and the end of event year 1 (1962).
  25 In a similar vein, we implemented doughnut RD specifications excluding births in 1960, to flexibly

account for trends in outcomes by birth cohorts, and found similar results.


                                                   14
the short run, parental leave schemes induce women to stay out of the labor force and
reduce labor market earnings (e.g. Lalive and Zweimüller 2009, Rossin-Slater, Ruhm
and Waldfogel 2013, Baum and Ruhm 2016). These short-term work interruptions may
translate into longer-term effects through experience channels (such as human capital
accumulation or signaling) or persistent preferences changes. On the other hand, others
have argued that job-protected parental leave fosters female labor market attachment,
thus leading to positive long-run effects on the career trajectories of mothers. This view
has been challenged by findings in Ejrnæs and Kunze (2013), Schönberg and Ludsteck
(2014), Dahl, Løken, Mogstad and Salvanes (2016), and Bailey, Byker, Patel and Ram-
nath (2019), who find either small or negative effects of parental leave schemes in the
longer run.
Our analysis of 50 years of parental leave reforms in Austria offers an unambiguous
answer: parental leave policies have no significant effects on the labor market outcomes
of mothers in the long run. But why? And how does this fit with the existing evidence?


Non-Linear Effects of Parental Leave Extensions First, our study of Austrian reforms
allows us to shed light on non-linearities in the effects of parental leave policies, which
are usually held responsible for the differences in estimates across contexts and reforms
(see Rossin-Slater 2017). One key source of non-linearity stems from the interaction be-
tween the duration of job protection and the duration of cash benefits (Lalive, Schlosser,
Steinhauer and Zweimüller 2013). As discussed in Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017), it
could be that the availability of some job protection, relative to no protection at all, en-
sures continuity of employment and discourages transitions out of the labor market,
while further extensions simply delay return to work without further gains in employ-
ment and earnings.
Using our estimated effects of the 1990, 1996 and 2000 reforms on the average earnings
of women in the first five years after birth, and assuming additivity in the effects of
marginal extensions, we can compute the effects of 6 months increments in parental
leave duration, keeping job protection fixed at 24 months. Results, reported in Figure
5 confirm that the effects of PL extensions are indeed highly non-linear, and strongly
decrease with baseline duration. Extending the duration of paid leave from 12 to 18
months has a larger negative effect than extending duration from 18 to 24 months.
Furthermore, extending the duration of leave from 24 to 30 months, that is, beyond the
duration of job protection, has no effect on female outcomes. The latter result happens
to be entirely driven by compliance rates. In other words, there is a strong interaction
between job protection and the duration of cash benefits: unless it is covered by job
protection, the take up of additional leave by mothers appears close to zero. We also
report in Figure 5 the estimate of the 1961 introduction of parental leave, which captures


                                            15
the effect of a 10 month extension (from 2 to 12 months) of paid parental leave, covered
with job protection. The effect is larger than the effect of a 12 month extension from
12-24 months with job protection, confirming again that the marginal effect of parental
leave duration decreases significantly as a function of baseline duration.
But interestingly, the strong non-linearity evidenced by Figure 5 only applies to short
term effects, and seems entirely driven by decreasing marginal take up rates, as the
duration of PL increases. As far as long term effects are concerned, neither the duration
of cash benefits nor the presence of job protection seem to make any difference: the long
run labor market outcomes of mothers are systematically unaffected by PL policies.


Parental Leave & Experience Effects What could explain the absence of longer term
effects of PL policies? In the next section, we investigate the possibility that interactions
between institutional child care provision and PL policies drive these results in the
Austrian context. But, the absence of any long run dynamic effects on mothers' careers
still raises one puzzle: how is it compatible with the presence of significant negative
effects in the short run? Experience effects would suggest that spending an additional
year out of the labor force would negatively affect future earnings. So are returns to
experience in the labor market simply zero for Austrian mothers?
Indeed, a large fraction of mothers work in relatively low-skill occupations in Austria,
where experience effects have been estimated to be small. But interestingly, Appendix
Figure B.VII shows that even among mothers in the top quartile of the pre-birth earn-
ings distribution, PL reforms have no long term effects. A more natural explanation
is that our estimates identify local average treatment effects among the compliers to the
reforms. And compliance is likely to be higher among mothers who do not incur a
large cost on their career for taking additional leave. In other words, this suggests that,
when they make their parental leave decisions, individuals do internalize the long term
consequences of such choices on their careers.


The Role of Subsequent Fertility Our estimates of the effects of PL policies do not
control for subsequent fertility. In practice, fertility could be a significant mediator of
the long term effects of parental leave on child penalties, and contribute to mask other
dynamic effects of the policy.26
To investigate the mediating role of subsequent fertility, we estimate the dynamic ef-
fects of PL reforms on the restricted sample of mothers with a completed fertility of
one. Panel A of Appendix Figure B.VIII plots the results for the 1990 reform, and does
  26 If,
       for instance, longer PL duration is associated with lower or delayed subsequent fertility, this
could reduce the longer run penalty, thus counteracting potentially negative experience effects of taking
a longer maternal leave.


                                                   16
not reveal any difference in dynamic patterns compared to the whole sample of moth-
ers. This suggests that subsequent fertility does not have any significant mediating
impact on the earnings' responses to PL extensions. We further confirm this diagnostic
by plotting in Panel B the average completed fertility (measured as of 2017) of mothers,
by bins of the weekly birth date of their first child, in an eight-months window around
the cutoff date of the 1990 PL reform. The absence of any discontinuity at the 1st of July
cutoff indicates that eligibility to the 24-months parental leave did not, in fact, have any
significant effect on completed fertility.27
We should nevertheless highlight that women who give birth to their first child on both
sides of the reform cutoff dates face different PL regime for the first birth, but face on
average similar PL regimes for any subsequent birth. As a consequence, our estimates
so far have only identified how child penalties respond to the PL regime applicable to
the first child. To compute the total effect on child penalties of moving, in steady state,
from one PL regime to another, one needs to account for the effect of PL extensions for
births of higher parity. If this effect is significant, subsequent fertility will mechanically
increase the total effect of PL extension on child penalties. To illustrate this, we turn to
mothers giving birth to their second, third and fourth child, and replicate, for each par-
ity, our dynamic estimates of the impact of PL reforms on earnings. We then construct
the total steady state impact of a reform by adding dynamic estimates at all parities,
weighted by the average completed fertility, and average timing between parities, of
women who had their first birth around the time of each reform. Results are reported
in Appendix Figure B.IX. We find that accounting for the effects of PL reforms for all
subsequent births only slightly increases the impact of parental leave in the medium
run. But we still cannot detect any significant effect of parental leave in the long run.
Overall, even when considering their steady state impact, we find that parental leave
reforms have had only small effects on the careers of mothers.
  27 These  results are reminiscent of Dahl, Løken, Mogstad and Salvanes (2016) who, in the context of
Norway, also find that being exposed to a longer parental leave for the first child has no effect on subse-
quent fertility. Lalive and Zweimüller (2009), studying the Austrian 1990 and 1996 reforms, find signifi-
cant effects on fertility timing and argue this is consistent with incentives created by the parental-leave-
renewal rule: to qualify for a new parental leave, mothers giving births to a new child ­ while still on
parental leave for their previous child ­ are not subject to the previous-work requirement. In line with
Lalive and Zweimüller (2009), we find a significant impact on the timing of subsequent births but no
effect on completed fertilty. Moreover, the fertility effects are quantitatively too small to alter our con-
clusions on the impact of parental leave rules on long-run child penalities. We do not find any impact
on fertility of the 2000 parental-leave expansion that abolished the previous-work requirement. This is
consistent with the idea that fertility timing responses of previous reforms were driven by the renewal
rule.




                                                    17
4     The Impact of Child Care Provision on Child Penalties

Over the past fifty years, while parental leave generosity was drastically expanded in
Austria, so was the provision of public child care. Sixty years ago, nurseries were a
rarity, and the majority of Austrian municipalities did not have a kindergarten. The
fraction of children between the age of 3 and 5 who were enrolled in a kindergarten
was lower than 40% in 1970. Today it is above 90%. How did this expansion of child
care provision affect the careers of women relative to men? And how did the effects
interact with the expansion of parental leave generosity?


4.1   The Expansion of Child Care Provision

Measuring Child Care Provision

We start by constructing long time series of child care provision for each Austrian mu-
nicipality. The central government collects, in its supervisory role, granular information
on all nurseries & kindergarten for each municipality and year. The reports, available
since 1988, contain information on the precise location of each child care institution,
whether it is public, private or operated by the church, its opening hours, its number of
certified teachers and their contracts (part-time vs full time), as well as the legal maxi-
mum number of children per certified teacher (which varies by type of institution and
is subject to state legislation). The data also reports the number of children attending
each institution, by age, and by number of hours of attendance. We convert this rich
information into two indices that capture the level of child care coverage for children
of age 1 to 2 (nursery care index), and for children of age 3 to 5 (pre-school care index),
in each municipality and year.

                                # FTE Child Care Spots for Children Age 1-2
            Index 1-2 = 100 ×
                                           # Children of Age 1-2

                                # FTE Child Care Spots for Children Age 3-5
            Index 3-5 = 100 ×
                                           # Children of Age 3-5

To get the numerator of index 1-2 (resp. index 3-5), we first multiply the number of
full time equivalent teachers working in each nursery (resp. kindergarten) by the le-
gal maximum number of children that a single teacher can supervise in this institution.
We then weight this number by the opening hours of the institution: a fulltime kinder-
garten receives a weight of 1 for instance, while a half-day kindergarten receives only
weight of 0.5. We then sum these numbers across all nurseries (resp. kindergarten) in
each municipality to obtain the number of full time equivalent child care spots available

                                            18
for children of age group 1-2 (resp. of age group 3-5). We then divide the numerator
by the number of children of that age group in the municipality. This gives us a direct
measure of the probability that a child of a given age range has access to a full time spot
in a child care institution, for each municipality and year.28 Finally, we also combine
the information from our two indices into an aggregate index of child care, that we call
Index 1-5:

                                  # FTE Spots for Age 1-2 + # FTE Spots for Age 3-5
            Index 1-5 = 100 ×
                                                # Children of Age 1-5

Appendix Figure C.I provides evidence of the massive expansion of child care in Aus-
tria since the 1980s. It displays the evolution of the nursery care and pre-school care
indices computed for Austria as a whole. Panel (a) focuses on the nursery care index.
It shows that the coverage of nursery care was extremely low in 1988: the probability
that a child between the age of 1 and 2 had access to a full time spot in nursery care was
just 5% then. The index increased significantly after that, especially during the 2000s.
But despite its 7-fold increase, the index remained at a relatively low absolute level, be-
low 35, in 2015. Panel (b) shows that the coverage of pre-school care is generally much
higher. It started in 1988 from a much higher level (around 55) and expanded quickly
throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, to reach almost full coverage today.


4.2    The Effect of Local Child Care Expansions on Child Penalties

To assess the impact of child care provision on the dynamics of female labor market
outcomes, we start by comparing the child penalties of women who give birth in mu-
nicipalities with high vs low child care coverage. We rank municipalities according to
the value of their aggregate child care index (Index 1-5) in 1990 and split the sample be-
tween municipalities below vs above the median. We then compute for each subsample
the child penalty for mothers whose first child was born between July 1990 and June
1996, i.e. under the two years parental leave regime. To control for differences in pre-
birth characteristics of mothers across the two subsamples, we use inverse-probability-
weighting based on pre-birth earnings, pre-birth employment, and age.29 Results, re-
ported in Figure 6, show that child penalties are significantly lower for mothers in high
  28 Note  that we topcode each index at 100, as some communes offer spots in childcare for more than
the number of children in their own municipality.
  29 Concretely, we predict, using a probit model, the probability  of being in a municipality with above
                                                                      i
median child care provision. We use as predictors the number of days of employment in the year before
birth, a set of dummies for the age of the mother at first birth, and the log of individual earnings plus
one, log(yit + 1), for event years t = -5 to t = -1. Based on these probits, we predict the probability that
a municipality has above median child care provision in 1990, and we weight mothers in municipalities
with above median coverage by E (i ) /      ^ i whereas the weight for mothers in municipalities with below
median index is E (1 - i ) / (1 -    ^ i ).


                                                    19
coverage municipalities: their earnings penalty is 5.11 percentage point lower on av-
erage over the first five year after birth. Furthermore this effect seems to be quite per-
sistent and stable over the longer run. If we scale this difference in earnings penalty
by the difference in child care coverage across the two groups, we obtain a large and
significant TOT effect of .158 (.002), suggesting that increasing child care coverage from
0 to 100% would translate into a 16 percentage point reduction in the child penalty.
To interpret this evidence as causal, however, one would need to assume away selection
on unobservables characteristics correlated with child penalties. In practice, women
may decide to live in municipalities with high child care coverage precisely because
they would like to invest in their career after the birth of their child. A closer look at
the geographical distribution of child care in 1990 confirms that selection is likely to
be significant. Appendix Figure C.II, which provides a heat map of the child care in-
dex in 1990, shows a stark contrast between very high coverage rates in Vienna and its
surrounding municipalities, and very low coverage rates in the rest of Austria. This
strong urban/rural divide suggests that women in the high and low coverage munici-
palities of Figure 6 were likely to evolve in radically different environments in terms of
preferences and gender norms.


Identification Strategy: Using Local Expansions

While child care was extremely segmented geographically in 1990, the rest of Austria
did eventually catch up with Vienna, unleashing the massive expansion of child care
provision observed in the 1990s and 2000s. But, interestingly, when catching up with
Vienna and its surroundings, Austrian municipalities did so at very different rates. Fig-
ure 7 maps the change in child care index for each municipality between 1990 and 2000
in panel (a), and between 2000 and 2010 in panel (b). It reveals a tremendous amount
of spatial heterogeneity in the intensity and timing of the expansion. Some municipal-
ities saw a rapid increase in child care provision in the 1990s, while their neighbors or
other geographically similar municipalities only expanded child care much later in the
2000s. Some municipalities saw a steep increase, while others did not expand child care
provision much.
This large spatial variation in local child care expansion represents a promising source
of identification. Conceptually, we want to capture the macro effects of child care ex-
pansion on the dynamics of female outcomes, accounting for potential equilibrium ef-
fects in the labor market or for endogenous changes in preferences and norms, in the
spirit of Duflo (2001). To the extent that local labor markets are not fully integrated and
that treatment effects do not diffuse much across space, spatial variation in child care
expansion across municipalities can meaningfully capture macro effects and is there-


                                            20
fore appealing from an identification standpoint.30
However, spatial variation in child care expansion is also likely to be endogenous to the
evolution of female labor market outcomes. For instance, increases in local female em-
ployment may push municipalities to expand their supply of institutional child care.
To deal with this concern, we isolate episodes of large and sudden increases in child
care provision at the municipal level. We focus on events where the nursery care index
or the pre-school care index of a municipality increases by more than 20 points in one
single year. These events are driven by large supply shocks such as the construction
of a new facility, or the expansion of existing ones and the hiring of new teachers. We
define a municipality as "treated" when it experiences one such episode. Municipal-
ities that never experienced an increase of 20 points or more in their child care index
constitute our control group. Our strategy relies on comparing the outcomes of women
in treated municipalities, before and after an episode of child care expansion, to those
of women in control municipalities. To probe whether treated and control municipal-
ities are well balanced across observables dimensions, Appendix Table C.I provides
descriptive statistics by treatment status, and reveals that prior to local childcare ex-
pansion, both groups of municipalities are remarkably similar in terms of population
structure and labor market outcomes.
In Figure 8, we start by focusing on the evolution of child care provision and of the
take-up of institutional care, which constitute the first stage of our quasi-experimental
design. Panel (a) plots the evolution of the nursery care index around the time of a
nursery care expansion separately for treated and control municipalities. The graph
shows that the increase of nursery care provision in treated municipalities has four
important characteristics: it is unanticipated, sudden, large, and persistent. By unantic-
ipated, we mean that the index was extremely stable in the years prior to the event, and
we cannot detect any significant differences in pre-trends between treated and control
municipalities. By sudden, large and persistent, we mean that the year of the event is
characterized by a surge of 40 points in the value of the index in treated municipalities,
and the index remains stable at this high level therafter. For control municipalities we
do not see any specific trend upward in nursery care provision: the nursery care index
remains stable throughout, at a low level, around 8.
One concern with our quasi-experimental design is that child care expansions may be
endogenously driven by the dynamics of local demand. An increase in the demand
for child care may, for instance, create a shortage in supply, prompting a decision by
local authorities to expand the provision of instutional child care. Panel (b) of 8 dis-
  30 Evidence from Lalive, Landais and Zweimüller (2015) indeed suggests that local labor markets are

quite geographically segmented in Austria. Studying the response to a large region-specific UI extension
program for older workers, they find significant equilibrium effects in treated regions, but very limited
geographical spillovers to neighboring municipalities in untreated regions.


                                                   21
plays the evolution of the uptake of nursery care around an expansion and alleviates
these endogeneity concerns: the graph does not reveal any differential pre-trend in take
up between treated and control municipalities. Furthermore, the panel shows that the
dynamics of take up closely mimics the dynamics of child care provision. The large
increase in the provision of nursery care in treated municpalities translates into a large
increase in the uptake of nursery care, which is also sudden and persistent. On aver-
age, the supply shocks we focus on are accompanied by an immediate trebling of the
fraction of children going to nursery care, from 8% to 28%. The implied take up rate of
the additional full time equivalent spots created is a bit below 50%.
Panel (c) and (d) replicate the same analysis for sudden expansions in the provision
of pre-school care. Both panels reveal similar dynamic patterns as those observed for
nursery care expansions. The main important difference relates to the baseline levels of
the control municipalities. In the case of nursery care expansions, control municipalities
are at a lower baseline level than treated municipalities, the latter getting ahead of
the curve in terms of child care provision. To the contrary, in the case of pre-school
care expansions, treated municipalities were originally lagging behind, and are using
expansions to catch up with control municipalities.
To identify the effects of the large expansions of child care provision presented in Figure
8, we use a difference-in-difference framework. We compare the evolution of the earn-
ings of mothers in treated municipalities (Ti = 1) and control municipalities (Ti = 0) in
the years s around a child care expansion (we normalize the year of the expansion event
to s = 0). Because we want to map out the effects of child care on the full dynamics
of labor market outcomes around child birth, our outcomes of interest are the earnings
Yist of mothers who are observed exactly t years after/until the birth of their first child.
For each t, we are interested in the following model:

                             Exp  T     Exp           Age
                  Yist = t Dist + t Dist · Ti +  Dist +  DYear
                                                          ist + ist                      (5)


where D Exp is a vector of event time dummies with respect to child care expansion.
Note that we control, as before, for calendar year fixed effects and age fixed effects.
Identification relies on the usual parallel trend assumption that absent child care ex-
pansion, the evolution of earnings of mothers observed t years after birth would have
been the same in treated and control municipalities.
For the purpose of estimation, we stack the difference-in-difference models (5) for each
event time t relative to child birth, into one unique specification:




                                              22
           Yist = ( j Dist )· 1[ Disj   = 1] +  (  T
                            Exp   Event                        Exp       Event
                                                   j D ist · Ti ) · 1 [ Disj   = 1]
                    j                                 j
                          Age
                   +  Dist +  DYear
                               ist + ist                                                          (6)


This stacked model allows us to calculate counterfactual earnings Y     ~ ist , that is, earnings
without child penalty. We then standardize the coefficient estimates             ^ st and ^T st by
E Y ~ ist | t . To get a visual representation of our difference-in-difference design, we
finally plot, for given values of t, the standardized coefficient estimates     ^ st and  ^ st +^T st
in a ten year window around the expansion event (s = -5 to s = 5). In this graphical
representation, the coefficients   ^ st capture the effect on the child penalty, t years after
birth, of being in a control municipality, as a function of time s relative to child care
expansion. And the corresponding effect in treated municipalities is given by            ^ st +^T st .
When presenting our results, we set s = -1 as our baseline category, and therefore
express all results relative to the year prior to child care expansion. To account for
spatial correlation in unobserved labor market shocks, we cluster standard errors at the
municipal level.


The Limited Effects of Large Local Child Care Expansions

We start in Figure 9 by presenting the results for nursery care expansions. In panel (a),
we focus on women who are one year before birth (t = -1), and report their estimated
earnings in control municipalities vs treated municipalities, from five years before, to
five years after the expansion shock. The graph first shows no evidence of a differen-
tial trend in earnings before expansion. This helps alleviate concerns that the supply
shock was an endogenous response to the evolution of female labor market outcomes
in treated municipalities. Secondly, the graph reveals that the expansion had no effect
on the outcomes of women prior to giving birth. In other words, the increased access
to child care did not lead to anticipatory effects among women about to have children.
In panel (b), we turn to the child penalty one year and two years after birth, which
corresponds to the period when children are enrolled in nursery care. As in panel (a),
and in support of our identification strategy, we do not detect any sign of differential
trends before the expansion. But strikingly, neither do we find any significant difference
in the child penalty of women in treated municipalities after the expansion. Despite
a large increase in the take up of nursery care, the evolution of earnings one to two
year after birth remains virtually identical in treated and control municipalities. The
corresponding diff-in-diff estimate indicates that nursery care expansions decreased
the average penalty in the first two years after birth by 1.1 (1.4) percentage points. If

                                                 23
we scale this estimate by the change in nursery care index, we find that increasing
municipal nursery care coverage from 0 to 100% would reduce the child penalty by
only 3.1 (4.0) percentage points.
To further corroborate this surprising null result, we replicate diff-in-diff graphs similar
to panel (a) and (b) for child penalties at every horizon t, from 3 years before birth
to 5 year after birth. The results, reported in Appendix Figure C.III confirm that the
large municipal expansions of nursery care had no detectable effect on child penalties.
For every single panel, we find that the child penalty estimates for treated and control
municipalities closely line on top of each other. In the last panel, we plot the evolution
of the average penalty in the 5 years following the birth of a child. These estimates
similarly imply that an increase in coverage from 0 to 100% would only reduce the
child penalty by 3.0 (4.3) percentage points in the first five years after birth.
One concern is that the presence of significant frictions in the labor market, or slow-
moving gender norms may significantly hinder the response to nursery care expansion
in the short run. But interestingly, results are identical if we look at longer run effects.
In panel (c) of Figure 9, we plot for all event times t the coefficients    ^ st evaluated at
s = 10, ten years after the expansion. These estimates capture the long run causal effect
of nursery care expansions on the full dynamics of the child penalty. Note that panel
(c) is therefore the mirror image, for nursery care reforms, of panels (a), (c) and (e) of
Figure 3 in the case of parental leave reforms. The graph shows without ambiguity
that, even in the long run, these large increase in the supply of municipal nursery care
have had no significant effect on child penalties. Based on these estimates, we draw in
panel (d) counterfactual child penalties under the pre and post nursery care expansion
regimes: the two profiles are indistinguishable.
One potential explanation for the absence of effects of these large increases in the local
provision of nursery care is the availability of long maternal leaves during our period
of analysis. Mothers can enrol their child in nursery while still being on maternal leave.
The possibility to combine instutional care with maternal leave is no longer available
when looking at pre-school years, when children are between 3 and 5 years old. Yet,
Figure C.IV, shows that episodes of large pre-school expansions had no significant im-
pact on child penalties either. Panels (a) and (b) show that the earnings, be it just before
birth, or 3 to 5 years after birth, evolved in the exact same way in treated and control
municipalities. Looking in panels (c) and (d) at the long run causal impact, ten years af-
ter the expansion, we find that child penalties were not significantly impacted by large
increases in the local supply of pre-school care.




                                             24
4.3   Interaction Between Child Care and Parental Leave Policies

Since child care provision is not found to significantly affect child penalties, this implies
that there should be no significant effects on female earnings arising from the interac-
tion between child care supply and parental leave policies. To confirm this, we look in
Appendix Figure C.V at the effects of the 1990 extension of parental leave, comparing
women living in municipalities with high vs low levels of child care coverage. We first
split municipalities according to the value of their aggregate index of nursery and pre-
school care (index 1-5) in 1990. Panel (a) shows that the estimated effect of the reform
on child penalties is identical for women in municipalities with above vs below me-
dian levels of child care provision. In panel (b), we focus specifically on the provision
of nursery care and in panel (c) on the supply of pre-school care: in both cases, we do
not detect any significant differences in the impact of the parental leave reform between
municipalities with high vs low provision of child care.


4.4   Why Does Child Care Not Improve Mothers' Careers?

The existing literature on the impact of child care policies on mothers' labor market
outcomes has produced surprisingly mixed results. Some studies estimate positive and
sometimes large effects of child care subsidies on female labor supply (e.g., Baker, Gru-
ber and Milligan 2008; Berlinski and Galiani 2007; Cascio 2009; Eckhoff Andresen and
Havnes 2018). These micro studies are corroborated by cross-country evidence. At
the same time, a number of other studies provide a much less optimistic view on the
potential for child care provision to improve female labor supply. Studies from the
U.S. (Fitzpatrick 2010, 2012; Barua 2014), Norway (Havnes and Mogstad 2011), France
(Goux and Maurin 2010), and Spain (Nollenberger and Rodríguez-Planas 2015) find
that child care expansions did not generate any significant improvements in maternal
employment. Or if they did, the effects were small and typically limited to single moth-
ers. Our analysis of very large expansions of heavily subsidized child care in Austria
shows a precisely estimated zero effect on mothers' careers, in the short run as well as
in the long run.
But why are large increases in the take-up of child care not conducive to increasing
female labor supply? Uncovering the mechanisms behind this null effect is critical for
understanding the ability of family policies to shape the evolution of gender inequality.


Crowding-Out, Frictions & Preferences Two main mechanisms may explain our find-
ings. First, institutional child care may simply crowd-out other child care arrange-
ments, such as care by relatives for instance. Second, mothers may still face large re-
source and utility costs of increasing labor supply, even when child care becomes freely

                                             25
available. These high costs may come from the existence of frictions or constraints in
the labor market, but may also be due to preferences or gender norms regarding mater-
nal care.
To gain further insights on mechanisms, we use two large external surveys that were
conducted with the Austrian Microcensus in 1995 and 2002, and which contain house-
hold level information on time use, preferences and child care arrangements. To in-
vestigate the correlation between these outcomes and child care provision, we matched
this survey information with our measures of institutional child care provision at the
political district level.31
To increase statistical power, we pool observations from both waves of the survey, and
control for differences in the education and age structure across political districts. In
pratice, we regress the average outcome in a political district on the fraction of the
population in three education bins and five age bins. We then plot a binscatter of the
residuals, rescaled at the average level of education and age in Austria, against the
value of the child care index (index 1-5).
To validate this cross-sectional design, we start by looking at the fraction of children
in institutional care, and the employment level of mothers. For these two outcomes,
the correlation with the child care index obtained in this cross-sectional design can be
directly compared to the causal estimates from our local expansion design. Results, dis-
played in panel (a) and (b) of Figure 11, suggest that the correlations closely match our
quasi-experimental estimates. For take-up, we find that a 1 percentage point increase in
the child care index translates into a .36 (.09) percentage point increase in the fraction of
children attending institutional care. This is remarkably close to the corresponding esti-
mate from our local expansion design: when pooling all nursery and pre-school expan-
sion episodes together, we indeed find that the take-up rate of an exogenous increase
in child care index 1-5 is .35. Similarly, both the cross-sectional and local expansion
designs are congruent in finding no significant correlation between child care coverage
and mothers' probability of employment.
After having established the internal validity of this cross-sectional design, we then
turn to the correlation between institutional care provision and child care arrange-
ments. Panel (c) of Figure 11 displays the average number of hours that mothers spend
weekly on child care. It shows first that the prevalence of maternal care is extremely
high, each mother spending on average 40 hours a week taking care of their children.
Second, we find no sign that the availability of institutional care decreases the perva-
siveness of maternal care: mothers spend roughly the same amount of time on child
care whether the child care index in their political district is below 30 or above 70. If
  31 Thesurveys are unfortunately not representative at the municipal level, but are representative of
the 95 Austrian political districts ("politischer Bezirk"). These districts correspond to the second most
granular level of administrative authority after municipalities.

                                                   26
higher child care provision does not affect maternal care, panel (d) shows that it does
crowd-out almost one for one alternative care by relatives: the fraction of children that
are under the care of relatives decreases by .35 (.11) percentage point for every percent-
age point increase in the child care index. This large substitution effect clearly sug-
gests that working mothers predominently use relatives as a child care alternative, and
switch to nurseries and pre-schools when institutional child care becomes available.
But what about women who do not work: are they facing constraints preventing them
from increasing their labor supply? In panel (e), we correlate child care provision with
the fraction of mothers reporting that their career is constrained due to a lack of appro-
priate child care. Interestingly, only a small fraction of surveyed women say that they
do feel constrained by the supply of institutional care. And what is more, the fraction is
not larger in political districts with very low levels of child care provision. We find no
significant correlation between child care availability and the experience of child care
constraints.
So if child care constraints do not refrain mothers from investing in their careers, what
does? Evidence in panel (f) strongly points to the crucial role of preferences and norms
regarding maternal care: the overwhelming majority (i.e. 70 to 80%) of women report
that they do not work because they do want to take care of their children. Furthermore,
we find only a marginally significant negative correlation between these reported pref-
erences and the level of child care provision, showing little signs that expanding access
to institutional child care is shifting these strong norms around the role of maternal
care.
Overall, these results suggest that the combination of cheap available care by relatives
and strong preferences for taking care of children has prevented even very large expan-
sions of child care provision from improving the labor market outcomes of Austrian
mothers.


Fertility Effects To fully understand the impact of child care on the careers of women,
we finally need to account for the possibility that the expansion of child care provision
affected fertility behaviors. If the increased availability of child care induced women to
have more children, this may have mechanically increased the child penalties on their
careers. On the other hand, the development of cheap institutional child care in the last
sixty years has been accompanied in Austria by a steady decline in fertility rates. Is
there any causality behind this correlation?
Unfortunately, the existing literature offers little guidance to answer this question. There
are remarkably few studies investigating the issue and therefore little consensus on the
responsiveness of fertility decisions to child care provision. Interestingly, our quasi-
experimental set up allows us to identify the effect of municipal child care expansions

                                            27
on local fertility. To this effect, we measure local fertility rates as the total number of
births divided by the total number of women aged 15 to 49 in a municipality. In Ap-
pendix Figure C.VI, we plot the evolution of fertility rates in treated vs control munic-
ipalities, around the time of large shocks in child care supply. Looking at the long run
effects, ten years after the expansion, we find a very small, and insignificant, negative
effect of child care on fertility, for both nursery and pre-school care expansions.



5     How Much of the Evolution of Gender Inequality Can
      Family Policies Explain ?

Equipped with causal estimates of the effects of all family policy reforms in Austria over
the last sixty years, we can now measure how the dramatic expansion of family policies
has shaped the evolution of gender inequality. To do this, we proceed in two steps.
First, we use the estimated child penalties to decompose gender inequality into child-
related and residual inequality. We can then, in a second step, leverage our estimates
of the effects of family policies on child penalties to simulate gender inequality under
alternative policy scenarii. This will uncover how family policies have affected the
long-run historical evolution of gender inequality.


5.1    Child-Related Gender Inequality Over the Last 60 Years

The consistency and quality of the Austrian administrative data allows us to recon-
struct the evolution of gender gaps in earnings since the beginning of the 1950s. We
combined for this purpose the digitized ASSD data, which starts in 1972, and detailed
tabulated statistics on the distribution of earnings by gender based on the same under-
lying ASSD data before it was computerized (Lohnstufenstatistik).32 This allows us to
measure, for all years s between 1953 and 2017, the total gender gap in raw earnings
s  1 - E[Yist w | s ] /E Y m | s . Two points should be stressed about our measure of gen-
                          ist
der gap. First, it does correct for top coding in the data, by interpolating the top tail of
the distribution using information from uncensored tax data.33 Second, we systemat-
ically account for the extensive margin of labor supply, by including individuals with
zero earnings.34 In that sense, our measure of the gender gap encompasses the broadest
possible set of behaviors underlying labor market outcomes.
  32 See Christl and Wagner (1981). We provide all the details of the data sources and construction of our

gender gap measures in Appendix D.1.
  33 In practice, we allow for different Pareto parameters by gender and by age group. Details of our

procedure are given in Appendix D.1.
  34 As explained in Appendix D.1, we made sure that the fractions of men and of women with zero

earnings in our data matched the Census data.

                                                   28
For each year, we can then ask how much of the cross-sectional gender gap s is ex-
plained by child penalties, that is, by the differential impact of children on the ca-
reers of mothers relative to fathers. To answer this question, we follow a decompo-
sition methodology similar to Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019). This strategy relies
on using child penalty estimates to get a measure of the counterfactual gender gap
~ s  1 - E [Y~ w |s]/E Y m |s . This counterfactual gender gap represents the level of
              ist       ist
gender inequality in earnings that would prevail if we removed the negative effect of
children on the careers of women. Child-related gender inequality is then simply esti-
mated as the difference between the observed and the counterfactual gender gap:

                                           1
                                           m | s  st
                            s - ~s                            ~ w |s,t]]
                                                 [  · Pst · E[Yist
                                        E Yist    t

In the language of Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions, our measure of child-related in-
equality corresponds to the "unexplained" effects of children and two sets of inputs are
necessary to compute it. First, we need a measure of the fraction of women st who are
at each event time t relative to the birth of their first child in year s. Second, we need
estimates of their child penalty Pst and of their corresponding average counterfactual
earnings E[Y~ w | s, t ].
             ist

We compute the measures st by complementing the ASSD data with information from
the birth register and from the Austrian Birth Barometer, to account for women whose
first birth is not observed in the ASSD or REV data. To get estimates of child penalties
and counterfactual earnings by year, we extend the baseline specification (1) to allow for
year-specific coefficients on event time. In practice, we estimate the following model:

                            (y Dist
                                g                             Age
                   w
                  Yist =        Event
                                      ) · I [y = s] +  g Dist       +  g DYear
                                                                          ist + ist ,                (7)
                           y


where we interact the event time dummies with year dummies in order to estimate
year-specific event coefficients w
                                 st . As in our baseline specification (1), we include a
full set of age and year dummies in the set of covariates Xk . We can then reconstruct
counteractual earnings for mothers in event time t in year s: they simply correspond to
the predicted earnings from the above specification, when omitting the contribution of
the w st coefficients.
                       35


Figure (12) panel (a) presents the results from our decomposition. The first striking
  35 Note  that estimating event coefficients by calendar year s and event year t amounts to estimating
event coefficients by birth cohort c = s - t. For births cohorts before the start of our data, we observe
only post-event years and are unable to directly estimate child penalties associated with these births.
We therefore rely on an extrapolation of the observed penalties in the data that we describe in detail in
Appendix D. Overall, results reported in Appendix Figure D.VII show that penalties up to 10 years after
birth have been remarkably stable over the past 50 years. Longer run penalties, from 10 to 30 years after
birth, to the contrary have declined significantly.


                                                   29
fact is that despite having experienced a significant decline over the last sixty years, of
about 30 percentage points, the gender gap in earnings remains very large in Austria:
the average woman still earns 40% less than the average man in 2017. Furthermore, the
graph shows that the level of the child-related gender gap is also very large: women
earn on average around 30 to 35% less than men because of children. This naturally
reflects the very large child penalties experienced by Austrian mothers, compared to
mothers of other developed countries. Interestingly, child-related gender inequality
has been quite stable over the past six decades. As a consequence, children went from
being responsible for just about half of gender inequality at the beginning of the 1950s,
to explaining almost the entirety of the remaining gender gap in Austria today. This
also implies that most of the decline in gender gaps in the labor market has been due
to factors that are not directly related to children, such as the closing of the educational
gender gap.
While the overall level of the gender gap is much higher in Austria than in Scandinavia,
we note that results from Figure (12) are strikingly similar to the decomposition evi-
dence of Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019) in the context of Denmark. They confirm
that child penalties are the main driving force behind gender inequality in developed
nations today. We can now turn to exploring how family policies, by affecting these
child penalties, have influenced the long run evolution of gender inequality.


5.2   Gender Gaps Under Counterfactual Family Policies

Our focus is on estimating how gender inequality has been affected by the dramatic
expansion of three family policies: parental leave duration (PL ), the coverage of free
nursery care (N ), and the coverage of free pre-school care (PS ). This means identi-
fying, for family policy k  {PL , N , PS }, the causal effect of each policy change dk
                                   s
on the level of the gender gap: d dk . Fortunately, we can express this effect as a simple
function of the causal effects of the policy change dk on the full dynamics of the child
penalty. Indeed, we have that:


                        w |s]/d
             ds     dE[Yist     k
                = -         m
             dk       E Yist |s
                             1                   dPt
                   = -       m |s
                          E Yist
                                  ·     st · dk (PL , N , PS )·E    ~ w | s, t
                                                                    Yist
                                        t


where we use the empirical fact that earnings of men are affected neither by the arrival
of kids, nor by family policies. Motivated by our empirical evidence, the above expres-
sion assumes that family policies have no effect on fertility, such that dst /dk = 0. But

                                            30
we explore below scenarii where we relax this assumption and allow family policies
to affect fertility as well. We also note that the effect of any policy change on the child
penalty is theoretically a function of all family policies. But in practice, we can leverage
our empirical evidence which found no interaction effects between parental leave and
child care provision. This means that we can consider the impact of a policy change on
the child penalty to be solely a function of that particular policy: dP  t
                                                                       dk ( k ). This, in turn,
allows us to easily explore counterfactual scenarii where we change all three policies
together.
The scenarii we study involve large, non-marginal, policy changes. Our unique ability
to measure their impact on the evolution of aggregate gender inequality relies on two
fundamental assets. First, it is made possible by the fact that we have estimated the
effect of each policy on the full dynamics of child penalties, that is, we have estimated
dPt
dk ( k ) for all event times t. Second, it relies on the fact that we can account for non-
linearity in the effects of these policies. For parental leave policies, we have identified
the effect of changing the length of PL benefits at various baseline durations, starting
from no parental leave at all. For child care provision, our estimates show that even
massive reforms, that increase the level of local coverage by more than 40 percentage
points, do not have any significant effects on penalties, even in the long run. We there-
fore believe that our counterfactual gender gaps are robust to adjustment frictions, and
other sources of non-linearities or of delayed timing in the effect of family policies.


Gender Inequality Without Parental Leave & Institutional Child Care Our baseline
counterfactual policy scenario consists in getting rid of all family policies. In other
words, we simulate the evolution of the gender gap since 1961, when eliminating the
effects of all parental leave reforms, and setting the level of nursery care and of pre-
school care provision to zero. Results, displayed in panel (b) of Figure (12) convey a
clear and striking message: In this hypothetical world, a world that would have ex-
perienced absolutely no development in family policies over the past sixty years, the
level of gender inequality would be just about the same, or if anything, slightly smaller
than what it is today. In 2010 for instance, the gender gap in earnings would have been
41.4% in the absence of any family policy, compared to the observed 43.7%. And the
gender gap caused by children would have been 30.1%, instead of 34.7%. This suggests
that the massive expansion of family policies has had surprisingly little effect on the
long run evolution of gender inequality. If anything, it made things marginally worse.
To offer further insights on this surprising outcome, in Appendix Figure D.VIII, we
compute counterfactual gender gaps where we remove each family policy indepen-
dently. Panel (a) shows what the gender gap would have been in the absence of any
parental leave reform. In this scenario, we only undo parental leave expansion, and


                                              31
assume that child care provision would have followed the same path as actually ob-
served. The graph highlights that parental leave expansions have had a negative, albeit
small, impact on gender inequality. In the absence of parental leave, we find that gen-
der inequality in earnings would have been about 3 percentage points smaller today.
This result stems from the significant negative impact of parental leave policies on labor
supply in the short run. But the absence of long run effects on the careers on women
that we documented in section 3 means that the overall negative impact of parental
leave policies on gender inequality remains somewhat modest. While parental leave
policies do have a small effect on the evolution of the gender gap, we find in panel (b)
and (c), to the contrary, that child care policies have none. When undoing these policies,
we find that the gender gap would have been absolutely unaffected by the absence of
nursery care or of pre-school care.
Of course, the latter results directly stem from our point estimates of the impact of
child care on child penalties being close to zero. But how sensitive are our counter-
factual gender gaps to the precision with which these null effects are estimated? Can
we actually reject that family policies have had large effects on gender inequality? To
provide some guidance for inference, we computed two bounding counterfactual gen-
der gaps. The first, "optimistic" one, uses, instead of our point estimates, the upper
bound of the 95% confidence interval on dP     t
                                             dk ( k ) for each policy change. The second,
or "pessimistic" scenario, uses the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval. The
results of these two bounding scenarii are presented in Table 1. The bottom-line is that
even in the optimistic scenario, family policies do no cause any substantial reduction
in the gender gap. And the difference between the optimistic and pessimistic scenario
is relatively minor (.428 vs .400). Our null effects are relatively precise: we can clearly
rule out large positive effects of family policies on gender inequality.


Robustness to Equilibrium Effects Our mapping between family policies and the
long run evolution of gender inequality rests on our estimates of the effects of these
policies on child penalties. It is therefore legitimate to wonder whether these estimates
fully account for the mechanisms through which these policies may affect the gender
gap.
One potential worry is equilibrium effects in the labor market: do these estimates prop-
erly account for all equilibrium effects that may arise from large family policy changes?
As far as childcare expansion is concerned, our quasi-experimental strategy is precisely
aimed at capturing equilibrium effects by focusing on differential treatment across lo-
cal labor markets. But we found absolutely no evidence of labor supply or earnings
responses to childcare provision, and therefore no evidence of equilibrium impacts on
local labor markets. For parental leave policies, our quasi-experimental strategy com-


                                            32
pares treated and non-treated mothers within the same labor market, and therefore
does not explicitely capture macro responses. Yet, we find very limited effects of these
policies on child penalties, thus greatly limiting the scope for significant equilibrium
effects.
Another concern may be the presence of long run effects of these policies operating
through slow and gradual changes in preferences and norms. Can our estimates cap-
ture them adequately? We note that our difference-in-difference strategy reveals ab-
solutely no long run effects of local child care expansion, up to ten years after they
occur. And our investigation in Figure (11) suggests that preferences for maternal care
remain extremely strong, and do not react much to the level of child care provision. It
is therefore unlikely that our counterfactual exercize misses significant effects of family
policies mediated by changes in preferences.


Anticipatory Effects & Fertility Responses Overall, it seems family policies have not
shaped the evolution of gender inequality over the last sixty years, because their im-
pact on child penalties has been surprisingly muted. As a consequence most of the
significant decline in the gender gap experienced since the 1960s has been due to fac-
tors unrelated to children, or to secular changes in choices made before the arrival of
kids, such as educational investment. This, in turn, opens two final questions.
First, have family policies possibly affected the choices made by women before the
arrival of children, thus contributing to the reduction in gender inequality? When
child care became more widely available for instance, did women respond by investing
significantly more in their career prior to having children? Could our decomposition
therefore miss a key mechanism through which family policies reduce the gender gap?
The answer is no. Our analysis of local child care expansion in Figures (9) and (10)
precisely shows that large increases in child care provision have no effect on the labor
market outcomes of women observed prior to having children. Even ten years after
local child care expansions, we found no significant differences in employment or in
earnings of women who were about to have kids in treated compared to control mu-
nicipalities.
If family policies do not generate significant anticipatory effects prior to motherhood,
they can still affect the probability of motherhood, as we discussed in sections 3.3 and
4.4. Which raises our second question: how robust are our counterfactual estimates to
accounting for fertility responses? What has been the causal effect of the expansion of
family policies on fertility? And what were the consequences on the gender gap? After
all, the development of family policies in the last sixty years has been accompanied in
Austria by a steady decline in fertility rates. Is there any causality behind this corre-
lation? In which case, family policies may have mechanically reduced the gender gap

                                            33
by decreasing the incidence of child penalties. On the other hand, supporters of fam-
ily policies often allege that they encourage fertility. This, in turn, would increase the
incidence of child penalties, and contribute to widen the gender gap.
There is unfortunately very limited evidence, and no clear consensus, on the impact of
family policies on fertility. But as far as child care provision is concerned, we can use
the results from our local child care expansions in Appendix Figure (C.VI). There, we
found small and insignificant fertility responses. For parental leave, evidence is even
more scant. Most studies in the literature have compared, like we did in Appendix Fig-
ure B.VIII, the completed fertility rates of women who are exposed, for their first child,
to short vs long parental leave durations. But this does not capture the relevant effect
on total fertility of expanding the duration of parental leave. The reason is that in such
a quasi-experimental set-up, women face the same parental leave regime for any fu-
ture child they have. Furthermore, one cannot identify from such variation the effect of
parental leave on the probability of having a first child. To get at the effect we are inter-
ested in, one would need to compare the total fertility of women who are experiencing
two different parental regimes permanently. The issue is that parental leave policies usu-
ally apply to all women in a given country. So this suggests relying on cross-country
variation, as in Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017). Correlating parental leave generosity
with fertility rates for 22 countries over the period 1970­2010, and controlling for coun-
try and year fixed effects, they find a significant, but small, positive correlation.
Using these estimates from Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017) for parental leave, and our
estimates of fertility responses to child care provision, we can now simulate counterfac-
tual gender gaps accounting for fertility responses.36 And results reported in Appendix
Figure D.X show that fertility responses to family policies are simply too small to make
a substantial difference to gender inequality. We estimate, accounting for fertility re-
sponses, that the gender gap would be 0.423 today in the absence of any family policy.
This is almost undistinguishable from our baseline estimate of 0.414 without fertility
responses.37
  36 We   take estimates from Table 3 column (8) of Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017). Appendix D.3provides
all details on our methodology.
   37 In Appendix Table D.III, we also explore the sensitivity of results to the precision of our estimates of

fertility response. We use a methodology similar to Table 1, and compute the gender gap in two scenarii:
one using only the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of our estimates of fertility responses,
and the other using only the lower bound of the confidence interval. We find that the range of possible
gender gap estimates between these two bounds is very narrow, going from 0.437 to 0.408. We can
therefore credibly rule out the presence of significant effects of family policies on gender inequality.




                                                     34
6    Conclusion

In this paper, we have measured the contribution of family policies to the long-run
evolution of gender inequality, leveraging historical administrative data and quasi-
experimental estimates over more than sixty years. Our approach builds on causally
identified estimates of the impact of policy reforms, making it more credible than cross-
country approaches to assess the importance of family policies for gender inequality
(Ruhm 1998; Blau and Kahn 2013; Olivetti and Petrongolo 2017). By accounting for the
effects of all family policy variation, our approach is robust to policy interactions and
other non-linearities that normally provides threats to out-of-sample extrapolations of
marginal treatment effects. This general approach could be fruifully extended to other
contexts such as, for example, measuring the contribution of tax and transfer policies
to income and wealth inequality.
Our results point to a limited role for public policy in explaining the secular decline
in gender inequality. Our setting focuses on one particular country, Austria, but their
historical expansion of family subsidies is similar to the policy path of other European
countries, and while the U.S. has not gone as far as Europe, proposals to expand family
policies are the subject of ongoing debate. We find that parental leave policies have had
negative short-term effects on female labor market outcomes, but no long-term effects.
The short-term effects are relatively small and largely inconsequential for the evolution
of aggregate gender inequality. More surprisingly, we also find that publicly provided
and heavily subsidized child care has had no effect on the secular decline in gender
inequality. This stands in contrast to the strong cross-country correlation between child
care subsidization and gender gaps, while within-country quasi-experimental studies
of specific reforms have led to mixed results.
Broadly speaking, our evidence is consistent with the ideas exposed in Goldin (2014),
arguing that gender convergence relies less on government intervention than on equi-
librium features of the labor market. Our work is also consistent with the notion that
gender convergence reflects the evolution of gendered preferences and norms (Bertrand
2011; Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller 2019; Boelmann, Raute and
Schönberg 2020). This underlines the need for furthering our understanding of the for-
mation of preferences and social norms regarding the family-career choices of men and
women, and to account for their potential interaction with public policies. Endogenous
preferences may create multiple equilibria and tipping points, whereby small changes
in policies can have large effects on gender inequality. Conversely, as seems to be the
case in Austria, gendered preferences can be sufficiently strong that gender gaps do not
respond to even very large expansions of policies.




                                           35
References
B AIERL , A. AND M. K AINDL (2011): "Kinderbetreuung in Österreich," Working Pa-
  per 77, Austrian Institute for Family Studies, Vienna.

B AILEY, M. J., T. S. B YKER , E. PATEL AND S. R AMNATH (2019): "The Long-Term Ef-
  fects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act on Women's Careers: Evidence from
  U.S. Tax Data," Working Paper 26416, National Bureau of Economic Research, Series:
  Working Paper Series.

B AKER , M., J. G RUBER AND K. M ILLIGAN (2008): "Universal Child Care, Maternal
  Labor Supply, and Family Well-Being," Journal of Political Economy, 116(4), 709­745.

B ARUA , R. (2014): "Intertemporal Substitution in Maternal Labor Supply: Evidence
  Using State School Entrance Age Laws," Labour Economics, 31, 129­140.

B AUM , C. L. AND C. J. R UHM (2016): "The Effects of Paid Family Leave in California on
  Labor Market Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 35(2), 333­356.

B ERLINSKI , S. AND S. G ALIANI (2007): "The Effect of a Large Expansion of Pre-Primary
   School Facilities on Preschool Attendance and Maternal Employment," Labour Eco-
   nomics, 14(3), 665­680.

B ERTRAND , M. (2011): "New Perspectives on Gender," in Handbook of Labor Economics,
   vol.4b, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, chap. 17, pp. 1543­1590. North Holland:
   Elsevier Science Publishers.

B ERTRAND , M., C. G OLDIN AND L. F. K ATZ (2010): "Dynamics of the Gender Gap
   for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 228­255.

B LAU , F. AND L. K AHN (2013): "Female Labor Supply: Why Is the United States Falling
   Behind?," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 251­256.

B OELMANN , B., A. R AUTE AND U. S CHÖNBERG (2020): "Wind of Change? Cultural
  Determinants of Maternal Labor Supply," Working Papers 914, Queen Mary Univer-
  sity of London, School of Economics and Finance.

C ASCIO , E. U. (2009): "Maternal Labour Supply and the Introduction of Kindergartens
  into American Public Schools," The Journal of Human Resources, 44(1), 140­170.

C HRISTL , J. AND M. WAGNER (1981): "Geschlechtsspezifische Einkommensunter-
  schiede: Österreich 1953-1979," Forschungsbericht, Institut für höhere Studien (IHS),
  Vienna.


                                          36
C ORTÉS , P. AND J. PAN (2020): "Children and the Remaining Gender Gaps in the Labor
  Market," Working Paper 27980, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D AHL , G. B., K. V. L ØKEN , M. M OGSTAD AND K. V. S ALVANES (2016): "What Is the
  Case for Paid Maternity Leave?," Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(4), 655­670.

D UFLO , E. (2001): "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction
  in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment," American Economic Re-
  view, 91(4), 795­813.

E CKHOFF A NDRESEN , M. AND T. H AVNES (2018): "Child Care, Parental Labor Supply
  and Tax Revenue," Discussion paper, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

E JRNÆS , M. AND A. K UNZE (2013): "Work and Wage Dynamics around Childbirth,"
   The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(3), 856­877.

F ITZPATRICK , M. D. (2010): "Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects
   of Universal Prekindergarten," Journal of Labor Economics, 28(1), 51­85.

       (2012): "Revising Our Thinking About the Relationship Between Maternal La-
  bor Supply and Preschool," Journal of Human Resources, 47(3), 583­612, Publisher:
  University of Wisconsin Press.

G OLDIN , C. (2014): "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 104, 1091­1119.

G OLDIN , C. AND L. F. K ATZ (2016): "A Most Egalitarian Profession: Pharmacy and the
  Evolution of a Family-Friendly Occupation," Journal of Labor Economics, 34, 705­746.

G OUX , D. AND E. M AURIN (2010): "Public School Availability for Two-Year Olds and
  Mothers' Labour Supply," Labour Economics, 17(6), 951­962.

H AVNES , T. AND M. M OGSTAD (2011): "Money for Nothing? Universal Child Care and
  Maternal Employment," Journal of Public Economics, 95(11-12), 1455­1465.

K LEVEN , H. (2014): "How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much?," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 28, 77­98.

K LEVEN , H. AND C. L ANDAIS (2017): "Gender Inequality and Economic Development:
  Fertility, Education, and Norms," Economica, 84, 180­209.

K LEVEN , H., C. L ANDAIS , J. P OSCH , A. S TEINHAUER AND J. Z WEIMULLER (2019):
  "Child Penalties Across Countries: Evidence and Explanations," AEA Papers and Pro-
  ceedings, 109, 122­126.



                                         37
K LEVEN , H., C. L ANDAIS AND J. E. S ØGAARD (2019): "Children and Gender Inequal-
  ity: Evidence from Denmark," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(4),
  181­209.

       (2020): "Does Biology Drive Child Penalties? Evidence from Biological and
  Adoptive Families," American Economic Review: Insights, p. forthcoming.

K UZIEMKO , I., J. PAN , J. S HEN AND E. WASHINGTON (2018): "The Mommy Effect: Do
  Women Anticipate the Employment Effects of Motherhood?," NBER Working Paper
  No. 24740.

L ALIVE , R., C. L ANDAIS AND J. Z WEIMÜLLER (2015): "Market Externalities of Large
  Unemployment Insurance Extension Programs," American Economic Review, 105(12),
  3564­3596.

L ALIVE , R., A. S CHLOSSER , A. S TEINHAUER AND J. Z WEIMÜLLER (2013): "Parental
  Leave and Mothers' Careers: The Relative Importance of Job Protection and Cash
  Benefits," Review of Economic Studies, 81(1), 219­265.

L ALIVE , R. AND J. Z WEIMÜLLER (2009): "How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and
  Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 124(3), 1363­1402.

N OLLENBERGER , N. AND N. R ODRÍGUEZ -P LANAS (2015): "Full-Time Universal Child-
  care in a Context of Low Maternal Employment: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from
  Spain," Labour Economics, 36, 124­136.

O LIVETTI , C. AND B. P ETRONGOLO (2016): "The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Indus-
  trialized Countries," Annual Review of Economics, 8, 405­434.

        (2017): "The Economic Consequences of Family Policies: Lessons from a Cen-
  tury of Legislation in High-Income Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31,
  205­230.

R OSSIN -S LATER , M. (2017): "Maternity and Family Leave Policy," Discussion paper,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

R OSSIN -S LATER , M., C. J. R UHM AND J. WALDFOGEL (2013): "The Effects of Califor-
  nia's Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers? Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor
  Market Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(2), 224­245.

R UHM , C. J. (1998): "The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates:
  Lessons from Europe," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 285­317.



                                         38
S CHÖNBERG , U. AND J. L UDSTECK (2014): "Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage
   and Mothers' Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth," Journal of Labor Economics,
   32(3), 469­505.

Z WEIMÜLLER , J., R. W INTER -E BMER , R. L ALIVE , A. K UHN , J.-P. W UELLRICH , O. R UF
  AND S. B ÜCHI (2009): "Austrian Social Security Database," Working Paper 410, Insti-

  tute for Empirical Research in Economics (IEW), Zurich.




                                           39
Figures

                                                                                                Figure 1: Child Penalties
                                                    (a) Child Penalty in Earnings                                         (b) Child Penalty in Extensive Margin Labor Supply
                      .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2
  Annual Earnings rel. to Event Time -1




                                                                                                                              Participation rel. to Event Time -1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                               0
                           -.2




                                                                                                                                                       -.2
                  -.4




                                                                                                                                               -.4
           -.6




                                                                                                                                      -.6
    -.8




                                                                                                                              -.8
                      -1




                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                          -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6     7     8   9   10                                              -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6     7   8   9   10
                                                                       Event Time (Years)                                                                                                         Event Time (Years)

                                                                       Mothers              Fathers                                                                                               Mothers              Fathers




(c) Child Penalty in Intensive Margin Labor Supply                                                                                                                       (d) Child Penalty in Daily Wage Rate
                      .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2
  Days Employed rel. to Event Time -1




                                                                                                                              Daily Wage rel. to Event Time -1
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                            0
                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                    -.2
                 -.4




                                                                                                                                            -.4
         -.6




                                                                                                                                     -.6
   -.8




                                                                                                                              -.8
                      -1




                                                                                                                                                 -1




                                          -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6     7     8   9   10                                              -5    -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6     7   8   9   10
                                                                       Event Time (Years)                                                                                                         Event Time (Years)

                                                                       Mothers              Fathers                                                                                               Mothers              Fathers




Notes: The figure shows event time coefficients estimated from equation 2 and normalized as explained
                              g  g    ~ g | t ) for mothers and fathers and for different outcomes. The
in Section 2.3 (i.e. we plot P  ^ /E Y                                           t      t             ist
sample includes all first births between 1985-2012. Fathers are matched to mothers based on applications
for child benefits. In panel (a), the dependent variable is annual earnings (including individuals with
zero earnings) converted to real 2000 Euro using the CPI and adjusted for topcoding (see Appendix
D.1 for details). In panel (b) the dependent variable is an indicator for whether an individual had any
employment spells in a given year. In panel (c), we focus on total days of employment conditional
on having at least one employment spell that year. In panel (d), daily wage rate is defined as annual
earnings divided by days of employment in that year, and is conditional conditional on having at least
one employment spell that year.




                                                                                                                         40
          Figure 2: The 2008 Parental Leave Regime: Child Penalty by PL Option



                                          .2
         Earnings rel. to Event Time -1
                                          0
                                          -.2
                                          -.4
                                          -.6
                                          -.8
                                          -1




                                                -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0    1    2     3    4    5     6   7    8   9   10
                                                                          Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                         Mothers 15+3                Fathers 15+3
                                                                         Mothers 20+4                Fathers 20+4
                                                                         Mothers 30+6                Fathers 30+6

                                                                 g      g    ~ g | t ) from child penalty
Notes: This figure shows normalized event time coefficients ( Pt      ^ t /E Y ist
regressions in annual earnings. The sample is mothers and fathers who had their first child in 2008.
We separately estimate child penalty regressions for mothers and fathers according to the parental leave
option they selected into. The "30+6" option corresponds to the long leave, with up to 30 months for the
mother, and 6 months for the father, at low replacement rate. The "20+4" corresponds to the intermediate
option of 20 months of PL for the mother and 4 months for the father. The "15+3" option, corresponds to
the short parental leave at higher replacement rate. Note that we assign parents to the different options
based on the observed length of their effective leave. Shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals on the
normalized event time coefficients.




                                                                                    41
Figure 3: Parental Leave Reforms: Dynamic RD Estimates & Causal Effects on Child
Penalties
                   (a) 1990 Reform: Dynamic RD Estimates                                                                          (b) 1990 Reform: Effects on Child Penalties
         .4




                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                                                                Average yearly effect 0-5:                                                                                            Adding Parental Leave Effect
         .3




                                                                -0.0404 (0.0062)




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                       Earnings rel. to Event Time -1
         .2




                                                                                                                              -.2
              .1
    RD Estimate




                                                                                                                      -.4
  -.1   0




                                                                                                            -.6
         -.2




                                                                                                                        -.8
         -.3
         -.4




                                                                                                                        -1
                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6   7   8    9   10
                                                Event Time (Years)                                                                                                     Event Time (Years)



                   (c) 1996 Reform: Dynamic RD Estimates                                                                         (d) 1996 Reform: Effects on Child Penalties
         .4




                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                                                                Average yearly effect 0-5:                                                                                            Adding Parental Leave Effect
         .3




                                                                0.0189 (0.0061)
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                       Earnings rel. to Event Time -1
         .2




                                                                                                                              -.2
              .1
    RD Estimate




                                                                                                                      -.4
  -.1   0




                                                                                                            -.6
         -.2




                                                                                                                        -.8
         -.3
         -.4




                                                                                                                        -1




                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6   7   8    9   10
                                                Event Time (Years)                                                                                                     Event Time (Years)



                   (e) 2000 Reform: Dynamic RD Estimates                                                                             (f) 2000 Reform: Effects on Child Penalties
         .4




                                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                                                                Average yearly effect 0-5:                                                                                            Adding Parental Leave Effect
         .3




                                                                -0.0260 (0.0064)
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                       Earnings rel. to Event Time -1
         .2




                                                                                                                              -.2
              .1
    RD Estimate




                                                                                                                      -.4
  -.1   0




                                                                                                            -.6
         -.2




                                                                                                                        -.8
         -.3
         -.4




                                                                                                                        -1




                   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5   6   7   8    9   10
                                                Event Time (Years)                                                                                                     Event Time (Years)



Notes: The figure reports the estimated effects of the 1990, 1996 and 2000 reforms on child penalties in
earnings for women. The left panels plots for each event time the statistic  ^t /E Y
                                                                                   ~ w | t estimated from
                                                                                     it
specification 3 , which captures the percentage-point change in the child penalty at event time t caused
by the reform. The right panels plot the observed child penalties for women whose first child is born
before the reform (baseline), and the counterfactual child penalties that these mothers would have had
under the new PL regime, which corresponds to adding the estimates from the corresponding left panel
to the baseline penalty. Shaded areas correspond to 95% confidence intervals.



                                                                                                  42
                                                 Figure 4: Dynamic Effects of the 1961 Parental Leave Reform
                                                     (a) Employment                                                                                              (b) Earnings
                 .4




                                                                                                                              .4
                 .3




                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                     Average yearly effect 0-5:                                                                                 Average yearly effect 0-5:
                            .2




                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                     -0.0411 (0.0061)                                                                                           -0.0515 (0.0088)
     Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                  Impact on Child Penalty
                      .1




                                                                                                                                   .1
               0




                                                                                                                            0
   -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                -.2 -.1
                 -.3




                                                                                                                              -.3
                 -.4




                                                                                                                              -.4
                                 -3   -2    -1   0    1   2     3    4    5    6     7     8      9   10                                      -3   -2   -1   0   1   2     3    4    5    6     7     8      9   10
                                                          Event Time (Years)                                                                                         Event Time (Years)



Notes: The figures shows the estimated effects of the introduction of the 1961 reform of parental leave
on the dynamics of female earnings (left panel) and female employment (right panel), based on the
REV sample of mothers who give birth to their first child in 1959 or 1961 and are eligible for parental
leave (52 weeks of employment in the two years before birth). In each panel , we report the estimates
         T
        ^t
   ~ g | t, T =1 ]                         from (4), which correspond to the percentage-point change in the child penalty at event time
E [Y ist
t for women who become eligible to 12 months of maternal leave. Shaded areas correspond to 95%
confidence intervals.




                                                                                                           43
        Figure 5: Parental Leave Expansions: Causal Effects by Baseline Duration



                                                             .01
            Effect on Average Yearly Child Penalty: Year 0-5
         -.05     -.04    -.03    -.02     -.01      0




                                                                   2 to 12 Months   12 to 18 Months   18 to 24 Months   24 to 30 Months

Notes: This figure reports the estimated marginal effects of parental leave extensions at different levels
of baseline PL duration, on the average yearly child penalty in the first five years following a first child
birth. The three estimates on the right of the graph correspond to the effects of 6 months increments in
parental leave duration, keeping job protection fixed at 24 months, obtained from our estimated effects of
the 1990, 1996 and 2000 reforms in Figure 3, and assuming additivity in the effects of marginal extensions.
The estimate on the left corresponds to the estimated effect of the 1961 introduction of parental leave,
which captures the effect of a 10 month extension (from 2 to 12 months) of paid parental leave, covered
with job protection.




                                                                                               44
                                            Figure 6: Child Penalty by Level of Child Care Provision
                                                               Index 1-5 in 1990

                         .2            0
          Earnings rel. to Event Time -1




                                                                                          Average yearly effect 0-5
                               -.2




                                                                                          ITT=0.0511 (0.0007)
                                                                                          TOT=0.1583 (0.0023)
         -.8    -.6     -.4
                         -1




                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8     9   10
                                                                    Time from Birth of First Child

                                                           Below Median Index                 Above Median Index


Notes: This figure compares child penalties for women who give birth in municipalities with high vs
low child care coverage. We focus on mothers whose first child was born between July 1990 and June
1996. We rank municipalities according to the value of their aggregate child care index (Index 1-5) in
1990 and split the sample between municipalities below vs above the median. We then compute for
each subsample the child penalty in earnings following equation 2, as done in Figure 1. To control for
differences in pre-birth characteristics of mothers across the two subsamples, we use inverse-probability-
weighting based on pre-birth earnings, pre-birth employment, and age. The ITT estimate corresponds to
the average difference in penalties in the two groups over the first five year after birth. The TOT estimate
corresponds to the ITT estimate scaled by the difference in our index 1-5 of child care coverage across the
two groups.




                                                                              45
                         Figure 7: Spatial Variation in Child Care Expansion
                               (a) Change in Index 1-5 between 1990 and 2000




              (35,100]
              (20,35]
              (10,20]
              (0,10]
              [-60,0]




                              (b) Change in Index 1-5 between 2000 and 2010




              (35,100]
              (20,35]
              (10,20]
              (0,10]
              [-60,0]




Notes: The figure showcases the significant amount of spatial variation in the expansion of local child
care provision in Austria. Each panel corresponds to a heatmap that reports for each municipality the
change in the value of the child care index 1-5 from 1990 to 2000 (panel (a)) and from 2000 to 2010 (panel
(b). A darker color indicates a larger increase in local child care provision. See section 4.1 for further
details on the construction of the child care provision index. GIS files of municipality borders provided
by Statistik Austria.




                                                    46
Figure 8: Local Child Care Shocks: Evolution of Child Care Provision and Take-Up for
Treated and Control Municipalities
                                                                   Nursery Care Expansions

                     (a) Child Care Provision (Index 1-2)                                                                 (b) Take-Up of Nursery Care




                                                                                                          50
          50




                                                                                                          40
          40




                                                                                                          30
          30




                                                                                                Take-up
  Index




                                                                                                          20
          20




                                                                                                          10
          10
          0




                                                                                                          0
                -5    -4   -3    -2       -1     0     1      2        3   4     5     6                        -5   -4     -3    -2       -1     0     1      2        3   4     5     6
                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                   Years from Childcare Expansion

                            Change >20 in 1 yr               Change <20 in all years                                         Change >20 in 1 yr               Change <20 in all years




                                                                  Pre-School Care Expansions

                     (c) Child Care Provision (Index 3-5)                                                             (d) Take-Up of Pre-School Care
          100




                                                                                                          100
          90




                                                                                                          90
          80




                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                Take-up
  Index
          70




                                                                                                          70
          60




                                                                                                          60
          50




                                                                                                          50




                -5    -4   -3    -2       -1     0     1      2        3   4     5     6                        -5   -4     -3    -2       -1     0     1      2        3   4     5     6
                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                   Years from Childcare Expansion

                            Change >20 in 1 yr               Change <20 in all years                                         Change >20 in 1 yr               Change <20 in all years




Notes: The figure shows the evolution of child care provision (left panels) and of the take up of insti-
tutional care (right panels) for treated and control municipalities around the time of a local shock to
child care provision. A nursery care (resp. pre-school care) expansion event is defined as an increase
of more than 20 points in the municipal nursery care (resp. pre-school care) index in one single year.
Municipalities with an expansion event constitute the treated group, while municipalities that never ex-
perience an event constitute the control group. We randomly assign an expansion event year to control
municipalities uch that the distribution over calendar years is balanced between the two groups.




                                                                                           47
                                                                       Figure 9: Estimated Effects of Nursery Care Expansions
                                                                                              Difference-in-Difference Evidence
                                                      (a) Earnings 1 Year Before Birth                                                                                                 (b) Earnings 1-2 Years After Birth
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                             .4
                       .3




                                                                                                                                                             .3
                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                  .2
   Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                             Impact on Child Penalty
                   .1




                                                                                                                                                             .1
             0




                                                                                                                                            -.2 -.1    0
  -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                  TOT:
                                                                                                                                                                                  Impact of moving childcare




                                                                                                                                                             -.3
                       -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                  coverage from 0 to 100%
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.031 (0.040)




                                                                                                                                                             -.4
                       -.4




                                            -5        -4         -3        -2      -1     0      1      2        3        4       5                                               -5        -4         -3        -2     -1      0      1      2        3       4       5
                                                                           Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                                                        Years from Childcare Expansion

                                                                Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in All Years                                                                          Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in all Years




                                                                                                                 Long Run Effects

 (c) Effect on Child Penalty 10 Years After Reform                                                                                                                                (d) Child Penalty 10 Years After Reform
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                               .2
                                       .3
     Diff-in-Diff Estimate on Earnings




                                                                                                                                              Diff-in-Diff Estimate on Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                      -.2
                            .1




                                                                                                                                                               -.4
  -.3 -.2 -.1          0




                                                                                                                                             -.8      -.6
                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                               -1




                                            -5   -4        -3    -2   -1     0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7    8       9   10                                              -5   -4        -3    -2   -1     0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8       9   10
                                                                            Time from Birth of First Child                                                                                                        Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                  Difference in Child Penalty 10 Years after Reform                                                                                   Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in All Years




Notes: The figure shows the difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of nursery care expansions
on the full dynamics of female earnings. In panel (a) (resp. panel (b)), we plot the evolution of earnings
at event time t=-1 (resp. t  [1, 2]), that is for women who are one year before (resp. between one and
two years after) giving birth to their first child, in treated vs control municipalities, around the event of a
nursery care expansion. In panel (b) we also report the TOT effect, which corresponds to the diff-in-diff
estimate ^T st for earnings scaled by the first-stage, i.e. the equivalent diff-in-diff estimate for the change
in the nursery care index. In panel (c), we plot the diff-in-diff estimate ^T st for earnings at all event times
t w.r.t. birth of the first child, evaluated at s = 10, that is 10 years after the local nursery care expansion.
Panel (c) is therefore the mirror image, for nursery care reforms, of panels (a), (c) and (e) of Figure 3 in the
case of parental leave reforms. Based on the estimates of panel (c), we draw in panel (d) counterfactual
child penalties under the pre and post nursery care expansion regimes. Standard errors are clustered at
the municipal level, and shaded areas correspond to 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                       48
                                                                  Figure 10: Estimated Effects of Pre-School Care Expansions
                                                                                            Difference-in-Difference Evidence
                                                       (a) Earnings 1 Year Before Birth                                                                                                (b) Earnings 3-5 Years After Birth
                      .4




                                                                                                                                                        .4
                      .3




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                        .2




                                                                                                                                                             .2
   Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                        Impact on Child Penalty
                   .1




                                                                                                                                                        .1
             0




                                                                                                                                       -.2 -.1    0
  -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                             TOT:
                                                                                                                                                                             Impact of moving childcare




                                                                                                                                                        -.3
                      -.3




                                                                                                                                                                             coverage from 0 to 100%
                                                                                                                                                                             -0.010 (0.040)




                                                                                                                                                        -.4
                      -.4




                                            -5        -4         -3        -2      -1     0      1      2         3       4        5                                         -5        -4         -3        -2     -1      0      1      2        3       4       5
                                                                           Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                                                   Years from Childcare Expansion

                                                                Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in All Years                                                                     Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in all Years




                                                                                                                 Long Run Effects

         (c) Effect on Child Penalty 10 Years After Reform                                                                                                                    (d) Child Penalty 10 Years After Reform
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                       .3
     Diff-in-Diff Estimate on Earnings




                                                                                                                                         Diff-in-Diff Estimate on Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                 -.2
                            .1




                                                                                                                                                          -.4
  -.3 -.2 -.1          0




                                                                                                                                        -.8      -.6
                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                          -1




                                            -5   -4        -3    -2   -1     0    1   2     3     4    5     6    7   8       9   10                                         -5   -4        -3    -2   -1     0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8       9   10
                                                                            Time from Birth of First Child                                                                                                   Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                  Difference in Child Penalty 10 Years after Reform                                                                              Change >20 in 1 Year                 Change <20 in All Years



Notes: The figure replicates the analysis of Figure 9 for pre-school care expansions events. It shows the
difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of pre-school care expansions on the full dynamics of
female earnings. In panel (a) (resp. panel (b)), we plot the evolution of earnings at event time t=-1 (resp.
t  [1, 2]), that is for women who are one year before (resp. between one and two years after) giving birth
to their first child, in treated vs control municipalities, around the event of a pre-school care expansion.
In panel (b) we also report the TOT effect, which corresponds to the diff-in-diff estimate ^T st for earnings
scaled by the first-stage, i.e. the equivalent diff-in-diff estimate for the change in the pre-school care
index. In panel (c), we plot the diff-in-diff estimate ^T st for earnings at all event times t w.r.t. birth of
the first child, evaluated at s = 10, that is 10 years after the local pre-school care expansion. Panel (c) is
therefore the mirror image, for pre-school care reforms, of panels (a), (c) and (e) of Figure 3 in the case
of parental leave reforms. Based on the estimates of panel (c), we draw in panel (d) counterfactual child
penalties under the pre and post pre-school care expansion regimes. Standard errors are clustered at the
municipal level, and shaded areas correspond to 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                  49
Figure 11: Reported Child Care Arrangements and Preferences: Residual Correlations
With Child Care Provision
                                                                             (a) Take-Up                                                                                                   (b) Employment
                                                       Estimated coefficient: .36 (.09)                                                                                  Estimated coefficient: -.04 (.14)
                                    70




                                                                                                                                          70
   % children in institutional care




                                                                                                                % mothers working
                      50




                                                                                                                          50
     30




                                                                                                                                          30
                          10




                                                                                                                                          10
                                                  30               40             50             60   70   80                                                       30               40             50             60   70   80
                                                                                   Childcare Index                                                                                                   Childcare Index



                                                                        (c) Maternal Care                                                                                                 (d) Alternative Care
                          60




                                                       Estimated coefficient: -.01 (.1)                                                                                  Estimated coefficient: -.35 (.11)
                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                Childcare by relative at least 1x week
   Hours worked on childcare - mother
                           40




                                                                                                                                      50
          20




                                                                                                                      30                  10
                          0




                                                  30               40             50             60   70   80                                                       30               40             50             60   70   80
                                                                                   Childcare Index                                                                                                   Childcare Index



                                                                 (e) Child Care Constraints                                                                                   (f) Preference for Maternal Care
                          100




                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                       Estimated coefficient: .13 (.17)                                                                                  Estimated coefficient: -.38 (.18)
                                                                                                                Don't work because want to take time for kids
   Don't work for lack of appropriate childcare
                                       80




                                                                                                                                                   80
                             60




                                                                                                                                         60
                   40




                                                                                                                               40
       20




                                                                                                                      20
                          0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                                  30               40             50             60   70   80                                                       30               40             50             60   70   80
                                                                                   Childcare Index                                                                                                   Childcare Index



Notes: The figure reports correlations between measures of institutional child care provision at the political district level and house-
hold level information on time use, preferences and child care arrangements from two large external surveys from the Austrian
Microcensus in 1995 and 2002. We pool observations from both waves of the survey. Each panel corresponds to a different out-
come. We control for differences in the education and age structure across political districts by regressing the average outcome in
a political district on the fraction of the population in three education bins and five age bins. Each panel plots a binscatter of the
residuals, rescaled at the average level of education and age in Austria, against the value of the child care index (index 1-5). We
also report on each panel the residual correlation estimate and its standard error. Panel (a) focuses on the fraction of children aged
2 to 5 in institutional child care. Panel (b) looks at the fraction of women who report working in the survey. Panel (c) focuses on
the average number of hours that mothers report spending weekly on child care, while panel (d) looks at the fraction of children
that are under the care of relatives. Panel (e) uses as an outcome  50the fraction of mothers reporting that their career is constrained
due to a lack of appropriate child care, while the outcome in panel (f) is the fraction of women who eport that they do not work
because they do want to take care of their children.
Figure 12: Gender Gap Decomposition & Counterfactual Inequality Absent Family
Policies
           (a) Decomposition of Gender Gap Between Child-Related and Residual Inequality


                                                               .8
              Decomposition of Gender Inequality in Earnings (%)
                                           .5      .6    .7




                                                                                Residual Gender Inequality
                  .1     .2    .3   .4




                                                                              Child-Related Gender Inequality
              0




                                                                    1950     1960      1970       1980          1990   2000      2010      2020
                                                                                                         year


                                                                           (b) Gender Gap Estimates Absent Any Family Policy
                                                               .8
              Decomposition of Gender Inequality in Earnings (%)




                                                                                                          Child-Related GG w/o Family Policy
                                                                                                          Gender Gap w/o Family Policy
                                           .5      .6    .7




                                                                                Residual Gender Inequality
                  .1     .2    .3   .4




                                                                              Child-Related Gender Inequality
              0




                                                                    1950     1960      1970       1980          1990   2000      2010      2020
                                                                                                         year


Notes: This figure decomposes the gender gap in Austria for the period 1953 to 2017, and provides coun-
terfactual gender inequality estimates absent family policies. Panel (a) plots the results of the decompo-
sition of the earnings gap (corresponding to the sum of the blue and grey shaded areas) into child-related
(blue) and residual factors (grey), following the methodology of Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019). In
Panel (b), we superimpose the result of a counterfactual decomposition where we undo the effects of
all family policy reforms since 1953, that is, we set parental leave duration and our child care indices to
zero in all years. This decomposition is based on the reduced form estimates of the dynamic effects of all
family policy reforms, from sections 3 and 4. See text for details.


                                                                                                     51
Table 1: Gender Gap Decomposition Under Observed & Counterfactual Family Policy
Regimes


  Year                                1953     1964     1970     1980      1990       2000      2010
                             A. Gender Inequality Decomposition
  Share Childless                     0.217 0.180 0.163 0.151              0.151     0.157      0.167
  Share Mothers t<0                   0.144 0.151 0.153 0.186              0.186     0.177      0.208
  Share Mothers t=0-10                0.172 0.173 0.184 0.197              0.217     0.208      0.188
  Share Mothers t=11-20               0.166 0.160 0.160 0.163              0.169     0.187      0.187
  Share Mothers t=21-30               0.166 0.168 0.166 0.153              0.151     0.156      0.160
  Share Mothers t>30                  0.134 0.168 0.173 0.151              0.125     0.113      0.083
  Earnings Women                       307      790     1,308    3,877     6,540      9,705    13,095
  Earnings Men                        1,011    2,277    3,634    9,128    13,526     18,833    23,258
  Employment Rate Women               0.495    0.515    0.486    0.522     0.538     0.599      0.646
  Employment Rate Men                 0.904    0.887    0.858    0.826     0.775     0.759      0.744
                     Decomposition Btw Child-Related & Residual Inequality
  Earnings Gap             0.696 0.653 0.640 0.575                         0.517     0.485      0.437
  Child-Related Gender Gap 0.370 0.356 0.338 0.322                         0.367     0.366      0.347

                           B. Counterfactual Family Policy Scenario
                         No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Baseline)
  Earnings Gap             0.696 0.646 0.628 0.562                         0.499     0.463      0.414
  Child-Related Gender Gap 0.370 0.342 0.314 0.296                         0.331     0.323      0.301
                        No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Optimistic)
  Earnings Gap             0.696 0.648 0.632 0.565                         0.503     0.474      0.428
  Child-Related Gender Gap 0.370 0.347 0.322 0.302                         0.340     0.345      0.329
                        No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Pessimistic)
  Earnings Gap             0.696 0.644 0.624 0.559                         0.495     0.452      0.400
  Child-Related Gender Gap 0.370 0.337 0.306 0.289                         0.323     0.301      0.272

Notes: Panel A reports inputs and results of our decomposition exercise of gender gaps for selected
years. In particular, we start by reporting the fraction of women st who are at each event time t relative
to the birth of their first child in year s. We also report average nominal earnings of women and men
in each year in Euro (we use the ECB reference rate to convert Austrian Shillings to Euro for years be-
fore the introduction of the Euro) estimated from the ASSD earnings distribution (employed only). The
employment rates of women and men are obtained from the census. Finally, we report the actual and
child-related earnings gaps corresponding to Figure 12 panel (a). In Panel B we report the results of our
counterfactual decomposition exercize, where we undo the effects of all family policies since 1953. We
first report the results from our baseline scenario, and then the results from two bounding exercizes. The
first, "optimistic" excercize, uses, instead of our point estimates, the upper bound of the 95% confidence
interval on dP t
              dk ( k ) for each policy change. The second, or "pessimistic" scenario, uses the lower bound
of the 95% confidence interval. See text for details.




                                                   52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A


                                                                                                                                                           Child suffers (% agreeing)                                                                                                            Women stay at home (% agreeing)
                                                                                                                                                  0   20         40        60         80   100                                                                                               0    20          40         60        80
                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                   m                                                                                                                                          Is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ra
                                                                                                                                         ar                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                            k                                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                             Sw                                                                                                                                          Sw
                                                                                                                                     ed                                                                                                                                         ed
                                                                                                                                       en                                                                                                                                             en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                                  Ja
                                                                                                                                    pa                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ar
                                                                                                                                      n                                                                                                                         N                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   et
                                                                                                                             C                                                                                                                                        he
                                                                                                                                  an                                                                                                                                         rla
                                                                                                                                     a                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                     U                    da                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                       ni
                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                            d                                                                                                                                           Sl
                                                                                                                                 St                                                                                                                                         ov
                                                                                                                U                  at                                                                                                                                            en
                                                                                                                    ni                    es                                                                                                                                            ia
                                                                                                                       te
                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                           Ki
                                                                                                                             ng                                                                                                                                              Sp
                                                                                                                                 do
                                                                                                                                     m                                                                                                                                              ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                           Au
                                                                                                                               st                                                                                                                                           R
                                                                                                                                  ra                                                                                                                                          us
                                                                                                                       N            l ia                                                                                                                                            si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                         et
                                                                                                                            he                                                                                                                                            Ta
                                                                                                                               rla
                                                                                                                                   nd                                                                                                                     C                     iw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ze                         an
                                                                                                                                       s                                                                                                                      ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ep
                                                                                                                                   Is                                                                                                                                           ub
                                                                                                                                     ra
                                                                                                                                       el                                                                                                                                              lic
                                                                                                                             Sl
                                                                                                                               ov
                                                                                                                                     en                                                                                                                                           Ita
                                                                                                                                        ia                                                                                                                                              ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bu
                                                                                                                C                 Sp                                                                                                                                         lg
                                                                                                                    ze               ai                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                      ch                n                                                                                                                                               ia




53
                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                 ep                                                                                                                                          Br
                                                                                                                                    ub                                                                                                                                              az
                                                                                                                                       lic                                                                                                                                            il
                                                                                                                                 Fr                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                                    an                                                                                                                                          ex
                                                                                                                                       c                                                                                                                                          ic
                                                                                                                                            e                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                 Ta                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                   iw                                                                                                                                             ad
                                                                                                                                          an                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                             Bu
                                                                                                                                l    ga                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                        r  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Supplementary Figures: Context




                                                                                                                                 Po                                                                                                                                       Fr
                                                                                                                                   la                                                                                                                                        a     nc
                                                                                                                                     nd                                                                                                                       U                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    te
                                                                                                                                 Au                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             St
                                                                                                                                   st                                                                                                                                             at
                                                                                                                                          ria                                                                                                                                          es

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Au
                                                                                                                                      Ita                                                                                                                 U                       st
                                                                                                                                         ly                                                                                                                ni                         ria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ki
                                                                                                                                 R                                                                                                                                          ng
                                                                                                                                     us
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure A.I: Agreement with Statements




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 do
                                                                                                                                       si
                                                                                                                                            a                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                              er                                                                                                                                          Po
                                                                                                                                   m                                                                                                                                             la
                                                                                                                                      an                                                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                                                        y



                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) "When a Mother Works for Pay, Her Children Suffer"
                                                                                                                                 M                                                                                                                                           Ja
                                                                                                                                   ex                                                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                                         ic                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Au
                                                                                                                                     C                                                                                                                                       st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ra
                                                                                                                                       hi                                                                                                                                              lia
                                                                                                                                         le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         er
                                                                                                                                  Br                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                         az                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                            i l                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (a) "A Woman Should Stay Home when She Has a Child under School Age"




     Notes: The figure is based on data from the 2012 wave of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP).
                                                        Figure A.II: Child Penalties - Other Countries
                                                                       (a) German-Speaking Countries



                              .2
              Earnings Relative to Event Time -1                                First Child Birth
               -.8    -.6     -.4    -.2    0




                                                                                                                  Long-Run Penalty:
                                                                                                                  Austria: 51%
                                                                                                                  Germany: 61%
                              -1




                                                   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1      0    1    2   3    4       5    6     7    8   9   10
                                                                                     Event Time (Years)

                                                                              Men - Austria               Women - Austria
                                                                              Men - Germany               Women - Germany




                                                                         (b) Scandinavian Countries
                              .2




                                                                                First Child Birth
              Earnings Relative to Event Time -1
               -.8    -.6     -.4    -.2    0




                                                                                                                  Long-Run Penalty:
                                                                                                                  Denmark: 21%
                                                                                                                  Sweden: 26%
                              -1




                                                   -5   -4   -3   -2     -1      0    1    2   3    4       5    6     7    8   9   10
                                                                                     Event Time (Years)

                                                                              Men - Denmark               Women - Denmark
                                                                              Men - Sweden                Women - Sweden




Notes: Figures reproduced from Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller (2019). We plot
                  g
child penalties Pt as defined in equation (2) for each gender g by event time t (years from birth of first
child) for a set of countries. Annual earnings are zero if an individual is not working in a given year.
                                    m - Pw . For details on data sources and methodology see Kleven,
Long-run penalties are defined as P10     10
Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweimuller (2019).
B   Supplementary Figures: Parental Leave




                           55
                                                  Figure B.I: RDD Evidence on Maternal Earnings: 1990 Parental Leave Reform
  9000 100001100012000130001400015000
                                                        (a) 4 Years Before                                                                                                                                (b) 3 Years Before                                                                                                                                      (c) 2 Years Before




                                                                                                                                                     10000110001200013000140001500016000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11000120001300014000150001600017000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                        90           90       99
                                                                   0                90          99
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         0          90       99
                                                                                                                                                0                                          90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          90              90             90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 390.7 (312.0)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: -56.1 (330.0)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 28.3 (333.4)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0416 (0.0332)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0054 (0.0316)                                                                                                                   Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0025 (0.0293)




                                                        (d) 1 Year Before                                                                                                                                 (e) Time of Event                                                                                                                                             (f) 1 Year After
  12000130001400015000160001700018000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
                                                                                                                                                     2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                       Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                        90           90       99
                                                                   0                90          99
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         0          90       99
                                                                                                                                                0                                          90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          90              90             90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                             RD Estimate: 6.3 (333.1)                                                                                                              RD Estimate: -53.5 (168.4)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: -1715.1 (234.2)
                                                                             Div. by Counterfactual: . (.)                                                                                                         Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0042 (0.0131)                                                                                                                   Div. by Counterfactual: -0.1291 (0.0176)




                                                          (g) 2 Years After                                                                                                                                  (h) 3 Years After                                                                                                                                         (i) 4 Years After
  1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000




                                                                                                                                                     2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        90           90       99
                                                                   0                90          99
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         0          90       99
                                                                                                                                                0                                          90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          90              90             90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: -1501.7 (361.1)                                                                                                                      RD Estimate: -362.4 (407.4)                                                                                                                                RD Estimate: 234.3 (432.0)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: -0.1105 (0.0266)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0263 (0.0295)                                                                                                                   Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0168 (0.0310)




                                                             (j) 5 Years After                                                                                                                               (k) 6 Years After                                                                                                                                         (l) 7 Years After
                                                                                                                                                     4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
  3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        90           90       99
                                                                   0                90          99
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         0          90       99
                                                                                                                                                0                                          90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          90              90             90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 335.8 (448.6)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 415.0 (450.8)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 490.6 (458.6)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0238 (0.0318)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0289 (0.0314)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0338 (0.0315)




                                                        (m) 8 Years After                                                                                                                                    (n) 9 Years After                                                                                                                                   (o) 10 Years After
  5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000




                                                                                                                                                     5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6000 7000 8000 9000 100001100012000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        90           90       99
                                                                   0                90          99
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         0          90       99
                                                                                                                                                0                                          90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          90              90             90             90          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           90         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 567.4 (479.2)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 621.9 (499.8)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 585.7 (503.0)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0383 (0.0324)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0410 (0.0329)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0376 (0.0323)




Notes: Figures plot the average annual earnings of mothers by week of first birth for each event time relative to first birth. We
adjust earnings by CPI (base year 2000) and correct for topcoding (see Appendix D.1). Earnings are zero if the individual did not
work in a particular year. We include first births in a 4-month window around the reform cut-off dates (July 1st 1990, 1996, and
2000). We exclude women ineligible for parental leave (less than 52 weeks of work in the two years preceding birth). For each event
time separately we regress annual earnings on age dummies and a cubic in distance to the cut-off, allowing for separate trends
on each side. We plot cubic trends from this regression including 95% confidence intervals. We report the discontinuity estimate
and standard error as well as the estimate scaled by average counterfactual earnings at the same event time from child penalty
regressions estimated on pre-reform samples.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      56
                                              Figure B.II: RDD Evidence on Maternal Earnings: 1996 Parental Leave Reform
                                                        (a) 4 Years Before                                                                                                                                (b) 3 Years Before                                                                                                                                      (c) 2 Years Before
  11000120001300014000150001600017000




                                                                                                                                                     12000130001400015000160001700018000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13000140001500016000170001800019000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                        96           96       99
                                                                   6                96          99
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         6          96       99
                                                                                                                                                6                                          96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6          96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                          96              96             96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: -182.1 (395.6)                                                                                                                       RD Estimate: -75.3 (404.9)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 243.5 (403.0)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0161 (0.0350)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0061 (0.0326)                                                                                                                   Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0181 (0.0300)




                                                        (d) 1 Year Before                                                                                                                                 (e) Time of Event                                                                                                                                             (f) 1 Year After
  14000150001600017000180001900020000




                                                                                                                                                                        15000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                     Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                                                                                                                                       5000        10000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1000
                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                        96           96       99
                                                                   6                96          99
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         6          96       99
                                                                                                                                                6                                          96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6          96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                          96              96             96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                            RD Estimate: 282.9 (408.2)                                                                                                             RD Estimate: 20.8 (202.0)                                                                                                                                  RD Estimate: 121.4 (210.8)
                                                                            Div. by Counterfactual: . (.)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0014 (0.0135)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0079 (0.0137)




                                                          (g) 2 Years After                                                                                                                                  (h) 3 Years After                                                                                                                                         (i) 4 Years After
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
  2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000




                                                                                                                                                     3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        96           96       99
                                                                   6                96          99
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         6          96       99
                                                                                                                                                6                                          96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6          96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                          96              96             96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 2,393.5 (371.8)                                                                                                                      RD Estimate: 630.4 (446.4)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 463.1 (465.4)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.1516 (0.0236)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0389 (0.0276)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0279 (0.0280)




                                                             (j) 5 Years After                                                                                                                               (k) 6 Years After                                                                                                                                         (l) 7 Years After
  4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000




                                                                                                                                                     5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        96           96       99
                                                                   6                96          99
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         6          96       99
                                                                                                                                                6                                          96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6          96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                          96              96             96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 147.1 (480.5)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 213.0 (486.0)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 173.9 (502.2)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0086 (0.0281)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0121 (0.0277)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0096 (0.0278)




                                                        (m) 8 Years After                                                                                                                                    (n) 9 Years After                                                                                                                                   (o) 10 Years After
  5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000




                                                                                                                                                     6000 7000 8000 9000 100001100012000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6000 7000 8000 9000 100001100012000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        96           96       99
                                                                   6                96          99
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                       99
                                                                                                                         6          96       99
                                                                                                                                                6                                          96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                         6          96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                          96              96             96             96          99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6           96         99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                         r19                      r19       y1                    19
                                                                                           jul1          g1         p1           t19       v1           r19                                          r1       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19              19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1                                r19                      r19            y19                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul1           g1           p1            t19         v1
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: -38.0 (508.6)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 246.4 (525.1)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 15.9 (541.1)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0021 (0.0276)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0131 (0.0279)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0008 (0.0283)




Notes: See notes to Figure B.I.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      57
                                             Figure B.III: RDD Evidence on Maternal Earnings: 2000 Parental Leave Reform
                                                        (a) 4 Years Before                                                                                                                                (b) 3 Years Before                                                                                                                                      (c) 2 Years Before
  12000130001400015000160001700018000




                                                                                                                                                     13000140001500016000170001800019000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14000150001600017000180001900020000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                        00           00       00
                                                                   0                00          00
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                         0          00       00
                                                                                                                                                0                                          00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          00              00             00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r20                      r20       y2                    20
                                                                                           jul2          g2         p2           t20       v2           r20                                          r2       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2                                r20                      r20            y20                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 595.8 (454.0)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 437.6 (460.1)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 477.1 (462.9)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0444 (0.0338)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0304 (0.0319)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0314 (0.0305)




                                                        (d) 1 Year Before                                                                                                                                 (e) Time of Event                                                                                                                                             (f) 1 Year After
  15000160001700018000190002000021000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                                                                                                                                                                           10000
                                                                                                                                                     Annual Earnings (Euro)
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Annual Earnings (Euro)
                                                                                                                                                           5000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1000
                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                        00           00       00
                                                                   0                00          00
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                         0          00       00
                                                                                                                                                0                                          00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          00              00             00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r20                      r20       y2                    20
                                                                                           jul2          g2         p2           t20       v2           r20                                          r2       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2                                r20                      r20            y20                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                            RD Estimate: 233.8 (469.6)                                                                                                             RD Estimate: 306.8 (238.0)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: -93.6 (227.8)
                                                                            Div. by Counterfactual: . (.)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0190 (0.0148)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0057 (0.0139)




                                                          (g) 2 Years After                                                                                                                                  (h) 3 Years After                                                                                                                                         (i) 4 Years After
  2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000




                                                                                                                                                     3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        00           00       00
                                                                   0                00          00
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                         0          00       00
                                                                                                                                                0                                          00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          00              00             00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r20                      r20       y2                    20
                                                                                           jul2          g2         p2           t20       v2           r20                                          r2       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2                                r20                      r20            y20                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: -1575.1 (397.7)                                                                                                                      RD Estimate: 81.3 (456.8)                                                                                                                                  RD Estimate: -12.3 (477.6)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0946 (0.0239)                                                                                                          Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0048 (0.0272)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: -0.0007 (0.0281)




                                                             (j) 5 Years After                                                                                                                               (k) 6 Years After                                                                                                                                         (l) 7 Years After
  4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000




                                                                                                                                                     5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 1000011000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6000 7000 8000 9000 100001100012000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        00           00       00
                                                                   0                00          00
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                         0          00       00
                                                                                                                                                0                                          00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          00              00             00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r20                      r20       y2                    20
                                                                                           jul2          g2         p2           t20       v2           r20                                          r2       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2                                r20                      r20            y20                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 98.1 (499.0)                                                                                                                         RD Estimate: 229.7 (513.6)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 778.7 (533.6)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0057 (0.0291)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0132 (0.0296)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0441 (0.0302)




                                                        (m) 8 Years After                                                                                                                                    (n) 9 Years After                                                                                                                                   (o) 10 Years After
  6000 7000 8000 9000 100001100012000




                                                                                                                                                     7000 8000 9000 10000110001200013000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7000 8000 9000 10000110001200013000
          Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                             Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Annual Earnings (Euro)




                                        00           00       00
                                                                   0                00          00
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                                         0          00       00
                                                                                                                                                0                                          00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                          00              00             00             00          00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           00         00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         r20                      r20       y2                    20
                                                                                           jul2          g2         p2           t20       v2           r20                                          r2       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2                                r20                      r20            y20                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jul2           g2           p2            t20         v2
      ma                                       ap         ma                jun         01            au          se          oc         no           ma                                          ap                       jun         01             au           se            oc          no               ma                                        ap             ma              jun         01             au           se            oc          no
 01                                          01         01             01                           01          01         01         01            01                                          01        01
                                                                                                                                                                                                             m           01                        01           01            01          01              01                                          01          01                 01                        01           01            01          01
                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                          Child's Date of Birth                                                                                                                                       Child's Date of Birth

                                                                 RD Estimate: 702.3 (543.0)                                                                                                                        RD Estimate: 761.1 (567.1)                                                                                                                                 RD Estimate: 758.2 (575.4)
                                                                 Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0388 (0.0300)                                                                                                           Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0410 (0.0306)                                                                                                                    Div. by Counterfactual: 0.0398 (0.0302)




Notes: See notes to Figure B.I.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58
Figure B.IV: Effect on Paternal Earnings: 1990, 1996 and 2000 Parental Leave Reforms
                                                                    (a) 1990 Reform




                                 .4
                                                                                             Average yearly effect 0-5:




                                 .3
                                                                                             -0.0232 (0.0167)




                                 .2   .1
                            RD Estimate
                          -.1   0-.2
                                 -.3
                                 -.4




                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0      1    2    3     4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                         Time from Birth of Child



                                                                    (b) 1996 Reform
                                 .4




                                                                                             Average yearly effect 0-5:
                                 .3




                                                                                             0.0038 (0.0131)
                                 .2   .1
                            RD Estimate
                          -.1   0-.2
                                 -.3
                                 -.4




                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0      1    2    3     4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                         Time from Birth of Child



                                                                    (c) 2000 Reform
                                 .4




                                                                                             Average yearly effect 0-5:
                                 .3




                                                                                             0.0105 (0.0119)
                                 .2   .1
                            RD Estimate
                          -.1   0-.2
                                 -.3
                                 -.4




                                           -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0      1    2    3     4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                         Time from Birth of Child



Notes: The figure replicates Figure 3, but on the sample of first time fathers. It displays estimates of the
effects of three parental leave reforms on the dynamic earnings of fathers. Fathers are matched to first
births based on administrative data on applications for child benefits. See notes to Figure 3 for further
details.


                                                                               59
                                                                     Figure B.V: 1961 Reform: Take-Up


                                      150
                  Avg. Days on Leave in Year After Birth
                          50          0  100




                                               1959m1                 1960m1     1961m1         1962m1          1963m1           1964m1
                                                                                   Month of First Birth

Notes: The figure shows the evolution of maternity leave take up around the 1961 reform which intro-
duced parental leave. We plot average days on parental leave in the year following birth of the first child,
by month of first birth (based on REV data). As the reform was grandfathered, women who gave birth
in 1960 became eligible, hence the observed gradual increase in take up.



                                                           Figure B.VI: 1961 Reform: Robustness to Trends
                                      .4
                  Diff. in rel. Employment: 1963-1962




                                                                                                    Average yearly effect 0-5:
                                                  .2




                                                                                                    -0.0024 (0.0054)
                   -.4          -.2   -.60




                                                           -3   -2    -1   0    1     2     3      4      5     6     7     8      9
                                                                               Time from Birth of First Child


Notes: The figure investigates the presence of trends that may confound the estimated effects of the 1961
reform. The graph shows placebo results from specification 4 estimated on a sample of mothers who
gave birth in 1962 (T = 0) or 1963 (T = 1). See notes to Figure 4.




                                                                                        60
Figure B.VII: Earnings Effect of Parental Leave Reforms on Mothers in Top Quartile of
Pre-Birth Earnings Distribution
                                                                      (a) 1990 Reform




                                   .4
                                                                                           Average yearly effect 0-5:



                                   .3
                                                                                           -0.0304 (0.0086)


                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                           Event Time (Years)



                                                                      (b) 1996 Reform
                                   .4




                                                                                           Average yearly effect 0-5:
                                   .3




                                                                                           0.0374 (0.0077)
                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                           Event Time (Years)



                                                                      (c) 2000 Reform
                                   .4




                                                                                           Average yearly effect 0-5:
                                   .3




                                                                                           -0.0305 (0.0078)
                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1    2   3    4     5   6    7    8    9    10
                                                                           Event Time (Years)


Notes: This figure investigates the presence of heterogeneous responses to parental leave reforms by mothers' earnings level. We
                                                               61earnings distribution. To this effect, we split our reform samples
reproduce estimates from Figure 3 on women at the top end of the
into four quartiles by annual earnings one year before birth. We then run exactly the same procedure as in Figure 3 keeping only
mothers in the top pre-birth earnings quartile.
            Figure B.VIII: Effects of Parental Leave: Mediating Role of Fertility
                                               (a) Dynamic Effects of the 1990 Reform - 1 Child Only




                                .4
                                                                                                                                  Average yearly effect 0-5:



                                .3
                                                                                                                                  -0.0556 (0.0139)


                                .2
                                .1
                      RD Estimate
                    -.1   0     -.2
                                -.3
                                -.4




                                               -5          -4        -3         -2        -1          0       1    2   3    4            5      6      7       8      9     10
                                                                                                             Event Time (Years)



                                                   (b) Effect of the 1990 Reform on Completed Fertility
                                2.2       2
                      # Births up to 2017
                    1.6       1.8
                                1.4




                                                0                    0                    0               0          90             0             0            90            90
                                              99                99                   99                 99        19             99            99          t19            19
                              ar1                      a   pr1              a   y1               jun1         jul          au
                                                                                                                              g1
                                                                                                                                         se
                                                                                                                                            p1          oc             ov
                   01
                      m                             01               0   1m                   01           01          0 1           0 1            0 1          0 1 n
                                                                                                      First Child's Date of Birth

                                                                                               RD Estimate: -0.0353 (0.0452)



Notes: Panel (a) plots the 1990 reform effect (see notes to Figure 3) for the subsample of mothers who
only have one child in the 1989-2017 period. Panel (b) plots average number of births by week of birth
of the first child for mothers who gave birth to their first child between March-November 1990. Average
births includes all observed births up to 2017. Dashed lines are fitted values based on a cubic polynomial
separately fitted at each side of the cut off with 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                                62
Figure B.IX: Effects of Parental Leave on Child Penalties Acccounting For Subsequent
Births
                                                                  (a) 1990 Reform




                                   .4
                                                                                                   Impact for First Child
                                                                                                   Overall Impact




                                   .3
                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5    6    7    8     9   10
                                                                          Event Time (Years)



                                                                  (b) 1996 Reform
                                   .4




                                                                                                   Impact for First Child
                                                                                                   Overall Impact
                                   .3
                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5    6    7    8     9   10
                                                                          Event Time (Years)



                                                                  (c) 2000 Reform
                                   .4




                                                                                                   Impact for First Child
                                                                                                   Overall Impact
                                   .3
                                   .2   .1
                              RD Estimate
                            -.1   0-.2
                                   -.3
                                   -.4




                                             -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1    2   3    4     5    6    7    8     9   10
                                                                          Event Time (Years)



Notes: Our baseline estimates in Figure 3 identify how child penalties respond to the PL regime applicable
to the first child. To compute the total effect on child penalties of moving, in steady state, from one PL
regime to another, this figure accounts for the effect of PL extensions for births of higher parity. To
this effect, we turn to mothers giving birth to their second, third and fourth child, and replicate, for each
parity, our dynamic estimates of the impact of PL reforms on earnings. We then construct the total steady
state impact of a reform by adding dynamic estimates at all parities, weighted by the average completed
fertility, and average timing between parities, of women who had their first birth around the time of each
reform.                                               63
C     Supplementary Figures: Child Care Provision

                                                             Figure C.I: Index of Child Care Provision over Time

                                                        35                  (a) Child Care Index 1-2
             Index Supply Childcare for 1-2 Year Olds
                                                        30
                                                        25
                                                        20
                                                        15
                                                        10
                                                        5




                                                                1990       1995        2000            2005   2010
                                                                                        Year


                                                                            (b) Child Care Index 3-5
                                                        95
             Index Supply Childcare for 3-5 Year Olds
                                                        90
                                                        85
                                                        80
                                                        75
                                                        70
                                                        65
                                                        60
                                                        55




                                                                1990       1995        2000            2005   2010
                                                                                        Year

Notes: This figure plots our child care indices over time. Each index is calculated at the municipality
level based on child care availability and the number of children in the municipality. We then calculate
weighted averages by year weighting by the total number of children age 1-2 (panel a) and children age
3-5 (panel b) in the municipality.



                                                                                      64
         Figure C.II: Spatial Variation in Child Care Provision - Index 1-5 - 1990




                 (60,100]
                 (45,60]
                 (30,45]
                 (15,30]
                 [0,15]



Notes: This figure plots our child care index 1-5 by municipality using Austrian GIS maps with munic-
ipality borders (administrative boundaries). We shade each municipality according to the level of the
index. Darker colors indicate a higher index in 1990.



           Table C.I: Descriptive Statistics of Municipalities By Treatment Status


                                                     Index 1-2                   Index 3-5
 Treatment Status                              Control     Treatment       Control     Treatment         All

 Panel A. 1991 Census Characteristics
 Number of Municipalities                       1,554          284           253          1,507         1,887
 Total Population                             4,797,414     1,323,339     2,938,329     3,817,840     7,795,786
 % Urban                                         0.39          2.11          9.49          0.07          1.48
 % Towns/Suburbs                                15.51         32.04         28.46         15.59         18.76
 % Rural                                        84.11         65.85         62.06         84.34         79.76
 Average Population                             3,087         4,660        11,614         2,533         4,131
 Empl. Rate Men                                 58.63         58.18         57.91         58.68         58.53
 Empl. Rate Women                               35.18         35.10         37.54         34.88         35.25
 Female Earnings at t=-1                       17,317        17,300         17,896       17,228        17,308
 Panel B. Child Care in 1991
 % Municip. with Nursery                         0.77          4.93         12.65          0.46          2.33
 % Municip. with All-Day Pre-School             40.93         40.85         83.79         33.84         41.92
 % of Children (1-2) in Nursery                  0.00         0.01           0.02          0.00          0.00
 % of Children (3-5) in Pre-School               0.57          0.59         0.82           0.53         0.57
 Index 1-2                                       0.16          0.99          2.95          0.08          0.48
 Index 3-5                                      50.54         49.97         85.86         45.25         51.01
 Index 1-5                                      30.39         30.38         52.69         27.18         30.80

Notes: Panel A shows municipality characteristics in our treatment and control municipalities drawn
from the 1991 census and earnings information from the ASSD. For earnings, we focus on women just
about to give birth (i.e. in event time -1 with respect to the birth of their first child).
Panel B shows average child care availability according to the child care availability dataset provided
by Statistics Austria. We calculate the average share with a nursery (children age 1-2), with all-day pre-
school (children age 3-5) and the share of children enrolled in each of these types of child care facilities.
We also show the averages of our child care indices age 1-2, 3-5 and 1-5.


                                                     65
                                                                                                            Figure C.III: Nursery Care
                                   (a) 3 Years Before Birth                                                                             (b) 2 Years Before Birth                                                                                      (c) Year of Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                              Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                   0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                             -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2 -.1
                    -.3




                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3
                    -.4




                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4
                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                               -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                             Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




                                        (d) 1 Year After Birth                                                                           (e) 2 Years After Birth                                                                                (f) 3 Years After Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                              Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                   0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                             -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2 -.1
                    -.3




                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3
                    -.4




                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4
                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                               -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                             Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




                                    (g) 4 Years After Birth                                                                              (h) 5 Years After Birth                                                  (i) Avg 0-5 Years Post-Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                              Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                   0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                             -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TOT:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Impact of moving childcare
                    -.3




                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           coverage from 0 to 100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.030 (0.043)
                    -.4




                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.4




                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                               -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                             Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




Notes: The figure plots difference-in-differences estimates from specification 6 for the effects of nursery
care expansions on the full dynamics of female earnings. Each panel corresponds to different event time
with respect to the birth of the first child. In panel (a) we plot the evolution of earnings at event time
t=-3, that is for women who are three years before giving birth to their first child, in treated vs control
municipalities, around the event of a nursery care expansion. In panel (b), we do the same for women at
at event time t=-2. Etc.




                                                                                                                                                                 66
                                                                                                        Figure C.IV: Pre-School Care
                                   (a) 3 Years Before Birth                                                                            (b) 2 Years Before Birth                                                                                      (c) Year of Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                             Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                   0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                            -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2 -.1
                    -.3




                                                                                                                        -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.3
                    -.4




                                                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                     Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                            Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




                                        (d) 1 Year After Birth                                                                          (e) 2 Years After Birth                                                                                (f) 3 Years After Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                             Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                   0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                            -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2 -.1
                    -.3




                                                                                                                        -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.3
                    -.4




                                                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                     Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                            Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




                                    (g) 4 Years After Birth                                                                             (h) 5 Years After Birth                                                  (i) Avg 0-5 Years Post-Birth
                    .4




                                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                    .3




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                              .2




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
         Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                             Impact on Child Penalty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Impact on Child Penalty
                         .1




                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                   0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
        -.2 -.1




                                                                                                            -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TOT:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Impact of moving childcare
                    -.3




                                                                                                                        -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          coverage from 0 to 100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.013 (0.036)
                    -.4




                                                                                                                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.4




                                   -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5   -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5                              -5    -4     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2     3      4       5
                                                      Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                     Years from Childcare Expansion                                                                       Years from Childcare Expansion

                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                            Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years                                              Change >20 in 1 Year            Change <20 in all Years




Notes: The figure plots difference-in-differences estimates from specification 6 for the effects of pre-school
care expansions on the full dynamics of female earnings. Each panel corresponds to different event time
with respect to the birth of the first child. In panel (a) we plot the evolution of earnings at event time
t=-3, that is for women who are three years before giving birth to their first child, in treated vs control
municipalities, around the event of a pre-school care expansion. In panel (b), we do the same for women
at at event time t=-2. Etc.




                                                                                                                                                                67
  Figure C.V: Effects of 1990 Parental Leave Reform by Level of Child Care Provision
                                                                               (a) Index 1-5




                                       .4
                                       .3        .2
                            Impact on Child Penalty
                           -.2 -.1    0-.3
                                       -.4  .1




                                                      -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8     9   10
                                                                               Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                      Below Median Index                 Above Median Index




                                                                               (b) Index 1-2
                                       .4
                                       .3        .2
                            Impact on Child Penalty
                           -.2 -.1    0-.3
                                       -.4  .1




                                                      -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8     9   10
                                                                               Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                      Below Median Index                 Above Median Index




                                                                               (c) Index 3-5
                                       .4
                                       .3        .2
                            Impact on Child Penalty
                           -.2 -.1    0-.3
                                       -.4  .1




                                                      -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1   2     3     4    5     6   7   8     9   10
                                                                               Time from Birth of First Child

                                                                      Below Median Index                 Above Median Index



Notes: The figure plots our reform impact estimates by whether the municipality of residence at the time
of birth was below or above the median child care index at the time of birth. The reform impact estimates
use IPW to weight mothers according to their pre-birth characteristics. Specifically, we run a probit
regression of the treatment variable (above median index) on logs of annual earnings in years 3-5 before
birth (interacted with year of first birth), employment status in the year before birth and age dummies.
We then construct adjusted inverse probability weights based on predicted treatment probabilities and
perform the same regressions as in Figure 3.


                                                                                       68
                             Figure C.VI: Fertility Effects of Local Child Care Expansions
                                                                           (a) Nursery Care Expansions



                                 1
              -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                    Births per 100 Women Age 15-49




                                                     -5   -4   -3    -2     -1   0     1  2     3    4   5    6   7   8    9     10
                                                                              Years from Child Care Expansion

                                                                    Change >20 in 1 Year               Change <20 in all Years



                                                                          (b) Pre-School Care Expansions
                                 1
              -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                    Births per 100 Women Age 15-49




                                                     -5   -4   -3    -2     -1   0     1  2     3    4   5    6   7   8    9     10
                                                                              Years from Child Care Expansion

                                                                    Change >20 in 1 Year               Change <20 in all Years


Notes: The figure plots event study estimates of a municipality-level regression of the fertility rate on
event time relative to child care expansion interacted with treatment dummy and calendar year dum-
mies. The fertility rate is measured as the number of births in a municipality from the birth register
divided by the number of women age 15-49 residing in that municipality in the same year. We obtained
the number of women age 15-49 by municipality and year from Statistik Austria register data. Shaded
areas are 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                        69
D        Decomposing Gender Gaps: Data & Methodology

D.1          Measuring Gender Gaps in Earnings Over the Long Run

D.1.1        Using ASSD Data: 1972-2017

Our main data come from the Austrian Social Security Database. This is a matched
employer-employee data set which contains detailed information on employment spells
and earnings by calendar year over the period 1972 to 2017. The ASSD register covers
the universe of paid employment spells, with the notable exclusion of civil servants,
self-employed and farmers. This means that about 85% of the Austrian population is
covered by ASSD, and this coverage rate has been stable over time. Our analysis there-
fore focuses on the long run evolution of the earnings gap on the ASSD population.
38


Earnings in the ASSD (and REV) are topcoded at the maximum contribution base,
which changes from year to year. The fraction of topcoded individuals is quite sta-
ble over the period 1972-2017: around 8% of men and 2% of women have topcoded
earnings. During the years 1994-2012 we can check how much topcoding affects earn-
ings gaps by comparing the earnings gaps in the ASSD and in the income tax data (for
workers in both datasets). In Figure D.I, panel (c) we plot the earnings gaps calculated
from both sources for workers age 15-64, restricting both samples to individual with
positive earnings only. Topcoding has mainly a level effect. The ASSD gap is about 12
percentage points below the income tax gap.
To adjust for topcoding in the ASSD data, we impute earnings above the top coding
thresholds, using Pareto estimates of the earnings distribution computed using the in-
come tax data. To be precise, we fit, in the tax data, separate Pareto distributions of
earnings by gender and age groups. For each age group a and gender g, we compute
                     g
Pareto coefficients  a . In practice, we use three age groups: 15-29 years old, 30-49 years
old, and 50-64 years old. Figure D.I panel (a) reports the Pareto coefficient of these
distributions for each year for men, while panel (b) does the same for women. We see
that these Pareto coefficients are very stable over time. In panel (c), we impute earnings
above the threshold using these estimated Pareto parameters and compute gender gaps
adjusted for top coding. The grey dots report estimated gender gaps when we use the
yearly Pareto coefficients for each group, while the yellow series shows the gender gaps
when we use the average Pareto coefficients over the period 1994-2012. We see that the
ASSD series adjusted for top coding match very closely the gender gaps estimated in
     38 We
         note that our estimated gender gaps likely understates the earnings gap in the entire Austrian
population because men are more often working in the non-ASSD sectors (self employed, civil ser-
vants,...) than women and workers in those sectors earn slightly higher wages on average.


                                                  70
the non-top coded tax data, and that using yearly or average Pareto coefficients does
not make a significant difference.


                                                      Figure D.I: Correcting for Top Coding of Earnings in the ASSD Data
                                                         (a) Pareto Coefficients - Men                                                                                     (b) Pareto Coefficients - Women
                       6




                                                                                                                                              6
                       5




                                                                                                                                              5
  Pareto Alpha




                                                                                                                           Pareto Alpha
            4




                                                                                                                                     4
   3




                                                                                                                            3
                       2




                                                                                                                                              2
                       1




                                                                                                                                              1
                                              1994    1996     1998    2000   2002 2004   2006   2008    2010       2012                                           1994   1996   1998   2000   2002 2004       2006    2008    2010    2012
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                             Year

                                                                         Age 15-29         Age 30-49                                                                                      Age 15-29             Age 30-49
                                                                         Age 50-64                                                                                                        Age 50-64




                                                     (c) Gender Gap in Tax vs ASSD Data                                                                             (d) ASSD With Correction for Top Coding
                                        .45




                                                                                                                                              .45
  Earnings Gap (Positive Earnings only)




                                                                                                                           Earnings Gap (Positive Earnings only)
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                         .4
                  .35




                                                                                                                                           .35
         .3




                                                                                                                                .3
                        .25




                                              1994    1996     1998    2000   2002 2004   2006   2008    2010       2012
                                                                                 Year
                                                                                                                                              .25




                                                             Tax data                     ASSD
                                                                                                                                                                   1971   1976   1981   1986   1991     1996   2001   2006    2011    2016
                                                             ASSD with avg. Pareto        ASSD with yearly Pareto                                                                                     Year



Notes: Panels (a) and (b) plot our estimated Pareto coefficients for men and women by age. This is based
on our sample of income tax records (1994-2012) which are not topcoded. We fit a pareto distribution by
gender and age groups for gross labour income above the social security limit. The limit is adjusted each
year and our procedure only fits the Pareto distribution for income above the relevant cut off in any given
year. Panel (c) plots gender earnings gaps calculated from the income tax data, ASSD, ASSD adjusting
topcoded earnings based on the average Pareto parameter and ASSD adjusting topcoded earnings based
on the relevant Pareto parameter by year. Panel (d) plots the ASSD gender gap in annual earnings (ex-
cluding zeroes) based on the ASSD earnings adjusted for topcoding using the 1994-2012 average Pareto
parameter.




Our sample includes any individual who has at least one record in the ASSD at any
point in time. One issue is that we may miss some individuals who never enter the labor
force. In practice, we can compare the fraction of individuals with zero earnings in our


                                                                                                                71
sample and in the census data for years when the census is available. This comparison
shows that our sample slighlty underepresents women with zero earnings compared
to the census. We therefore added women with zero earnings to our sample to match
the share of non-employed in the census.


D.1.2      Measuring Gender Gaps Before 1972

Before 1972, ASSD data exist but has not been digitized. However earnings statistics
(Lohnstufenstatistik), including detailed tabulations by gender, drawn from the original
data, were regularly published, enabling us to consistently compute the evolution of
gender inequality on the population covered by the ASSD since 1953.39 We used tab-
ulations of the earnings distributions for women and men in 1953, 1957, 1964, 1967,
1970, 1973, 1976, and 1979 that report average monthly earnings for women and men
(in July), deciles of the earnings distribution, and the share of women among all ASSD
workers. Importantly, to calculate the mean and deciles of all distributions, the IHS
imputed topcoded earnings based on the assumption of a lognormal distribution. To
account for individuals not in the labor force, we also added men and women with
zero earnings so that the employment rates of men and women before 1972 matches
the census.


D.2        Decomposition of Gender Gap Between Child Related and Resid-
           ual Inequality

D.2.1      Methodology

Our methodology for decomposing the gender gap follows Kleven, Landais and Sø-
gaard (2019). It relies on estimating the effect of children (child penalties) on women
and men separetely. In the spirit of a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition, we then ask how
much of the average gender gap can differences in these estimates explain. We refer to
Kleven, Landais and Søgaard (2019) for further details.
We define the average gender gap in year s as s  1 - E[Yist     w | s ] /E Y m | s . Based on our
                                                                            ist
empirical evidence, and to simplify notation and exposition, we assume in what follows
that there are no effect of children on the earnings dynamics of men. We are interested
in the average counterfactual gender gap in year s absent child penalties for women,
that is: ~ s  1 - E [Y
                     ~ w |s]/E Y m |s . This gap captures the level of gender inequality that
                      ist       ist
would happen absent child penalties on women's careers. In other words,              ~ s represents
the residual inequality across men and women in the labor market that is not related to
  39 IHSReport ("Geschlechtsspezifische Einkommensunterschiede: Österreich 1953-1979") by Christl and
Wagner (IHS Vienna 1981)

                                                 72
the arrival of children. The child related gender gap is therefore captured by s - ~s 
E Y~ w - Y w | s, t /E Y m | s
    ist    ist             ist

In practice, we reconstruct the counterfactual earnings gap in year s ~ s based on four
inputs:

                                                                    w |s]
   1. the observed average level of earnings of women in year s, E[Yist

   2. the fraction st of women who are in event time t with respect to the birth of their
      first child birth,

   3. the child penalty for each event time Pst ,
                                                                            ~ w | s, t ] .
   4. and the average level of counterfactual earnings at each event time E[Yist

To understand the relationship between the counterfactual earnings gap and these four
inputs, note that the computation of    ~ s solely relies on having an estimate of E[Y
                                                                                     ~ w | s ].
                                                                                      ist
We now show that we can estimate E[Y     ~ w |s] based on the four inputs mentioned above.
                                          ist
                                                                                       w |s]
For this, we start by noting that the average level of earnings of women in year s E[Yist
is the weighted average of the earnings of women who will never have children (child-
less women) and of the earnings of women who have, or will have, children and are, in
year s, at event time t with respect to the birth of their first child.

                    w
                 E[Yist       Childless
                        |s] = s               w
                                        · E [Yist |s, childless] +  st · E [Yist
                                                                             w
                                                                                 | s, t ]
                                                                     t


                         Childless +
where we have that s                 t st = 1. Similarly, we can write the average coun-
terfactual level of earnings of women in year s E[Y    ~ w |s] as the weighted average of the
                                                        ist
earnings of women who will never have children (childless women) and of the coun-
terfactual earnings Y~ w of women who have, or will have, children and are, in year s, at
                      ist
event time t with respect to the birth of their first child.

                    ~ w |s] = s
                 E [Yist
                              Childless       w
                                        · E [Yist |s, childless] +  st · E Y
                                                                           ~ w | s, t
                                                                            ist
                                                                    t


From this, and the definition of child penalties in equation (2), it follows that:



                          ~ w |s] = E[Y w |s] +  st · E Y
                       E [Y                             ~ w - Y w | s, t
                           ist         ist               ist   ist
                                                      t
                                   =      w
                                       E[Yist |s] -    st · E          ~ w | s, t
                                                                 Pst · Yist
                                                      t


We show in the following sections how we computed or estimated each of these four
inputs.

                                                   73
D.2.2    Estimating Fraction st of Women at Each Event Time

Fraction of Childless Women We estimated the cohort-specific share of childless women
from the Human Fertility Database and the Austrian Birth Barometer. Both data sets
contain data and estimates by the Vienna Institute of Demography. For older cohorts,
we used a simple linear exponential smoothing predictor (Holt's method) to predict
childlessness back to cohorts born in 1887 (age 64 in 1951). Figure D.II below shows the
evolution of the fraction of childless women, i.e. women whose completed fertility is
zero, by birth cohort.


        Figure D.II: Evolution of the Fraction of Childless Women by Birth Cohort


                                             Forecasts from Damped Holt's method
                               0.35
             Share Childless

                               0.25
                               0.15


                                      1890

                                             1900

                                                    1910

                                                           1920

                                                                  1930

                                                                          1940

                                                                                 1950

                                                                                        1960

                                                                                               1970

                                                                                                      1980

                                                                                                             1990



                                                                  Year of Birth

Notes: The figure plots the share of childless women (defined as women who will never have children
over their lifetime) by birth cohort from the Austrian Birth Barometer (Vienna Institute of Demography)
and a backward prediction based on the damped Holt's method ('holt' in R with damped=TRUE and
bandwidth 14).




Fraction of Women at Each Event Time To estimate how many mothers are at event
time t in a given year s, we need to know the distribution of age at first birth by cohort.
Mean age at first birth is available yearly from 1952 to 2017 from the Austrian Birth
Barometer (HFD). Figure D.III compares mean age at first birth from the Austrian Birth
Barometer and from the Birth Register. We also show age at first birth estimates from
IPUMS census microdata (1971-2011).




                                                                     74
                                                Figure D.III: Mean Age at First Birth




                           30
               Mean Age at First Birth
                24     26  22    28




                                         1940        1960              1980                 2000          2020
                                                                       Year

                                                      Census
                                                      Birth Register (exact)
                                                      Birth Register (first in union)
                                                      Birth Register (first in union or out of wedlock)
                                                      HFD


Notes: The figure plots mean age at first birth from various data sources. Census: From the 1971-2011
decennial census (IPUMS and Statistics Austria). We keep all women whose oldest child is between
0-10 at the census date and calculate the average age of the mother in the year the oldest child was born.
Birth register (exact): from 1984 the birth register contains data on parity. We keep first births in each
year and calculate average age of the mother. Birth register (first in union): before 1984 parity
information was only available by mother-father pairs. We keep first births by union in each year and
calculate average age of the mother. Birth register (first in union or out of wedlock): We keep first birth
by union or births out of wedlock (no father) each year and calculate average age of the mother. HFD:
Estimates from the Human Fertility Database.




To get the fraction of women at each event time, we need the distribution of age at first
birth, and not just the mean. To this purpose, we fit a Beta distribution to the Birth
Register data (1984-2007) for each year. Then we separately regress the two coefficients
                                                        ¯ s . This gives us: 
s and  s of the distribution on mean age at first birth A                    ^s = 6.404 -
        ¯ s and 
0.122 · A       ^s = 30.346 - 0.966 · A
                                      ¯s .

To predict out of sample we simply plug in mean age at first birth from the HFD and
predict s and  s for all years in HFD (1952-2017). We then use the implied Beta distri-
bution in each year to assign mothers to the different event times.
The distribution of age at first birth by year and the childlessness estimates finally en-
able us to estimate, for each year s the composition of women ( s       Childless and  ,  t).
                                                                                      st
The following figure shows the evolution of the composition of women, splitting event
times into 5 bins : t < 0, t = 0 - 10, t = 11 - 20, t = 21 - 30, and t > 30.




                                                                     75
                                                Figure D.IV: Composition of Women



                     1
          Share Among All Women
          .2     .4  0 .6    .8




                                  1950       1960        1970      1980          1990       2000       2010   2020
                                                                          Year

                                                          Childless                     Mothers 31+
                                                          Mothers 21-30                 Mothers 11-20
                                                          Mothers 0-10                  Mothers before


Notes: The figure plots our constructed shares of childless women and mothers by event time relative to
first birth in each calendar year. See text for details on construction of these shares.




D.2.3    Estimating Child Penalties Pst & Counterfactual Earnings Y~
                                                                   w
                                                                   ist By Birth Cohort


We finally need to estimate child penalties and counterfactual earnings by birth cohort
over the long run.
To do this, we extend the baseline specification (1) to allow for year-specific coefficients
on event time. Specifically we consider the following specification:

                                                         yj · I [ j = t] · I [y = s] +   k Xkis + ist ,
                                         g                g                                  g     g     g
                                     Yist =                                                                          (8)
                                              y j = -1                                  k


where we interact the event time dummies with year dummies in order to estimate
                                   g
year-specific event coefficients yj . Note that estimating event coefficients by calendar
year s and event year t amounts to estimating event coefficients by birth cohort c =
s - t. As in our baseline specification (1), we include a full set of age dummies and year
dummies in the set of covariates.


Child Penalties: ASSD Data (1972-2017) and REV data (1960-1972) To compute child
penalties by birth cohort since 1960, according to specification (8) we use data from the

                                                                      76
ASSD and from the REV before 1972. As explained in section 2, the REV data has a very
high coverage rate for women born between the mid-1920s and the 1950s. Panel (a) of
Figure D.V below shows that for these births cohorts, the fraction of women with an
employment record represents close to 80% of women with employment records in the
census. This number is very similar to the coverage rate of ASSD. But due to the way the
REV was created, not all women had their earnings recorded even if the employment
and maternity insurance spells are recorded in the REV data. The selection of spells
that are recorded with earnings is not random: it is related to the fact that the REV
data was set up for pension calculation purposes. When the earnings attached to an
employment spell were not relevant for pension computation, i.e. spells with low or no
earnings levels (not relevant for top 18 years of earnings variable) the corresponding
earnings were less likely to be recorded. This means that spells at younger age with
lower earnings level are less likely to have recorded level of earnings attached. As a
consequence, the number of first births identified with earnings data in the REV data is
lower than the true number of first births, as shown in panel (b) of Figure D.V.
To account for this differential selection of observable first births in the REV data,
we use an Inverse Probability Weighting correction. We know that first births are
more likely to be recorded with earnings if earnings are relatively high. We therefore
reweight the earnings of women who have a first birth in the REV data so that the av-
erage earnings of women giving birth relative to average female earnings in Austria in
that year matches that observed in the ASSD data. Figure D.VI below shows the evo-
lution of earnings for women observed prior to having children in the REV data up to
1977, and in the ASSD data afterwards. Panel (a) shows the raw data: we see a clear
downbreak in the series in 1977, showing that the women who have a first birth spell
recorded with earnings information are on average positively selected in the REV data.
Panel (b) shows the results when applying our IPW correction.




                                          77
                                                                      Figure D.V: Coverage of REV Data
                                                            (a) Fraction of Women With Employment Records in REV




                                      .8
                  REV Employed (Spells) / Census Employed
                        .2         .4 0          .6




                                                               1910           1920          1930           1940         1950           1960
                                                                                             Year of Birth


                                (b) Number of First Births by Year: Comparison Across Data Sets
                  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
                  Number of First Births in Thousands




                                                            1960       1970          1980        1990        2000         2010         2020
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                              Census                                REV+ASSD
                                                                              Birth Register (exact)                Birth Register
                                                                                                                    (first in union)
                                                                              Birth Register (first in
                                                                              union or out of wedlock)



Notes: Panel (a) plots the share of women with employment records in the REV by year of birth. We
select all employment spells from the REV around the 1971 census date (December 5th 1971) and
calculate the number of REV employed women by year of birth. We then divide this number by the
number of women who are employed according to the 1971 census (again by year of birth). Panel (b)
plots the raw number of first birth from various data sources. Census: We keep women with oldest child
age 0-10 from each census 1971-2011 and calculate the total number of first births by year. REV+ASSD:
We merge the REV and ASSD data and keep the first birth ever observed for each woman. In the REV
data this is based on observing a maternity insurance spell, in the ASSD data a live birth is indicated
separately. Birth register (various): See notes to Figure D.III for definition of exact and first in union.




                                                                                              78
Figure D.VI: Earnings by Year of Birth and Event Time in REV and ASSD Data, With
and Without IPW Correction
                              (a) Raw REV + ASSD Data                                                      (b) With IPW Correction for REV Data
             20000




                                                                                                 20000
               15000




                                                                                                   15000
      Earnings




                                                                                          Earnings
       10000




                                                                                           10000
             5000




                                                                                                 5000
             0




                                                                                                 0
                       1950   1960   1970    1980       1990        2000   2010   2020                     1950   1960   1970    1980       1990        2000   2010   2020
                                            Year of First Birth                                                                 Year of First Birth

                                               t=-5               t=-4                                                             t=-5               t=-4
                                               t=-3               t=-2                                                             t=-3               t=-2
                                               t=-1                                                                                t=-1




Notes: Panel (a) plots average annual earnings from the REV and ASSD by year of first birth at various
event times. We select all first births over the REV+ASSD period. We exclude mothers who never have
positive earnings in the REV if their birth was before 1977 to ensure we have 5 years of pre-birth data
for everyone in the sample. Panel (b) plots average earnings weighted by IPW. To construct the weights
we run yearly probit regressions of 'after' (first birth in 1980 vs e.g. 1970) on the logs of earnings
divided by average earnings in the same year from our decomposition procedure at event times -4 to -1
(we include zeroes by adding 1 to earnings) and whether earnings are zero at any of these event times.
Based on the predicted probabilities we then construct inverse probability weights.



Estimated Child Penalties By Birth Cohorts Figure D.VII shows the estimated child
penalties by birth cohort, following specification 8, on the ASSD sample and the REV
sample with IPW correction. We also plot the estimated counterfactual earnings E Y      ~ w | s, t ]
                                                                                         ist
corresponding to these specifications. We see that child penalties in the first ten years
after birth have remained remarkably stable over the last 50 years. But child penalties
at longer horizons (11 to 20 years after birth, and 21 to 30 years after birth), after being
quite stable in the 1960s and early 1970s, have started to decrease significantly.
For first births before 1960, we need to extrapolate child penalties: we assume that child
penalties for first births before 1960 were equal to the average penalty observed for
first births between 1960 and 1972. For counterfactual earnings corresponding to births
before 1960, we extrapolate them linearly based on the observed trend in counterfactual
earnings for first births between 1960 and 1972.
We estimate specification 8 using event time dummies up to t = 30. As a result, we
also need to extrapolate penalties after event time 30: given the extreme stability of
penalties after event time 10, we fix them at the estimated child penalty level in event
time 30: Ps30 .




                                                                                     79
                                            Figure D.VII: Reforms: Dynamic RD Estimates & Effects on Child Penalties

                                                                                        0 to 10 years After Birth
                                                               (a) Child Penalty                                                                        (b) Counterfactual Earnings Y~it




                                                                                                                               20000
                      -.4
  Child Penalty 0-10 Years After Birth




                                                                                                                                      15000
                                                                                                                    Counterfactual Earnings
                               -.5




                                                                                                                            10000
                  -.6




                                                                                                                  5000
     -.7




                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960 1970 1980         1990   2000   2010    2020
                      -.8




                                                                                                                                                                            Year of First Birth
                                          1920   1930   1940    1950     1960 1970 1980      1990   2000   2010
                                                                       Year of First Birth                                                                   Counterfactual Earnings              Avg. Earnings Women




                                                                                       11 to 20 years After Birth
                                                               (c) Child Penalty                                                                        (d) Counterfactual Earnings Y~it
                                                                                                                               25000
                      -.4




                                                                                                                        10000 15000 20000
  Child Penalty 11-20 Years After Birth




                                                                                                                     Counterfactual Earnings
                   -.6         -.5




                                                                                                                  5000
      -.7




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960 1970 1980         1990   2000   2010    2020
                      -.8




                                                                                                                                                                            Year of First Birth
                                          1920   1930   1940    1950     1960 1970 1980      1990   2000   2010
                                                                       Year of First Birth                                                                   Counterfactual Earnings              Avg. Earnings Women




                                                                                       21 to 30 years After Birth
                                                               (e) Child Penalty                                                                        (f) Counterfactual Earnings Y~it
                      -.4




                                                                                                                               20000
  Child Penalty 21-30 Years After Birth




                                                                                                                    Counterfactual Earnings
                                                                                                                                    15000
                               -.5




                                                                                                                          10000
                   -.6




                                                                                                                  5000
      -.7




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960 1970 1980         1990   2000   2010    2020
                      -.8




                                                                                                                                                                            Year of First Birth
                                          1920   1930   1940    1950     1960 1970 1980      1990   2000   2010
                                                                       Year of First Birth                                                                   Counterfactual Earnings              Avg. Earnings Women



Notes: The figure plots average child penalties and predicted counterfactual earnings over event times
0-10, 11-20 and 21-30 by year of first birth (see text for details). Dashed lines indicate the extrapolations
we use based on simple averages for child penalties    80(1960-72 average) and linear backward prediction
for counterfactual earnings. We also add our constructed average earnings of all women (including
zeroes) in the figures on the right.
D.3    Historical Gender Gaps With Counterfactual Family Policies

We now turn to explaining how we can use the previous decomposition, and our esti-
mates of the effects of policies on child penalties to measure gender gaps under coun-
terfactual policy scenarii.
Our focus is on the three following family policies: parental leave duration (PL ), the
coverage of free nursery care (N ), and the coverage of free pre-school care (PS ). What
we are trying to identify, for family policy k  {PL , N , PS }, is the causal effect of
                                                            s
any policy change dk on the level of the gender gap: d     dk . Based on our previous
decomposition exercize, we can express this effect as a simple function of the causal
effects of the policy change dk on the full dynamics of the child penalty (dPt /dk ,t).
Indeed, we have that:


                        w |s]/d
             ds     dE[Yist      k
                = -         m |s
             dk       E Yist
                             1                       dPt
                   = -       m |s
                          E Yist
                                  ·        st · dk (PL , N , PS )·E   ~ w | s, t
                                                                      Yist
                                           t


To get the above expression, we used the empirical fact that earnings of men are af-
fected neither by the arrival of kids, nor by family policies. The above expression also
assumes that family policies have no effect on fertility, such that dst /dk = 0. But
we explore below scenarii where we relax this assumption and allow family policies to
affect fertility as well.
Note that the effect of any policy change on the child penalty is theoretically a function
of all family policies. But in practice, our empirical evidence found no interaction effects
between parental leave and child care provision. This means that we can consider the
impact of a policy change on the child penalty to be solely a function of that particular
policy: dP t
         d ( k ).
         k

As a consequence, for all family policy reforms since 1961, we can compute the causal
effect of that reform on the gender gap in each year s by simply combining:

  1. our estimates of st , the fraction of women at each event time t in year s

                                                        ~ w |s, t for women absent
  2. our estimates of average counterfactual earnings E Yist
     child penalties, at each event time t in year s
                            dPt
  3. and our estimates of   dk ( k ),   the effect of each the reform on child penalty at each
     event time t


                                                81
Baseline Results: Undoing All Family Policies Our baseline counterfactual policy
scenario consists in getting rid of all family policies. In other words, we simulate the
evolution of the gender gap since 1961, when eliminating the effects of all parental leave
reforms, and setting the level of nursery care and of pre-school care provision to zero.
The table below summarizes our estimates of the effect of each policy on child penalties
that we use to compute the counterfactual gender gaps. Note that for parental leave
reforms, we account for the steady state effect of the reform on child penalties, that is
we account for the effect on child penalties of getting access to a new regime PL regime
for all children, and not just the first one. This issue is discussed at length in section 3.3
and results of these steady state effects on child penalties are presented in Figure B.IX.


                                                      Avg. effect on 0-10              Avg. effect on 0-10
                                                      Penalty (first birth)           Penalty (higher order
                                                                                             births)
 1961 Reform                                                -0.0281                          -0.0459
 1990 Reform                                                -0.0227                          -0.0234
 1996 Reform                                                 0.0109                          0.0251
 2000 Reform                                                -0.0149                          -0.0145
 Index 1-2 Expansion (for Index from 0 to 100)                                0.022
 Index 3-5 Expansion (for Index from 0 to 100)                                0.027


Note also that given we systematically found no long run effects of any of these policies
on child penalties, we systematically set the effect of each policy reform on penalties to
be zero for event time superior to 10: dP
                                       d = 0,  t > 10 .
                                         t
                                                 k

Figure D.VIII below shows the effect on the gender gap of removing each policy sep-
arately. Panel (a) shows what the gender gap would have been in the absence of any
parental leave reform. In this scenario, we only undo parental leave expansion, and
assume that child care provision would have followed the same path as actually ob-
served. The graph highlights that parental leave expansions have had a negative, albeit
small, impact on gender inequality. This result stems from the significant negative im-
pact of parental leave policies on labor supply in the short run. But the absence of
long run effects of PL on the careers of women means that the overall negative im-
pact of parental leave policies on gender inequality remains somewhat modest. While
parental leave policies do have a small effect on the evolution of the gender gap, we
find in panel (b) and (c), to the contrary, that child care policies have none. When undo-
ing these policies, we find that the gender gap would have been absolutely unaffected
by the absence of nursery care or of pre-school care.




                                                     82
Figure D.VIII: Gender Gap in Earnings and Counterfactual Gender Gaps Under Differ-
ent Policy Scenarii
                                               (a) Undoing Parental Leave Reforms Only




                              .7   .6
                       Earnings Gap
                      .5      .4




                                        1950      1960   1970       1980          1990   2000       2010   2020
                                                                           Year

                                                                  Actual Earnings Gap
                                                                  Undo Parental Leave Reforms



                                               (b) Undoing Nursery Care Expansion Only
                              .7  .6
                       Earnings Gap
                      .5      .4




                                        1950      1960   1970       1980          1990   2000       2010   2020
                                                                           Year

                                                                 Actual Earnings Gap
                                                                 Set Nursery Care Index to Zero



                                           (c) Undoing Pre-School Care Expansion Only
                              .7  .6
                       Earnings Gap
                      .5      .4




                                        1950      1960   1970       1980          1990   2000       2010   2020
                                                                           Year

                                                                Actual Earnings Gap
                                                                Set Pre-School Care Index to Zero



                                                    83
Notes: The figures plot actual earnings gaps and counterfactual   earnings gaps based on setting various
policy parameters to zero in isolation. See text and notes to Table 1 for details.
Sensitivy Analysis It is critical to assess how sensitive our counterfactual gender
gaps estimates are to the precision with which we estimate the effects of policies on
child penalties. To this effect, and to provide some guidance for inference, we com-
puted two bounding counterfactual gender gaps. The first, "optimistic" one, uses, in-
stead of our point estimates, the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval on dP    t
                                                                                    dk ( k )
for each policy change. The second, or "pessimistic" scenario, uses the lower bound of
the 95% confidence interval. The results of these two bounding scenarii are presented
in Table 1. The bottom-line is that our null effects are relatively precise: we can clearly
rule out large positive effects of family policies on gender inequality.


Accounting for Fertility Effects We assumed, for our baseline counterfactual policy
scenario that family policies had no effect on fertility. We now explore scenarii allowing
for potential effects on fertility. In practice, this means accounting for potential effects
                                                                                  d
of each policy change on the fraction of women observed at each event time t: dst . The
                                                                                     k
causal effect of the policy change on the gender gap can now be written as:


                   w |s]/d
        ds     dE[Yist     k
           = -         m
        dk       E Yist |s
                            1                            dPt        ~ w |s, t +  dst · Pst ·E Y
                = -         m |s
                         E Yist
                                 ·          st · dk ·E              Yist
                                                                                  d k
                                                                                    
                                                                                              ~ w | s, t
                                                                                               ist
                                            t                                   t


where the second part in the bracketed term accounts for fertility responses. Intuitively,
if a policy reform induces more couples to have children, it will increase the fraction of
women observed at each event time t after birth (dst /dk > 0. As these women are
facing penalty Pst , this will increase the gender gap.
We use two different sources to account for fertility effects. To account for fertility
effects of parental leave we use the estimates from Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017) Table
3 column (8). Their formula for total fertility rate is (from the replication data set)


                                                         leave_weeks2
   TFR = . . . - 0.0007448 × leave_weeks + 0.0013043 ×                + 0.0019767 × %weeks_paid + 0.0003374 × %payrate
                                                              100


The following table shows what these estimates imply when we undo parental leave.
Note that in their data set leave_weeks is equal to weeks of maternity insurance plus
weeks of parental leave. So undoing parental leave but keeping maternity insurance
means setting leave duration to 8 weeks.

To account for fertility effects of child care expansions we use our own estimates of the
effect of these roll-outs on total fertility rate. We constructed total fertility rate at the mu-

                                                               84
Table D.I: Summary of Fertility Impact Computed Based on Estimates from Olivetti and
Petrongolo (2017)


                                                                   Counterfactual
    Regime        leave (wks) %wks         %payrate        leave (wks) %wks paid %payrate TFR Effect of
                              paid                                                        PL
   1961-1990         60        100            52              8         100       100      -0.0088
   1990-1996        112        100            46              8         100       100       0.0671
   1996-2000        112         75            37              8         100       100       0.0146
   2000-2008        112        123            30              8         100       100       0.1072

Notes: The table shows the policy parameters we use for the different periods to calculate the total
fertility effect of parental leave policies. We use the formulas in the online dofiles provided by Olivetti
and Petrongolo (2017).


nicipality level as follows. First, we get the number of births at the municipality level
from the birth register (1988-2007) and Statistik Austria Register Data (2002-2018).40
Then we get the number of women age 15-49 from the census (1991, 2001, 2011) and the
Population Register (2011-2017). We interpolate linearly to get yearly data. Dividing
the number of births by the number of women is the crude fertility rate. We then use
the Austrian aggregate yearly relationship between crude fertility rate and total fertility
rate to convert crude to total fertility rate.
We use the effects 10 years after expansion as an estimate for the TFR impact of child
care expansion, scaled by the difference in the index during event times 0-5.

                                       Effect at t = 10      Avg. change in index         Scaled Effect
  Nursery Care Expansion                  -0.049645                  0.363941                 -0.1364
  Pre-School Care Expansion               -0.046957                  0.369499                 -0.1271

Figure D.IX shows actual and counterfactual total fertility rates. Counterfactual means
fertility when there is no parental leave and no child care.
  40 And we take the average of those two numbers for years 2002-2007 where the data overlaps, to
account for a few small discrepancies in the data.




                                                      85
                   Figure D.IX: Actual and Counterfactual Total Fertility Rates
                                                  (a) By Year


             2
             1.9
             1.8
             1.7
             1.6




                   1950    1960      1970         1980          1990     2000        2010   2020
                                                         Year

                                            TFR                 Counterfactual TFR


Notes: The figure plots the total fertility rate (TFR) calculated by multiplying the number of children by
the shares of women who have 0-4 children as constructed for the main decomposition exercise. The
counterfactual TFR is based on setting all family policy parameteres to zero taking into account our
estimated child care expansion fertility effects and the parental leave expansion effects based on Olivetti
and Petrongolo (2017).




                                                                             d
To convert our estimated fertility effects into estimates for dst , we proceed as follows.
                                                                   k
Our fertility estimates are, theoretically, measuring the effect of policy reforms on total
fertility dN /dk , where N is the average number of children by women. Note that
N = (1 - childless ) · n ¯ , where n¯ is the average number of children among women with
children and    childless is the fraction of childless women.
What we do is to assume that policy reforms affect the total fertility by changing the
fraction of women with kids rather than the number of kids per mother. In other words,
we assume that dN /dk = d(1 - childless )/dk · n
                                               ¯
As a consequence, we easily obtain an estimate of the effect of the reform on the fraction
of women at event time t in year s:



                                    dst     d(childless )
                                        = -               · st
                                    dk          dk
                                          dN st
                                        =     ·
                                          dk n  ¯

                                                      86
Figure D.X shows the results of our counterfactual policy scenario of removing all fam-
ily policies, when accounting for fertility responses. For almost the entire period the
policy reforms slightly decreased fertility overall, so undoing the reforms slightly in-
creases the gender earnings gap. In Table D.III we also explore the sensitivity of our
results to the precision with which the fertility effects are estimated. We computed two
bounding counterfactual gender gaps. The first, "optimistic" one, uses, instead of our
                                                                         dN     dPt
point estimates, the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval on d      k and dk ( k ) for
each policy change. The second, or "pessimistic" scenario, uses the lower bound of the
95% confidence interval.




                                            87
Figure D.X: Counterfactual Gender Gaps Under No Family Policy Accounting for Fer-
tility Responses
                                                                                   (a) Without Fertility Responses

                                                               .8
              Decomposition of Gender Inequality in Earnings (%)
                                                                                                        Child-Related GG w/o Family Policy
                                                                                                        Gender Gap w/o Family Policy
                                           .5      .6    .7




                                                                             Residual Gender Inequality
                  .1     .2    .3   .4




                                                                           Child-Related Gender Inequality
              0




                                                                    1950   1960     1970       1980          1990    2000     2010       2020
                                                                                                      year


                                                                                     (b) With Fertility Responses
                                                               .8
              Decomposition of Gender Inequality in Earnings (%)




                                                                                                        Child-Related GG w/o Family Policy
                                                                                                        Gender Gap w/o Family Policy
                                           .5      .6    .7




                                                                             Residual Gender Inequality
                  .1     .2    .3   .4




                                                                           Child-Related Gender Inequality
              0




                                                                    1950   1960     1970       1980          1990    2000     2010       2020
                                                                                                      year


Notes: The figures plot the results of our decomposition exercise removing all family policies when we
do not take fertility effects into account (panel (a)) and when we incorporate fertility effects (panel (b)).
See text for details.




                                                                                                  88
             Table D.III: Sensitivity Of Counterfactual Gender Gap Estimates


   Year                                  1953     1964     1970     1980    1990     2000     2010
   Panel A. Decomposition
   Actual Earnings Gap                   0.696 0.653 0.640 0.575 0.517 0.485 0.437
   Counterfactual Earnings Gap           0.326 0.297 0.302 0.253 0.149 0.119 0.090
   Gap Due to Kids                       0.370 0.356 0.338 0.322 0.367 0.366 0.347
   Panel B. Undoing the Reforms Without Fertility Response
                         No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Baseline)
   Earnings Gap                          0.696 0.646 0.628 0.562 0.499 0.463 0.414
   Child-Related Gender Gap              0.370 0.349 0.326 0.309 0.349 0.344 0.324
                        No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Optimistic)
   Actual Earnings Gap                   0.696 0.648 0.632 0.565 0.503 0.474 0.428
   Child-Related Gender Gaps             0.370 0.351 0.330 0.312 0.353 0.355 0.338
                       No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Pessimistic)
   Earnings Gap                          0.696 0.644 0.624 0.559 0.495 0.452 0.400
   Child-Related Gender Gap              0.370 0.346 0.322 0.306 0.345 0.333 0.309
   Panel C. Undoing the Reforms With Fertility Responses
                         No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Baseline)
   Earnings Gap                          0.696 0.646 0.629 0.565 0.505 0.472 0.423
   Child-Related Gender Gap              0.370 0.349 0.327 0.312 0.356 0.353 0.332
                        No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Optimistic)
   Earnings Gap                          0.696 0.649 0.633 0.568 0.510 0.483 0.437
   Child-Related Gender Gap              0.370 0.352 0.331 0.315 0.360 0.364 0.347
                       No Parental Leave and No Child Care (Pessimistic)
   Earnings Gap                          0.696 0.644 0.625 0.561 0.501 0.460 0.408
   Child-Related Gender Gap              0.370 0.347 0.323 0.308 0.352 0.341 0.318

Notes: The table reports inputs and results of our decomposition exercise of gender gaps for selected
years, when accounting for fertility responses to family policies. See notes to Table 1 for additional
details. The "optimistic" scenario is based on the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval for all
policy treatment effect estimates and the "pessimistic" scenario is based on the lower bound of the 95%
confidence interval.




                                                  89
