                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                    CAN NUDGES INCREASE TAKE-UP OF THE EITC?:
                    EVIDENCE FROM MULTIPLE FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                           Elizabeth Linos
                                           Allen Prohofsky
                                           Aparna Ramesh
                                           Jesse Rothstein
                                             Matt Unrath

                                        Working Paper 28086
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28086

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2020

We are grateful to our partners for their extraordinary work in administering these interventions and
their commitment to informing policy through rigorous research. At the California Franchise Tax
Board, we thank Sean McDaniel, Monica Trefz, Ian Kiltz, Chad Angaretis, Silvano Guitierrez, Bob
Schlie, and Xudong Chen, and especially Allen Prohofsky and Julie Moreno. At the California
Department of Social Services, we thank Alexis Fernandez, Kim McCoy-Wade, Jianjun Chen, Brittney
Gossard, and Akhtar Khan. We also thank our multiple CalFresh county partners, Alberto Garcia,
Deanna Abrahamian, Todd Blair, Ashley Arnold, Gladys Deloney, Yunny Tai, Margareta Hodzic, and
Idelle Villarreal. We also thank Trevor Rogers, Sebastien Chaubard, Timothy Merritt and Josh Fryday
at Golden State Opportunity for all of their help in administering these studies. And we thank Pete
Manzo and Nalleli Sandoval at the United Way of California, along with staff from United Way Bay
Area, United Way of the Wine Country, and Orange County United Way for their input along the way.

Finally, we are grateful for financial support from the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Arnold
Ventures, Tipping Point Community, the University of Wisconsin Institute for Research on Poverty,
the Horowitz Foundation for Social Policy, and the James Irvine Foundation. All errors should be
attributed to the authors. The analyses reported herein were performed with the permission of CDSS
and FTB, who had the opportunity to review for disclosure risk before they were released. The opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and should not be considered as
representing the policy of the collaborating department, agency, any department or agency in the
California government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

This research was conducted through the California Policy Lab at UC Berkeley. We thank Evan White,
Christopher Campos, Konrad Franco, John Iselin, Sree Kancherla, and Charles Davis, who were instrumental
in making this project a success. We also thank Professor Jacob Goldin and Taylor Cranor from Stanford
Law School and Akshay Ravikumar Kalose from Stanford University who were critical to launching
our CalFresh experiments in 2018.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Elizabeth Linos, Allen Prohofsky, Aparna Ramesh, Jesse Rothstein, and Matt Unrath. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Nudges Increase Take-up of the EITC?: Evidence from Multiple Field Experiments
Elizabeth Linos, Allen Prohofsky, Aparna Ramesh, Jesse Rothstein, and Matt Unrath
NBER Working Paper No. 28086
November 2020
JEL No. D91,H24,H26,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) distributes more than $60 billion to over 20 million low-
income families annually. Nevertheless, an estimated one-fifth of eligible households do not
claim it. We ran six pre-registered, large-scale field experiments to test whether "nudges" could
increase EITC take-up (N=1million). Despite varying the content, design, messenger, and mode
of our messages, we find no evidence that they affected households' likelihood of filing a tax
return or claiming the credit. We conclude that even the most behaviorally informed low-touch
outreach efforts cannot overcome the barriers faced by low-income households who do not file
returns.

Elizabeth Linos                                 Jesse Rothstein
University of California at Berkeley            Goldman School of Public Policy and
2607 Hearst, Room 312                            Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720                              University of California, Berkeley
elinos@berkeley.edu                             2607 Hearst Avenue #7320
                                                Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
Allen Prohofsky                                 and NBER
Franchise Tax Board                             rothstein@berkeley.edu
PO Box 942857
Sacramento, CA 95827-0500                       Matt Unrath
Allen.Prohofsky@ftb.ca.gov                      Goldman School of Public Policy
                                                University of California, Berkeley
Aparna Ramesh                                   2607 Hearst Avenue #7320
University of California, Berkeley              Berkeley, CA 94270-7320
2521 Channing Way #5555                         unrath@berkeley.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
aparna.ramesh@berkeley.edu
1   Introduction

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a critical income support for working families. In 2019,
25 million households received about $63 billion nationwide, with an average benefit of approxi-
mately $2,500. Numerous studies have documented the EITC's beneficial effects on work, income,
and poverty; children's educational achievement and attainment; and adult and infant health (see
reviews in Hoynes and Rothstein, 2016; Nichols and Rothstein, 2016). Despite these benefits, the
IRS estimates that one in five eligible households do not take up the program (IRS, nd). For eligi-
ble families with the lowest incomes, take-up may be much lower, with approximately one in two
households foregoing their cash benefit (Jones, 2014; Plueger, 2009).
    The academic literature in various disciplines has proposed that learning, compliance, and
psychological costs can explain incomplete take-up of government benefits (Finkelstein and No-
towidigdo, 2019; Herd and Moynihan, 2019; Currie, 2006; Moffitt et al., 1983). First, to claim the
EITC, households must overcome the learning costs associated with discovering the credit exists
and determining whether they are eligible. Second, for families aware of the credit, the filing pro-
cess can be confusing, complex, and burdensome. Previous research suggests that the direct and
indirect compliance costs of filing, difficult for the average tax filer to navigate, may be especially
burdensome for low-income families (Herd and Moynihan, 2019; Goldin and Liscow, 2018; Bhar-
gava and Manoli, 2015; Currie, 2006). Third, even if learning and compliance costs are overcome,
the target population may face psychological barriers that inhibit take-up. Although the EITC is
thought to carry less stigma than other benefit programs (Halpern-Meekin et al., 2015), a potential
recipient may nevertheless distrust government or face psychological stressors that prevent them
from carrying out plans to file a return (Hovland and Weiss, 1951; Pornpitakpan, 2004). Distrust,
for example, may be a particular challenge for EITC outreach. Outreach messages often include
promises of free cash that can be hard to distinguish from scams to which families are frequently
exposed. The relative importance of all these potential explanations for the take-up gap remains
largely unexplored.
    "Nudges" ­ small changes to the choice architecture surrounding a decision that aim to alter
people's behavior without meaningfully changing incentives ­ have been used to address many of
these barriers, with substantial impacts on enrollment decisions across a wide array of policy con-
texts (Benartzi et al., 2017; Hallsworth et al., 2017; Thaler and Sunstein, 2009; Thaler and Benartzi,
2004; Madrian and Shea, 2001; Dellavigna and Linos, 2020). For example, nudges have been used
to increase take-up of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) (Finkelstein and
Notowidigdo, 2019), citizenship applications (Hotard et al., 2019), and even college enrollment
through increasing completion of the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) (Bettinger
et al., 2012). However, the evidence is not unambiguous; recent studies suggest that nudges may
be ineffective in other settings or may fail to scale (Camerer et al., 2018; Bird et al., 2019; Castleman


                                                   2
et al., 2019; Bergman et al., 2019).
   Studies on EITC take-up have also yielded mixed results. Bhargava and Manoli (2015) find
that IRS notifications to eligible taxpayers increased EITC claiming. Guyton et al. (2017), on the
other hand, find positive but much smaller effects of outreach on tax filing rates, with an effect
size of about 0.5 percentage points. Kopczuk and Pop-Eleches (2007) find that the availability of
tax preparation software increased EITC claiming. Chetty et al. (2013) similarly show that the
availability of nearby paid tax preparation services in a neighborhood predicts knowledge about
the program and usage. However, Cranor et al. (2019) find that mandating employers to inform
employees about their potential eligibility for the EITC had no effect on EITC take-up.
   It is noteworthy that many successful nudge studies focused on populations who already had
some interaction with the government. For example, both the Bhargava and Manoli (2015) and
Bettinger et al. (2012) interventions were conducted among taxpayers who had already filed a
return and only needed to be nudged to complete additional forms covering similar material.
Similarly, Meiselman (2018) demonstrates that nudges increase filing of city tax returns amongst
those who have already filed federal income taxes. Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2019) contacted
seniors who were already enrolled in Medicaid, but though eligible, failed to enroll in SNAP. It
is not clear whether these kinds of nudges would work on those with fewer existing interactions.
That is, for those who do not already file or who may have limited positive interactions with
government, the learning, compliance, and psychological costs associated with EITC take-up may
be much higher.
   To contribute to the growing evidence on whether nudges "work" and for whom, and to tease
out potential theoretical mechanisms that may explain barriers to take-up, we conducted six large-
scale, pre-registered randomized controlled trials in California in 2018 and 2019. These trials were
carried out in collaboration with the California tax agency (the Franchise Tax Board, or FTB), state
and local agencies that administer SNAP in California (CalFresh), and a large NGO dedicated to
statewide EITC outreach (Golden State Opportunity). All of our trials aimed to increase take-up
of California's state EITC (CalEITC), introduced in 2015. Because FTB believed that most eligible
tax filers already claimed the EITC, and because many families eligible for the CalEITC do not face
requirements to file state returns, our efforts focused on reaching families that might not already
be filing California tax returns.
   The CalEITC supplements the federal credit, as do similar programs in 25 other states (Nichols
and Rothstein, 2016). Unlike other states' credits, the California credit does not simply magnify
the federal schedule. It is more concentrated at the lowest incomes, where it is worth as much as
$3,000 per year. Figure 1 shows how the federal EITC and the CalEITC relate to family income for
a single parent with two children; schedules vary for other family types but have similar shapes.
For families with earnings around $7,000, the combined federal and state credits can be worth as
much as $5,500, increasing family resources by close to 80%.


                                                 3
    To claim the federal and state EITCs, families must file income tax returns, a potentially com-
plex process. Many families who qualify for the credit are otherwise not required to file returns
because their incomes fall below the thresholds that trigger filing requirements. Therefore, to
claim the credit for the first time, families might have to engage with a tax system with which they
have never interacted. Policymakers in California continue to be concerned that, absent outreach
and education, many families will not claim the credits for which they are eligible. Iselin et al.
(2020) find that the take-up rates among eligible CalFresh participants is 50% for the CalEITC and
70% for the federal EITC, and that only about one-third of eligible non-claimants of either credit
file tax returns at all.
    Surveys of potentially eligible families demonstrate that many are unaware of the credit and
its specific eligibility parameters, validating this concern. One survey found that only two-thirds
of families who received food stamps had heard of the federal EITC, and as few as one in three
low-income parents who identified as Hispanic had heard of the credit (Phillips, 2001).While this
survey is from 2000, the estimated national EITC participation rate has been remarkably consistent
since the 2000s, remaining at roughly 75 to 80 percent (Jones, 2014; IRS, nd). Much of the evidence
on EITC awareness focuses on those low income households that are already filing their taxes.
Even among this population, surveys and interviews of filers at low income tax sites and other tax
preparation sites find that while most associate filing taxes with a refund (Halpern-Meekin et al.,
2015; Smeeding et al., 2000), only about half are aware of the EITC itself (Bhargava and Manoli,
2015). A minority are able to identify the mechanisms as to why they are receiving a refund or the
benefit structure itself (Smeeding et al., 2000; Chetty et al., 2013).
    Since it is more difficult to identify and survey non-filers, there is limited evidence about their
awareness of, and familiarity with, the EITC. Nevertheless, there is reason to expect that they are
less aware of the credit. For example, using a nationally representative sample including both
filers and non-filers, Phillips (2001) finds that awareness of the EITC is lower among those with
very low incomes, who are unlikely to file tax returns absent the EITC, than among those with
somewhat higher incomes. Consistent with this, Blumenthal et al. (2005) find that only about 35%
of EITC-eligible households who were not required to file tax returns, due to low incomes, in tax
year 1988 did so. More recent evidence confirms that substantial majorities of EITC eligible non-
claimants did not file tax returns at all (Plueger, 2009; Beecroft, 2012). This suggests that awareness
of the EITC is lower among non-filers, but more research is needed both on this question and
about how to reduce the burdens that these households face in claiming the EITC. Our study is
motivated by the hypothesis that lack of awareness about the credit, the likely benefit amount, and
where to seek help play at least some role in explaining incomplete take-up among this population.
    We used six randomized trials, several with multiple treatment arms, to test a range of outreach
messages that our partners sent to potentially eligible households. Our messages aimed to inform
recipients of their potential eligibility for the federal and state EITCs and to encourage them to


                                                    4
file a tax return. They were delivered by postal mail or by text message, and generally resembled
the type of outreach efforts that public agencies often make to potential users of their services,
though we strove to use best practice in terms of using clear and simple language. Other outreach
efforts administered by our partners or other organizations during the same tax seasons, such as
billboards, public events or traditional advertisements, were much lower-touch and would have
affected our treatment and control groups similarly.
    Subjects for our studies were drawn from participant lists for the CalFresh program and from
a marketing database that included people with little or no existing interaction with government.
None of the studies conditioned on filing taxes, and one conditioned on not having filed taxes
in any of the three previous years. Each study was randomized, and we linked treatment and
control rosters to FTB tax records. We report estimates for two primary outcomes, measured at the
household level: Whether anyone in the household appeared (as filer or spouse) on a California
tax return, and whether anyone appeared on a state or federal return including an EITC claim.
Results are similar if we examine only CalEITC claiming.
    Table 1 describes the six studies; the Appendix includes copies of each of the treatments. Each
arm in our studies was designed to test a set of hypotheses, drawn from the literature on adminis-
trative burdens and ordeals (discussed above) about why people may fail to take up this available
benefit. Specifically, the experiments aimed to reduce learning, compliance, and/or psychologi-
cal costs associated with EITC participation via scalable, low-touch nudges. All studies included
a control group that received no message,1 and all treatment arms provided information about
the program and its value. If eligible households did not know about the program or did not
know about the potential amounts they were likely to receive, we hypothesized that receiving this
information would reduce learning costs and therefore increase take-up.
    Treatment arms in Studies 3, 4, and 5 tested the impact of providing additional information
about how to obtain help in filing a return, which targeted compliance costs. Specifically, if people
knew about the EITC and understood the potential benefits, but the process was too burdensome,
we hypothesized that providing individuals with detailed information about how to obtain help
with tax preparation would reduce compliance hurdles and increase take-up. We pointed individ-
uals to existing support services, as these represented the most scalable interventions. In Study 3,
we directed people to online resources, to text-based assistance, or to a hotline. In Studies 4 and 5,
we provided detailed information about a local Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) site that
provides free, in-person tax preparation assistance to low-income households.
    To test whether psychological costs associated with source credibility might affect take-up de-

    1
      It is possible that a member of the control group for one study was in the treatment group for another. The
randomization design, discussed below, explicitly stratified on other treatment assignments where possible, to ensure
a precisely zero correlation between treatment statuses in the different studies. We present analyses of each study
separately. Analyses that use the overlapping samples to explore potential interactions among the different treatments
show no evidence of any such interactions.


                                                          5
cisions, treatment arms in Studies 2 and 4 delivered the same information in different formats and
via different messengers. Since the notifications informed households that they were eligible to
receive free money, we were concerned that households might distrust the information or assume
it was a scam. We hypothesized that communication from a government agency and information
presented in more formal formats would increase source credibility and reduce distrust. In Study
2, we varied the messenger to test whether receiving information from a government agency was
more effective than receiving the same information from a non-profit. We made the difference
in messenger salient by changing the logos, signatures, and return addresses on the letters. In
both Study 2 and Study 4, we also explored source credibility by sending the same information in
both formal and informal formats. The formal treatments adopted the design used for federal tax
communications and in other EITC nudging experiments to communicate with taxpayers about
the EITC (e.g., Bhargava and Manoli, 2015). In the "informal" format, we used styles, images, and
colors similar to those used in marketing materials employed by other statewide outreach efforts.
In both cases, we used communication designs that could plausibly be scaled by a government
agency. Studies 5 and 6 also aimed to enhance source credibility by delivering messages from
local county welfare offices with which recipients regularly interacted, using similar wording as
the agencies' other outreach messages.
   Despite testing a range of interventions designed to leverage many of the behavioral expla-
nations for incomplete take-up, we found that none of our interventions had substantively or
statistically meaningful effects on tax filing or EITC claiming. Our messages were received; we
find relatively high engagement with websites linked to in the messages. Nevertheless, in each
of our trials, we can reject effects as large as the average nudge effect in a recent meta-analysis of
nudge studies reviewed by Dellavigna and Linos (2020).
   The existing evidence demonstrates that information-focused "nudge" interventions could
have been effective. Our designs resemble interventions studied by other researchers that have
found significant positive effects on take-up. For example, Bhargava and Manoli (2015) study
an intervention that involved the IRS sending a single mailing to tax filers who had not claimed
the EITC, and find that better-designed formats lead to higher rates of claiming. Guyton et al.
(2017) also study the effect of a single mailed reminder, while Beecroft (2012) studies the impact
of a postcard-sized mailer about the EITC sent to social service program participants. Finkelstein
and Notowidigdo's (2019) study of SNAP participation involved sending one mailing and one
follow-up postcard; their "Information Plus Assistance" group included on these documents a
phone number for a non-profit organization which subjects could call for enrollment assistance,
which resembles the the offers of assistance we test in our studies 3, 4, and 5. We believe that the
difference in our results largely reflects the difficulty of the task that people are being nudged to
perform. For low-income households who do not file taxes, the hurdle of submitting a tax return
may be too big for a simple outreach effort, no matter how well designed or behaviorally informed,


                                                  6
to overcome.2 Getting families over this hurdle evidently requires more than just information and
pointers to existing assistance.
    It is important for the field to grapple with null findings in the same way it grapples with
negative and positive findings. Our study improves our understanding of both the promise and
limitations of behavioral interventions for low-income populations. It thereby makes a major
contribution to the scholarship on behavioral science and the literature on incomplete take-up of
means-tested programs; it should also inform potential policy reforms related to outreach efforts
and tax administration. While nudges are a potentially valuable part of the policy toolkit, outreach
to hard-to-reach populations will often need to include higher-touch interventions that simplify
the underlying processes.


2       Methods

This paper encompasses six distinct but partially overlapping randomized controlled trials. The
studies were implemented in spring 2018 (Studies 1 and 5) and spring 2019 (Studies 2, 3, 4, and 6),
and focused on tax filing for the 2017 and 2018 tax years, respectively. United States income tax
returns are typically filed between February and April, and are based on income received during
the previous calendar year (the "tax year").
    Interventions were delivered by public agencies, the California Franchise Tax Board and the
California Department of Social Services, and by a non-governmental organization (Golden State
Opportunity) that receives funding from the state to conduct EITC outreach. Some features were
chosen to meet agency needs rather than those of researchers.3


Sampling frames

A major challenge for EITC outreach is that non-claimers are unlikely to appear in tax records,
which are used for most tax-related outreach. Our samples of potential non-claimers drew from
two sources. Studies 1-4 used a database purchased from a private marketing firm, TargetSmart.
Records were purchased for California low income households, first in spring 2018 and then up-
dated in spring 2019. This yielded approximately 1.3 million records.
    From the original sample, we removed individuals younger than 18, older than 70, and those
apparently living in group residences (identified by more than four records at the same address).
    2
       While several of our treatment arms directed subjects to VITA sites that could assist with tax preparation, these
may not have sufficiently lowered the barriers. Halpern-Meekin et al. (2015) report that EITC recipients experienced
volunteer-based tax preparation services as untrustworthy and akin to government bureaucracies with "long lines in
drab buildings, impersonal or even rude treatment, and the heavy atmosphere of desperate people soliciting aid", in
contrast to the "bright," "neat," more professional for-profit tax preparers, who treat claimants "like a valued customer"
(p. 83).
     3
       Our analysis of the data from these experiments was overseen by the California State Committee for the Protection
of Human Subjects (protocols 2019-021, 2019-002, 2018-037, 2018-194).


                                                            7
Our eventual sample consisted of 1.2 million individuals in 1 million households.
   Many of the individuals in studies 1-3 would have filed taxes even without being nudged.
For Study 4, we focused on those households that had not filed taxes in the past three years. To
do so, in early 2019 we merged the TargetSmart data to FTB tax filing records for tax years 2015-
2017. This was a fuzzy merge, based on names, addresses, and dates of birth, with allowance for
apparently legitimate differences between records in the two databases (e.g., misspelled names,
alternative ways of recording addresses, potential local moves). The universe for Study 4 was
limited to a subset of approximately 200,000 TargetSmart records that did not appear in the FTB
filing records in any of the three preceding tax years.
   The second original source of potential non-filers, used in Studies 5 and 6, was administrative
records of participants in the CalFresh program, the California instantiation of the federal Supple-
mental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). We began with approximately 6 million individuals
enrolled in CalFresh at any point in calendar year 2017 (Study 5) or 2018 (Study 6), grouped into
case (household) units. We excluded cases containing only seniors. We then linked adults to their
quarterly earnings records for 2017:Q1 through 2017:Q3 for Study 5 and 2018:Q1 through 2018:Q3
for Study 6 from the California Employment Development Department, which administers the
state's Unemployment Insurance program.
   We used CalFresh case compositions and earnings records to simulate federal and CalEITC
eligibility. Our simulations assumed that the CalFresh case corresponded to the potential tax
household; that all children in the CalFresh case would qualify as children for purposes of EITC
eligibility; that earnings in 2017:Q4 and 2018:Q4, which were not yet available when we admin-
istered treatments, would equal one-third of total earnings over the previous three quarters; and
that there would be zero self employment earnings or other income not covered by the earnings
records. Based on this simulation, we selected cases with EITC eligibility above $50. This excluded
those with zero or very low earnings and those with earnings too high to qualify for the EITC.
   Last, we restricted to participating counties: Sacramento and San Diego in Study 5, and those
counties plus San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara in Study 6. Welfare offices in these coun-
ties use text messages to communicate with CalFresh participants about their cases. We limited
our sample to individuals with valid phone numbers who had consented to receiving these text
messages.
   The two data sources each have advantages and limitations. The TargetSmart sample provides
a broad cross-section of low-income Californians, including those who interact with government
infrequently. However, these data have limited information about earned income or family struc-
ture and may contain outdated or incorrect records. The CalFresh enrollee contact information is
updated regularly, with detailed and reliable information about income and family composition.
However, the CalFresh database only contains households already connected with state social as-
sistance programs, meaning they have exhibited an awareness of and are willing to enroll in these


                                                  8
forms of assistance.


Randomization

All six studies were implemented using stratified random assignment. Each included a control
group that received no treatment and one or more treatment arms that received text messages
or letters. Where there were multiple treatment arms, all were assigned with equal probability,
though in several cases the control group was larger than any single treatment arm. Randomiza-
tion was at the household level, defined by the address in the TargetSmart data and by the case
number in the CalFresh data. A single representative was selected from each household to receive
the treatment.
   Appendix Table 2 provides details about sample sizes and randomization strata. Studies 1-4
were implemented sequentially, with assignment in one used as a stratification variable for the
next, as discussed below. This ensured that treatments in each study were perfectly orthogonal to
those in the other prior studies. Studies 1 and 2 used varying assignment rates across strata. In
Study 1, assignment rates varied across counties and zip codes to meet GSO's needs. In Study 2,
rates were set to yield 5,000 observations per treatment arm in Riverside county and 5,000 in the
other counties combined. Other studies used constant assignment probabilities across strata.


Procedures

Treatments consisted of sending a single letter or a single text message to an individual chosen
from each household. There was no other interaction with subjects. Control group members did
not receive the letters or texts, though they may have been exposed to other outreach. Examples
of each treatment can be found in the Appendix.
   Study 1. Text messages were sent manually by GSO volunteers in March and April 2018, with
observations sequenced randomly. Texts informed recipients of their potential eligibility and of
the need to file a return in order to claim the credit, and included a link with more information to
reduce learning costs. The exact wording of the texts varied over the course of the study.
   Study 2. There were four treatment arms, delivered as different letters, that addressed learning
costs and psychological costs related to potential mistrust of the messenger or message. Letters
varied in two dimensions that both addressed source credibility: the source (GSO or FTB) and
the formality. Each sender's letters used the relevant logos, signatures and return addresses. In
addition, half were structured as formal letters and half as informal flyers. The front of each letter
was printed in English; the back contained the same information in Spanish. Letters were mailed
in February 2019.
   Study 3. There were four treatment arms, each consisting of a single text message. To tar-
get learning costs, each message informed recipients about potential eligibility and the need to


                                                  9
file taxes to claim the credit. Treatment arms 2 and 3 also targeted compliance costs by offering
assistance through a hotline or via text respectively. Treatment arm 4 included additional infor-
mation on the average benefit amount to further address learning costs. Texts were sent manually
between February and April 2019.
    Study 4. There were eight treatment arms, delivered as different letters. As noted above, inclu-
sion in this study was conditioned on not having filed in any of the previous three years. Letters
came from FTB and contained one of four different messages: a simple message about the credit;
a simple message that also included information about the average value of the credit (addressing
learning costs); a message that added information about the location, hours, and contact infor-
mation of the nearest in-person free tax preparation assistance site (addressing compliance costs);
and a message that included both the average value of the credit and tax assistance information.
Each message was delivered in a formal and an informal version, with the idea that formal letters
might signal more source credibility (addressing psychological costs). The front of each letter was
printed in English; the back contained the same information in Spanish. In addition, each let-
ter contained a URL at which recipients could find the letter translated into Korean, Vietnamese,
Chinese, or Russian. Letters were mailed in February and March 2019.4
    Study 5. All treated individuals received the same sequence of text messages, designed to ad-
dress both learning and compliance barriers. The first message included a personalized benefit
amount estimated using the recipients' household composition and quarterly earnings data (see
the sampling frames subsection for more information). If the recipient texted "1" for more infor-
mation, they were provided the URL to an online free tax-preparation software. If they responded
"1" again, they were provided the address and hours of the closest VITA site to the client's 9 digit
zip code. When that site required appointments, the text also included a link for registration. Texts
were sent in English or Spanish, depending on the language indicated in the CalFresh record, and
were delivered over two days in March 2018.
    Study 6. There were three treatment arms, each delivered by text message. The first treatment
arm was a simple text, informing recipients of their potential eligibility, and provided a URL
to calculate their credit and a hotline to learn where to file for free. The second treatment arm
provided the same information as the first text, along with the average benefit amount. The third
treatment arm, as in Study 5, included a personalized credit amount. The three treatments did
progressively more to address learning costs. Moreover, the fact that they came from the local
CalFresh program should have increased source credibility and reduced psychological costs. Texts
were delivered in March 2019 in the language indicated in the recipient's CalFresh record: English,
Spanish, Chinese, or Vietnamese. Speakers of other languages received the English message.

    4
      Seven of the eight treatment arms were mailed on February 15, 2019. Due to a mailroom error, letters for one arm
(a formal letter with benefit amount and in-person free tax preparation site information) were not sent until March 25,
2019.


                                                          10
   A design feature of all of our interventions is that they would all be easily scalable. The vast
majority of nudge interventions run by governments at scale in the US are outreach efforts of this
nature. A recent paper estimates that 30% are physical letters, 20% are postcards, and almost 40%
are emails (Dellavigna and Linos, 2020). Like our interventions, these outreach efforts may link to
an in-person service, but directly nudging people in person occurs in less than 1% of cases.
   In addition to being the nudge most commonly pursued by government, this type of infor-
mational intervention is also one studied by many scholars concerned about incomplete take-up
of means-tested programs like the EITC. Several recent papers find that simply informing likely
eligible individuals about the existence of a program with a single intervention can yield substan-
tial effects on enrollment decisions (e.g., Bhargava and Manoli, 2015; Goldin et al., 2017; Armour,
2018; Barr and Turner, 2018; Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019).
   While our interventions themselves are low-cost, treatment arms in studies 3, 4, and 5 directed
subjects to existing high-touch services, such as in-person assistance with tax returns. This is real-
istically what intensive interventions look like at scale ­ offers of help rather than forced provision.
Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2019) also study this type of enhanced intervention; their "compli-
ance" treatment arm contained a phone number for a non-profit that would help seniors walk
through their SNAP application. VITA sites offer a similar level of personalized assistance.


Data and outcomes

This study is made possible by unprecedented access to an array of administrative data from
California, including income tax, wage, and social service records. Our use of social service and
wage records is discussed above. We measure impacts of our interventions from actual California
income tax filings.
   For each study, we attempted to match each member of each household to FTB records, us-
ing the same fuzzy match discussed above. We measured whether each individual successfully
matched to a California tax return and whether the return included a claim for either the federal
EITC or CalEITC. Our primary outcome measures are an indicator for the presence of a matched
return and an indicator for the presence of any EITC claim.
   We analyze the data at the household level. We consider a household to have filed a return and
to have taken up the EITC, respectively, if any member appears on a return and if any member's
return includes an EITC claim.
   We also track website visits in Studies 2, 4, and 6. Distinct URLs were used for each study and
treatment arm. In Studies 2 and 4, we count all hits to these URLs; in Study 6, we count unique
users. These measures are not available for the control groups.
   Table 2 presents summary statistics for our main samples. The TargetSmart sample is relatively
old, with a mean age of 60, though nearly half are indicated as having children in the house.


                                                  11
55% are white, 58% are female, and 41% filed taxes in the previous year. In the CalFresh data,
individuals are younger (mean age 37) and less likely to be white (23%). A larger share have
children, and 74% filed taxes in the prior year. In our CalFresh sample, we also have access to
earnings records covering three quarters of the tax year, which we use to simulate EITC eligibility.
We include in the study only families eligible for a federal or state EITC of at least $50. In our
sample, the average family's estimated annual income is just over $14,000, and the average total
(federal and state) EITC eligibility is $2,715. Across all observable characteristics to which we have
access, our trial arms are balanced.


Statistical analysis

Our primary analyses examine the effect of any treatment versus control. We construct a single
observation for each simulated tax filing unit (household), and estimate regressions of the form:


                                       Yis =  + Tis  + µs + is                                     (1)

Here, Yis is the outcome for household i in stratum s ­ either the presence of a tax return for some
member of the household or the presence of an EITC claim. Tis is an indicator for treatment, and
µs is a vector of stratum fixed effects. The impact of treatment is  . These are reported as the first
estimates for each study (in black) in Figure 3.
   A second set of analyses examine the effect of each treatment arm separately, where relevant.
These are similar, but replace the single treatment effect with a series of separate effects:


                                   Yis =  +        Tisj j + µs + is                                (2)
                                               j

Here, Tisj an indicator for assignment to treatment arm j , and j is the impact of that treatment
relative to control. These are reported as the second and subsequent estimates for each study in
Figure 3. P-values correspond to the hypotheses that each of the j s, considered individually,
equal zero. We have also tested the joint hypotheses that all of the j s in a particular study equal
zero. Across the four studies for which this is relevant and for both outcomes, we never reject the
null hypothesis.
   We also use a version of this model to test for baseline balance. For each baseline covariate,
we estimate Equation 2 separately for each study and report j s and the p-values for the joint
hypotheses that all j s equal zero in Appendix Tables 4-9. In Appendix Table 1, we report a
single p-value that aggregates across all studies (1-4 in Panel A and 5-6 in Panel B). This is based
on a sample that stacks all observations from the relevant group of studies and includes study-
by-stratum and study-by-treatment-arm effects. The p-value is based on an F-test of the joint
hypothesis that all study-by-treatment-arm effects equal zero.


                                                   12
     Last, in Studies 2 and 4, treatment arms were identified by the presence or absence of particular
features. We estimate a separate set of models that examines the impact of each feature.
     In Study 2, these take the form:


                               Yis =  + F ormalis F + F T Bis M + µs + is                                       (3)

where F ormalis and F T Bis are indicators for whether the letter was more formal (vs. informal)
and came from the FTB (vs. GSO).
     In Study 4, these take the form:

                     Yis =  + F ormalis F + Amountis A + V IT Ais V + µs + is                                   (4)

where F ormalis , Amountis , and V IT Ais are indicators for the presence of formal, credit amount,
and VITA information features on the letters. Estimates for Equations 3 and 4 are reported in Table
3.


3        Results

Figure 2 presents the main findings for two types of engagement indicators. In Studies 2 and 4,
paper letters included URLs unique to each treatment arm, which allowed us to measure total
website visits by each arm. In Study 6, we measure unique click-throughs to URLs embedded in
the text messages. Our engagement measures capture only those who click on (or type in) the
links included in our messages. We are unable to capture whether our treatments led recipients
either to obtain more information via other means (e.g., internet searches for the EITC, CalEITC,
or VITA, or other related terms) or to call a VITA site or the 211 number provided in many of
our treatments. Thus, they likely understate the number of recipients who received and read our
communications. Nevertheless, engagement is high compared to other estimates of successful
online engagement: The average click through rate for our text messages was 10%. Even letters,
which required users to type URLs by hand, generated click through rates of around 1%.5
     Engagement patterns are in line with our main hypotheses: Engagement was higher when
the messenger was the government (and therefore perhaps better known); when the message
provided useful, personalized, new information (i.e. the location of a VITA site or a personalized
credit amount), and when more formal presentation was used to increase source credibility. In
the Study 6 text messages, more information about the value of the credit increased engagement
(messages including a personalized credit amount exhibited the highest engagement), but letters

     5
      Irvine (2020) reports that click-through-rates (CTRs) for Facebook ads, the behavioral measure most similar to
clicking on an unsolicited text message, are around 1%, while a study by Wozney et al. (2019) obtains a CTR around
0.1%.


                                                        13
in Study 4 that listed the average credit amount did not elicit more pageviews.
    Figure 3 presents our main findings regarding effects on tax filing and EITC claiming. We
present the estimated effect of any treatment relative to control for each study, then for each sep-
arate treatment arm. Across all trials and each treatment arm, our interventions did not have
significant effects on either outcome. Point estimates are uniformly close to zero. Because our
sample sizes are large, our estimates are highly precise. In Studies 1, 3, and 4, we can rule out
effects of 0.5 percentage point or larger; in the smaller studies, we can rule out effects larger than
1 or 1.5 percentage point.
    Studies 2 and 4 were cross-classified to enable us to examine the effects of different features in
isolation. We present estimated effects of letter features in Table 3: a formal letter format vs. a flyer;
a credible messenger (the FTB) vs. an unknown NGO; the inclusion vs. omission of the average
value of the credit; and information about the closest VITA site vs. none. As explained above, these
features were designed to test particular hypothesized costs. The format and messenger features
were meant to reduce psychological costs by increasing credibility. Specifying the credit's value
should have reduced learning costs. Finally, VITA information should have reduced compliance
costs. We find no evidence that any feature generated non-zero effects.


4   Discussion

As has been reinforced by the substantial challenges governments have faced in delivering eco-
nomic relief during the COVID-19 crisis, the difficulty of accessing public benefits can be a major
limitation to the effectiveness of government policy. Yet, it remains unclear whether the low take-
up rates for many public programs reflect design choices, lack of awareness, or other factors. In the
absence of good understanding of the determinants of take-up, many efforts to increase take-up
begin and end with low-cost informational interventions, sometimes called "nudges."
    Early successes demonstrated that these interventions can yield significant effects on enroll-
ment decisions (Thaler and Sunstein, 2009; Hummel and Maedche, 2019; Allcott, 2016; Gerber
and Rogers, 2009; Beshears et al., 2015). These successes led to the creation of over 200 "nudge
units" working in and with governments across the world (OECD, 2017). However, our under-
standing of what types of nudges work, in what settings, and for whom remains underdeveloped.
Most public nudges focus on people who are already interacting with government programs. This
makes intuitive sense: It is both practically and theoretically easier to conduct effective outreach
to individuals who already have relationships with the government agency providing the nudge.
Understanding how to reach people who have not had previous interactions with government
is crucial to improving equity in government service delivery and helping the most vulnerable
populations escape poverty. This study aimed to do just that. Based on extant theories about
behavioral reasons for non-take-up of benefit programs, our messages should have raised partici-

                                                   14
pation.
   Similar to many behavioral studies, our experiments show substantial engagement, measured
by click-throughs or visits to a website. These show expected patterns, indicating that messages
were received and that many recipients engaged with the material they received. Yet all of our
messages had null effects on the intended behavioral outcomes, filing taxes and claiming the EITC.
Our sample sizes are large enough and the effect sizes small and consistent enough that we are
confident that our results can be interpreted as precise zeros.
   There are several potential explanations for the failure of our outreach efforts.
   First, it is possible that the recipients of our messages were already exposed to the relevant
information, and that outreach would have been effective in previous years or in other contexts
where there are fewer additional outreach efforts. As with any randomized controlled trial, we
cannot make strong claims about external validity.
   Second, the value of the EITC may not be large enough to warrant filing a return and claiming
it. Non-filers in our sample are eligible for smaller credits than are filers, on average (see Ap-
pendix Figures 3 and 4). Twenty-five percent of non-filers are eligible for credits of $300 or less,
as compared with 9% of filers. For most non-filers, however, potential credits are large relative
to plausible financial costs. Three-quarters of non-filers are eligible for credits in excess of $300
­ enough to outweigh the potential financial costs of paying a tax preparer to file returns (U.S.
Government Accountability Office 2014, National Society of Accountants n.d.).
   Third, our messages ­ one-time communications that inform low-income households that they
are eligible for large sums of cash ­ may simply feel too good to be true. We tested various mes-
sage framings that aimed to get past this resistance, varying formatting of the messages and their
sources to increase credibility. Nevertheless, it is possible that none of these broke through, but
that alternative messages or messengers would be more successful.
   Fourth, the particular messages that we sent may have been ineffective, where others would
have been more effective. For example, perhaps messages sent earlier in the tax season, or re-
peated contacts, would have yielded different results. These are potential lines for future inquiry.
However, we do not think these are strong candidates for explanations. Our design choices were
grounded in behavioral theories drawn from the literature on administrative burden and barri-
ers to take-up, and our various treatments spanned a wide range of potential messages. While
it remains possible that we missed the one specific message that would have been effective, this
seems unlikely. More plausible is that repeated contacts would have been more effective, but we
note that a number of successful interventions in the literature (e.g., Bhargava and Manoli, 2015;
Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019) are also based on a single outreach message.
   Moreover, our treatments are similar to those that are commonly used in practice. Our partners
routinely use one-time, low-cost, low-touch informational campaigns, through targeted text mes-
sages, letters, or postcards, to communicate with their clients about benefits and programs. These


                                                 15
organizations know that not every recipient interacts with their outreach ­ but do expect that even
if a small percentage take action, the total benefits received for this small group justify the cost of
outreach at scale. Our results indicate that this logic may be flawed, as we cannot count on even
small effects from this type of outreach. Moving behavior seems to require a larger investment.
   Fifth, some eligible filers may face additional direct or psychological costs to interacting with
the federal tax agency that may not be addressed simply through information. For example, a
family concerned that immigration authorities would use tax returns or claiming behavior to tar-
get enforcement efforts or deny citizenship applications might be willing to leave free money on
the table. Our interventions were carried out in 2018 and 2019, when such mistrust may have been
heightened.
   Finally, our treatments do not directly reduce compliance or psychological costs. Instead, we
test the effect of messages that use information to reduce perceived learning, compliance and
psychological costs. Our evidence suggests that nudges alone may be insufficient, but does not
indicate that such costs are absent. The real compliance costs faced by our target population may
simply be too high for our messages to overcome. While some trial arms pointed recipients to
phone and online support as well as free tax filing assistance, actually receiving that help would
have involved seeking out that assistance, going to a VITA site at specified times, compiling all of
the required documents, and potentially making an advance appointment. Expanding the avail-
ability of this type of free tax support by extending the hours and availability of VITA sites, by
increasing access to and quality of free online resources, or by bundling tax services with other
services for low-income families may be crucial in helping people overcome real compliance hur-
dles. Similarly, simplifying the tax filing process itself by using existing administrative data to
pre-fill tax returns could reduce real compliance costs.
   A first step in understanding the nature of these costs for those who may have limited positive
interactions with government is to use linkages of existing data, as we have, to identify poten-
tially eligible households. More research on familiarity with tax filing and awareness of the EITC
among non-filers, as well as more qualitative research on the psychological and compliance costs
these households face in claiming the credit, would help inform future evaluations of higher-touch
interventions that might be able to overcome those costs.
   Nudges can provide a low-cost way to achieve many public purposes. They are particularly
well suited to bringing marginal people over the threshold into participation, but are less likely to
be successful for more inframarginal potential participants. For these populations, higher-touch
interventions, particularly design choices that make programs accessible from the beginning, are
likely to be required.




                                                  16
References

Allcott, H. (2016). Paternalism and energy efficiency: an overview. Annual Review of Economics,
  8:145­176.

Armour, P. (2018). The role of information in disability insurance application: An analysis of the
  social security statement phase-in. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3):1­41.

Barr, A. and Turner, S. (2018). A letter and encouragement: Does information increase postsec-
  ondary enrollment of ui recipients? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3):42­68.

Beecroft, E. (2012). EITC take-up by recipients of public assistance in Virginia and results of a
  low-cost experiment to increase EITC claims. Unpublished manuscript.

Benartzi, S., Beshears, J., Milkman, K. L., Sunstein, C. R., Thaler, R. H., Shankar, M., Tucker-Ray,
  W., Congdon, W. J., and Galing, S. (2017). Should governments invest more in nudging? Psy-
  chological Science, 28(8):1041­1055.

Bergman, P., Denning, J. T., and Manoli, D. (2019). Is information enough? the effect of information
  about education tax benefits on student outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  38(3):706­731.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., and Milkman, K. L. (2015). The effect of
  providing peer information on retirement savings decisions. The Journal of Finance, 70(3):1161­
  1201.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application
  assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1205­1242.

Bhargava, S. and Manoli, D. (2015). Psychological frictions and the incomplete take-up of social
  benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment. American Economic Review, 105(11):3489­3529.

Bird, K. A., Castleman, B. L., Denning, J. T., Goodman, J., Lamberton, C., and Rosinger, K. O.
  (2019). Nudging at scale: Experimental evidence from FAFSA completion campaigns. NBER
  Working Paper.

Blumenthal, M., Erard, B., and Ho, C.-C. (2005). Participation and compliance with the earned
  income tax credit. National Tax Journal, pages 189­213.

Camerer, C. F., Dreber, A., Holzmeister, F., Ho, T.-H., Huber, J., Johannesson, M., Kirchler, M.,
  Nave, G., Nosek, B. A., Pfeiffer, T., et al. (2018). Evaluating the replicability of social science



                                                 17
  experiments in nature and science between 2010 and 2015. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(9):637­
  644.

Castleman, B. L., Patterson, R., and Skimmyhorn, W. (2019). Benefits left on the table: Evidence
  from the Servicemembers' Civil Relief Act. Economics of Education Review.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., and Saez, E. (2013). Using differences in knowledge across neighbor-
  hoods to uncover the impacts of the EITC on earnings. American Economic Review, 103(7):2683­
  2721.

Cranor, T., Kotb, S., and Goldin, J. (2019). Does informing employees about tax benefits increase
  take-up?: Evidence from EITC notification laws. National Tax Journal, 72(2):1­8.

Currie, J. (2006). The take-up of social benefits. In Alan Auerbach, D. C. and Quigley, J., editors,
  Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, pages 80­148. Russell Sage.

Dellavigna, S. and Linos, E. (2020). RCTs to scale: Comprehensive evidence from two nudge units.

Finkelstein, A. and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2019). Take-up and targeting: Experimental evidence from
  SNAP. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3):1505­1556.

Gerber, A. S. and Rogers, T. (2009). Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote: Everybody's
  voting and so should you. The Journal of Politics, 71(1):178­191.

Goldin, J., Homonoff, T., and Tucker-Ray, W. (2017). Retirement contribution rate nudges and plan
  participation: Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Review, 107(5):456­61.

Goldin, J. and Liscow, Z. (2018). Tax benefit complexity and take-up: Lessons from the earned
  income tax credit. Tax Law Review, 72.

Guyton, J., Langetieg, P., Manoli, D., Payne, M., Schafer, B., and Sebastiani, M. (2017). Reminders
  and recidivism: using administrative data to characterize nonfilers and conduct EITC outreach.
  American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 107(5):471­75.

Hallsworth, M., List, J. A., Metcalfe, R. D., and Vlaev, I. (2017). The behavioralist as tax collector:
  Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal of Public Economics, 148:14­
  31.

Halpern-Meekin, S., Edin, K., Tach, L., and Sykes, J. (2015). It's not like I'm poor: How working
  families make ends meet in a post-welfare world. Univ of California Press.

Herd, P. and Moynihan, D. P. (2019). Administrative burden: Policymaking by other means. Russell
  Sage Foundation.


                                                  18
Hotard, M., Lawrence, D., Laitin, D. D., and Hainmueller, J. (2019). A low-cost information nudge
  increases citizenship application rates among low-income immigrants. Nature Human Behaviour,
  3(7):678­683.

Hovland, C. I. and Weiss, W. (1951). The influence of source credibility on communication effec-
  tiveness. Public Opinion Quarterly, 15(4):635­650.

Hoynes, H. and Rothstein, J. (2016). Tax policy toward low-income families. NBER Working Paper.

Hummel, D. and Maedche, A. (2019). How effective is nudging? a quantitative review on the effect
  sizes and limits of empirical nudging studies. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics,
  80:47­58.

IRS (n.d.). EITC participation rates by state. https://www.eitc.irs.gov/eitc-central/
  participation-rate/eitc-participation-rate-by-states. Accessed: 2020-03-20.

Irvine, M. (2020). Facebook ad benchmarks for your industry. https://www.wordstream.
  com/blog/ws/2017/02/28/facebook-advertising-benchmarks. Accessed: 2020-03-
  20.

Iselin, J., Lacoe, J., Rothstein, J., and Unrath, M. (2020). Take-up of the federal and California EITC:
  Measuring participation with administrative data. Technical report, California Policy Lab.

Jones, M. R. (2014). Changes in EITC eligibility and participation, 2005-2009. Center for Adminis-
  trative Records Research and Applications Working Paper.

Kopczuk, W. and Pop-Eleches, C. (2007). Electronic filing, tax preparers and participation in the
  earned income tax credit. Journal of Public Economics, 91(7-8):1351­1367.

Madrian, B. C. and Shea, D. F. (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k) participation and
  savings behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4):1149­1187.

Meiselman, B. S. (2018). Ghostbusting in Detroit: Evidence on nonfilers from a controlled field
  experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 158:180­193.

Moffitt, R. et al. (1983).   An economic model of welfare stigma.         American Economic Review,
  73(5):1023­1035.

Nichols, A. and Rothstein, J. (2016). The earned income tax credit. In Economics of Means-Tested
  Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1, pages 137­218. University of Chicago Press.

OECD (2017). Behavioural insights and public policy: Lessons from around the world. OECD.




                                                  19
Phillips, K. R. (2001). Who knows about the earned income tax credit? Technical report, The Urban
  Institute.

Plueger, D. (2009). The EITC participation rate for tax year 2005. Internal Revenue Service Bulletin.

Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source credibility: A critical review of five decades'
  evidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2):243­281.

Smeeding, T. M., Phillips, K. R., and O'Connor, M. (2000). The EITC: Expectation, knowledge, use,
  and economic and social mobility. National Tax Journal, pages 1187­1209.

Thaler, R. H. and Benartzi, S. (2004). Save more tomorrowTM: Using behavioral economics to
  increase employee saving. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1):S164­S187.

Thaler, R. H. and Sunstein, C. R. (2009). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happi-
  ness. Penguin.

Wozney, L., Turner, K., Rose-Davis, B., and McGrath, P. J. (2019). Facebook ads to the rescue?
  recruiting a hard to reach population into an internet-based behavioral health intervention trial.
  Internet interventions, 17:100246.




                                                 20
Figures

Figure 1: Federal and California EITC schedules for a single-parent family with two children, tax
year 2018


                                                        Mandated filing threshold
                                                        Head of household
                               Combined
                    $6000
                            EITC Amount



                    $5000
    Credit Amount




                    $4000




                    $3000




                                                                 Federal EITC
                    $2000




                    $1000      CalEITC
                              $5000




                                      $10000




                                               $15000




                                                        $20000




                                                                        $25000




                                                                                 $30000




                                                                                          $35000




                                                                                                   $40000




                                                                                                            $45000




                                                                                                                     $50000
                                                                 Earned Income

Notes. This diagram illustrates the federal (blue) and state (gold) EITC schedules for a head of household with two
children. The gray line illustrates the combined value of the EITC for a filer who claims both credits. The dotted line
denotes the filing threshold for a head of household in tax year 2018, which was $18,000; families with incomes below
this threshold are generally not required to file returns.




                                                                   21
                    Figure 2: Web traffic by pooled treatment features, tax year 2018




Notes. Figure shows measures of engagement as a share of the number of messages sent, by study and treatment
feature. In Studies 2 and 4, the features are shared across several treatment arms, and traffic estimates aggregate over
all relevant arms. In Studies 3 and 4, engagement measure is visits to a website, hand-entered from treatment-arm-
specific URLs included in letters, divided by the number of letters sent. In Study 6, engagement measure is the number
of unique visitors to a URL included in the text messages, divided by the number of texts sent.




                                                          22
         Figure 3: Effects of outreach treatments on tax filing and EITC claiming, by study




Notes. Figure shows estimated treatment effects on tax filing (left) and EITC claiming (right), with 95% confidence
intervals. P-values reflect two-sided significant tests. Larger black dots and lines show effects of any treatment vs.
control, while smaller, colored dots and lines show effects of each treatment arm individually.




                                                          23
Tables

                                 Table 1: Study descriptions

Study       Treatment Treatment mode                Costs addressed
            arms
Study 1     1         Text messages sent by         Learning
N=639,244             NGO                            ·Simple message

Study 2     4          Letters sent by state        Learning
N=96,370               government and NGO            ·Simple message vs. average benefit amount

                                                    Psychological
                                                     ·Government vs. NGO messenger
                                                     ·Formal vs. informal

Study 3     4          Text messages sent by        Learning
N=1,084,018            NGO                           ·Simple message vs. average benefit amount

                                                    Compliance
                                                     ·Web vs. text vs. phone-based assistance

Study 4     8          Letters sent by state        Learning
N=204,285              government                    ·Simple message vs. average benefit amount

                                                    Compliance
                                                     ·Local in-person free tax preparation information

                                                    Psychological
                                                     ·Formal vs. informal formatting

Study 5     1          Text messages sent by        Learning
N=38,093               county welfare office         ·Personalized benefit amount

                                                    Compliance
                                                     ·Free tax preparation website
                                                     ·Address of local in-person free tax preparation assistance

Study 6     3          Text messages sent by        Learning
N=47,104               county welfare office         ·Average vs. personalized benefit amount




                                               24
                                Table 2: Summary statistics and balance tests

                                                                      Mean           SD             P-value
       Panel A: Target Smart data (N=1,084,018)
           Age                                                        60             21             0.24
           Male                                                       0.42           0.49           0.14
           White                                                      0.55           0.50           0.20
           Married                                                    0.21           0.41           0.66
           Have children                                              0.47           0.50           0.72
           College graduate                                           0.22           0.42           0.53
           Filed in previous tax year                                 0.41           0.49           0.49
           Filed in current year, prior to start of study             0.11           0.31           0.83

       Panel B: CalFresh participants (N=47,104)
           Age                                                        37             12             0.14
           Male                                                       0.36           0.48           0.86
           White                                                      0.23           0.42           0.14
           Primary language is English                                0.75           0.43           0.74
           Presence of other adults                                   0.31           0.46           0.18
           Presence of children                                       0.68           0.47           1.00
           Filed in previous tax year                                 0.74           0.44           0.53
           Filed in current year, prior to start of study             0.43           0.49           0.39
           Predicted annual income                                    14,178         10,636         0.72
           Predicted EITC amount                                      2,715          2,176          0.69

Notes. Summary statistics are for samples used in Studies 2 and 6. The rightmost column shows p-value for a hypoth-
esis test that the indicated characteristic has the same mean across all assignment arms in all relevant studies (1-4 in
panel A; 5-6 in panel B).




                                                          25
Table 3: Estimates of pooled treatment features, identified from across-treatment arm variation

                                            Filed Return           Claimed EITC
                                        Study 2      Study 4     Study 2     Study 4
                   Baseline              0.377        0.089       0.076        0.024
                                        (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)
                   Formal letter         0.002        -0.000      -0.004      -0.000
                                        (0.004)      (0.001)     (0.005)     (0.001)
                   Messenger: FTB        0.000                    0.001
                                        (0.004)                  (0.002)
                   Benefit amount                     0.001                   -0.000
                                                     (0.001)                 (0.001)
                   VITA referral                      -0.002                  -0.000
                                                     (0.001)                 (0.001)
                   N                     96,370      204,285      96,370     204,285
                   p-value,  = 0          0.89         0.45        0.53        0.88

                 Notes. These estimates correspond to  coefficients in Equations 3 and 4.




                                                   26
              Can Nudges Increase Take-up of the EITC?:
               Evidence from Multiple Field Experiments

                                          Appendix


    Appendix Table 1 lists the assignment rates and stratification used in each study. Appendix
Table 2 lists the minimum detectable effects stated in the pre-analysis plan for each study.
    Appendix Tables 3-8 present full balance checks for each of the available baseline covariates
and each treatment. There is one table for each study. In each, the first column shows the control
group mean and standard deviation. The next series of columns, one for each treatment arm,
shows the estimated difference between that treatment arm and the control group, along with
standard errors. These are the j coefficients from equation (2), using the baseline covariates as
dependent variables. The final column of each table shows a p-value for the hypothesis that the
means are the same in each treatment group as in the control; that is, that all of the j s are jointly
zero. Very few of the estimated j s are statistically significant, evaluated individually, and all of
the estimated effects are substantively small. None of our tests indicate joint significance for any
study or covariate.
    The final columns of Appendix Tables 3-8 present estimated treatment effects on our primary
outcomes, tax filing and EITC claiming. These are again based on equation (2), and correspond to
the individual treatment arm effects plotted in Figure 3.
    Appendix Figures 1 and 2 use the CalFresh data from Study 6 to simulate annual incomes
and EITC credit eligibility for each family in our sample. We plot the histograms of those two
measures, separately for the subsets of the control group who do and do not file tax returns. These
figures indicate that filers have much higher incomes and higher credit eligibility than non-filers,
on average. Twenty-five percent of non-filers are eligible for credits of $300 or less, as compared
with 9% of filers. Nevertheless, 75% of non-filers are eligible for credits in excess of $300 ­ enough
to outweigh the potential financial costs of paying a tax preparer to file returns (U.S. Government
Accountability Office 2014, National Society of Accountants n.d.).
    The various treatment letters and text messages are reproduced in Appendix Figures 3-18.




                                                  i
Appendix figures and tables

                           Appendix Table 1: Randomization details by study

 Study Treatment N                         Assignment frequencies /          Strata
       arms      (households)              proportions
 1     1         639,244                   200,000 control; remainder        Zip code, dummies for
                                           treatment*                        white/nonwhite and
                                                                             college/non-college

 2        4            96,370              10,000 to each treatment          County, zip code, missing DOB,
                                           arm; remainder control            Study 1 assignment

 3        4            1,084,018           20% to each treatment arm;        County, zip code, missing DOB,
                                           20% control                       Study 1 and Study 2 assignment

 4        8            204,285             15,000 to each treatment          County, zip code, Study 1
                                           group; remainder control          assignment and Study 3 assignment

 5        1            38,093              50% treatment; 50% control        County, race, single adult, four bins
                                                                             of income, presence of children

 6        3            47,104              25% to each treatment arm;        County, presence of children, low or
                                           25% control                       moderate income, primary
                                                                             language

Notes. Study 1 used the TargetSmart records updated through spring 2018, and excluded those older than 70. Studies
2 and 3 included older individuals and those added in the 2019 update. Study 2 limited to a subset of records in six
counties (Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Riverside, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara). For Studies 1-4, some
zip codes contained too few observations to assign observations to treatment and control with nearly equal probabil-
ities. We grouped observations in these less populous zip codes to a simulated county-level "zip code", and used this
simulated zip code for stratification. For Study 5, we stratified on four income bins: $0 to $5000, $5000 to $11,500,
$11,500 to $20,000 and $20,000 to $50,000. The race variable used for stratification had four values: White, Latinx,
Black/Asian/PI/American Indian/Alaskan Native. The indicator for single adult reflected whether we identified the
case as having one working-age adult or more than one working-age adult. For Study 6, we stratified on two broader
income bins: $0 to $12,500 and $12,500 to $55,000; primary languages were the four languages in which we distributed
the messages, English, Chinese, Spanish, and Vietnamese.




                                                         ii
              Appendix Table 2: Pre-registration minimum detectable effect estimates

 Study OSF ID                            MDE                                  MDE
                                         Any treatment vs. control            Individual treatment arm vs. control
 1        https://osf.io/ct58w           0.3 percentage point                 n/a

 2        https://osf.io/z8ebc           0.8 pp                               1.4 pp

 3        https://osf.io/z8ebc           0.3 pp                               0.4 pp

 4        https://osf.io/z8ebc           0.6 pp                               1.1 pp

 5        https://osf.io/msh7t           1.6 pp                               n/a

 6        https://osf.io/p2q4y           1.4 pp                               1.7 pp


Notes. The pre-analysis plan for study 5 was posted before the eventual sample size was known, and does not contain
a power calculation. We estimate this MDE in the same way that we estimated the MDE for Study 6, as described in
that study's posted pre-analysis plan. Studies 2-4 are all described in the same pre-analysis plan. We used different
numbers to identify those experiments than we do here. Study 3 corresponds to what we called in the pre-analysis plan
Experiment 1, Study 4 corresponds to Experiment 2, and Study 2 corresponds to Experiment 3.




                                                         iii
Appendix Table 3: Differences in subjects' characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming rate by
treatment assignment in Study 1

                                                   Control Group
                                                     Average                          P-value from
                                                    (mean/sd)          Basic Text      F-test:  =0
                    Baseline Characteristics

                     Age                                47.219            0.037           0.407
                                                       [13.651]          (0.045)

                     Male                                0.425            -0.000          0.896
                                                        [0.494]          (0.002)

                     White                               0.444            -0.000          0.732
                                                        [0.497]          (0.000)

                     Married                             0.187            -0.001          0.505
                                                        [0.390]          (0.001)

                     Have Children                       0.582            0.001           0.691
                                                        [0.493]          (0.002)

                     College Grad                        0.386            -0.002          0.063
                                                        [0.487]          (0.001)

                     Filed Early                         0.219            -0.001          0.393
                                                        [0.414]          (0.001)

                    Treatment Effects

                     Filed Return                        0.405            -0.000          0.770
                                                        [0.491]          (0.001)

                     Claimed EITC                        0.085            0.000           0.908
                                                        [0.279]          (0.001)
                    N                                   195,200          444,044


Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance
of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that
the treatment effect on the indicated characteristic or outcome is zero.




                                                           iv
              Appendix Table 4: Differences in subjects' characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming rate by treatment assignment in Study 2

                                                  Control Group
                                                    Average                                                                              P-value from
                                                   (mean/sd)         FTB formal      FTB informal     GSO formal       GSO informal       F-test:  =0
                   Baseline Characteristics

                    Age                                43.499            -0.175          0.107            -0.116            0.227             0.169
                                                      [11.484]          (0.140)         (0.140)          (0.140)           (0.140)

                    Male                               0.628             -0.003          0.004            -0.001            -0.001            0.922
                                                      [0.683]           (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)

                    White                              0.443             0.001           0.001            0.005             0.002             0.901
                                                      [0.497]           (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.005)

                    Married                            0.241             0.007           -0.003           0.002             0.006             0.188
                                                      [0.520]           (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.004)

                    Have Children                      1.159             0.008           -0.000           -0.001            -0.002            0.724




v
                                                      [0.762]           (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)

                    College Grad                       0.213             0.004           0.003            -0.002            0.010             0.484
                                                      [0.409]           (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.006)

                    Filed Early                        0.115             0.002           0.003            -0.001           -0.007             0.245
                                                      [0.319]           (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)

                    Filed in 2017                      0.377             0.001           0.004            -0.000            -0.001            0.934
                                                      [0.485]           (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.005)

                   Treatment Effects

                    Filed Return                       0.377             0.001           -0.001           -0.000            -0.007            0.644
                                                      [0.485]           (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.005)

                    Claimed EITC                       0.077             -0.003          0.004            -0.000            0.000             0.513
                                                      [0.266]           (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.003)
                   N                                  56,370            10,000          10,000           10,000            10,000


    Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%,
    ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that all of the treatment coefficients (the  s in equation (2)) are jointly zero.
               Appendix Table 5: Differences in subjects' characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming rate by treatment assignment in Study 3

                                                      Control Group
                                                        Average                                                                        P-value from
                                                       (mean/sd)         Basic Info    211 Info    Text Assistance     Credit Amt       F-test:  =0
                       Baseline Characteristics

                         Age                               59.930          -0.042        0.017          -0.038             0.033           0.476
                                                          [21.096]         (0.050)      (0.050)         (0.050)           (0.050)

                         Male                              0.550          -0.005        -0.002          -0.002            -0.002           0.055
                                                          [0.640]          (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)

                         White                             0.548            -0.001       -0.001          -0.002            -0.001          0.700
                                                          [0.498]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

                         Married                           0.269            -0.001       0.000           -0.001            -0.001          0.702
                                                          [0.512]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

                         Have Children                     0.946            -0.001       -0.002          -0.002            -0.002          0.666




vi
                                                          [0.821]          (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)

                         College Grad                      0.223            -0.001       -0.001          -0.001            -0.001          0.923
                                                          [0.416]          (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)

                         Filed Early                       0.111            -0.001       -0.000          -0.000            -0.000          0.659
                                                          [0.314]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

                         Filed in 2017                     0.411            -0.001       -0.001          -0.000            0.000           0.875
                                                          [0.492]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

                       Treatment Effects

                         Filed Return                      0.390            -0.001       -0.002          -0.002            -0.001          0.583
                                                          [0.488]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)

                         Claimed EITC                      0.063            -0.000      -0.002           -0.001            0.000           0.017
                                                          (0.244]          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
                       N                                  216,804          216,804      216,804         216,803           216,803


     Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%,
     ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that all of the treatment coefficients (the  s in equation (2)) are jointly zero.
                                Appendix Table 6: Differences in subjects' characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming rate by treatment assignment in Study 4


                                      Control Group
                                        Average         Formal/     Formal/     Formal/       Formal/          Informal/    Informal/     Informal/      Informal/    P-value from
                                       (mean/sd)        Baseline    Amount       VITA       Amount+VITA         Baseline     Amount         VITA        Amount+VITA    F-test:  =0
           Baseline Characteristics

            Age                           44.106          0.081       0.129      -0.027          0.057          -0.216        -0.016        0.293            -0.059      0.288
                                         [11.789]        (0.138)     (0.138)     (0.139)        (0.138)         (0.139)       (0.139)       (0.138)         (0.139)

            Male                          0.708           -0.003      -0.001      -0.005        0.014            -0.001        -0.004        -0.005          -0.002      0.116
                                         [0.735]         (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)         (0.005)

            White                         0.474           -0.006     0.009        -0.001        -0.010           -0.004        -0.001        0.005           -0.001      0.023
                                         [0.499]         (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)

            Married                       0.152           0.002       0.002       -0.000         0.003          -0.001         0.003        -0.002          -0.000       0.709
                                         [0.460]         (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)

            Have Children                 1.390          -0.000       -0.007     -0.008          0.002          -0.008         -0.002       -0.010          -0.012       0.501
                                         [0.759]         (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.006)         (0.007)




vii
            College Grad                  0.157           0.010       0.004       0.001          0.003           -0.002       0.012          -0.003          0.001       0.345
                                         [0.364]         (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)         (0.005)

            Filed Early                   0.015          -0.002       -0.000     -0.001         -0.001          -0.000         0.000         0.000          -0.002       0.489
                                         [0.120]         (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)

            Filed in 2017                 0.036          -0.003       0.000       -0.001        -0.001          -0.003         -0.002       -0.001          -0.002       0.407
                                         [0.186]         (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)

           Treatment Effects

            Filed Return                  0.090          -0.001       -0.000     -0.003         -0.001          -0.002         0.000         -0.004          -0.002      0.874
                                         [0.286]         (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)

            Claimed EITC                  0.024          -0.000       -0.001     -0.001         -0.001          -0.000         -0.001        -0.001         -0.000       0.999
                                         [0.154]         (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
           N                             85,355          14,863      14,892      14,880         14,836          14,867        14,862        14,880          14,850


      Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%,
      ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that all of the treatment coefficients (the  s in equation (2)) are jointly zero.
Appendix Table 7: Differences in subjects' baseline characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming
rate by treatment assignment in Study 5, tax year 2017

                                                  Control Group Average                        P-value from
                                                        (mean/sd)               Basic Text     F-test:  = 0
           Baseline Characteristics

             Age                                             36.95                  0.01            0.94
                                                            [11.07]                (0.10)

             Male                                            0.36                   0.00            0.96
                                                            [0.48]                 (0.00)

             White                                           0.27                   -0.00           0.94
                                                            [0.45]                 (0.00)

             English                                         0.86                   0.00            0.65
                                                            [0.35]                 (0.00)

             Presence of other adults                        0.34                   -0.00           0.48
                                                            [0.47]                 (0.00)

             Presence of children                            0.73                   0.00            0.98
                                                            [0.44]                 (0.00)

             Filed previous year                             0.70                   0.01            0.19
                                                            [0.46]                 (0.00)

             Filed before treatment started                  0.67                   0.00            0.75
                                                            [0.47]                 (0.00)

             Predicted total EITC amount                   2915.16                 -2.89            0.80
                                                          [2155.56]               (11.24)

           Treatment Effects

             Filed return                                    0.79                   0.01            0.17
                                                            [0.41]                 (0.00)

             Claimed EITC                                    0.70                  0.00             0.91
                                                            [0.46]                (0.00)
           N                                                19,009                19,084


Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance
of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that
the treatment effect on the indicated characteristic or outcome is zero.




                                                          viii
     Appendix Table 8: Differences in subjects' baseline characteristics, filing rate and EITC claiming rate by treatment assignment in Study
     6, tax year 2018

                                                                   Control Group Average                Average Credit   Personalized   P-value from
                                                                         (mean/sd)         Basic Info      Amount         Credit Amt    F-test:  = 0
                                 Baseline Characteristics

                                  Age                                      36.98            -0.31           -0.01           -0.02           0.10
                                                                          [12.38]           (0.15)          (0.15)          (0.15)

                                  Male                                      0.37             -0.01          -0.01           -0.00           0.75
                                                                           [0.48]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)

                                  White                                     0.24             -0.01          -0.00           -0.01           0.23
                                                                           [0.43]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)

                                  English                                   0.75              0.00           0.00            0.00           0.58
                                                                           [0.43]            (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)

                                  Presence of other adults                  0.31             -0.01          -0.00           -0.01           0.30
                                                                           [0.46]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)

                                  Number of children                        1.24             -0.01           0.00            0.00           0.45
                                                                           [1.06]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)




ix
                                  Filed previous year                       0.74             -0.00          -0.01           -0.00           0.69
                                                                           [0.44]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)

                                  Filed before treatment started            0.43             -0.00          -0.01           -0.01           0.29
                                                                           [0.50]            (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)

                                  Predicted annual income                 14199.41           -71.98         -22.01          10.90           0.72
                                                                         [10642.15]         (78.06)        (78.06)         (78.05)

                                  Predicted total EITC amount             2702.35            11.96          24.68           16.68           0.62
                                                                         [2162.97]          (18.86)        (18.86)         (18.86)

                                 Treatment Effects

                                  Filed return                              0.78             -0.00          -0.00            0.00           0.73
                                                                           [0.41]            (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)

                                  Claimed EITC                             0.70              -0.00           0.00            -0.00          0.74
                                                                          [0.46]            (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)
                                 N                                        11,770            11,777          11,775          11,782


     Notes. Standard errors in parentheses; standard deviations in square brackets. Asterisks indicate statistical significance of individual coefficients; *=10%, **=5%,
     ***=1%. The p-values in the final column are for tests of the hypothesis that all of the treatment coefficients (the  s in equation (2)) are jointly zero. We show balance
     on the variable for number of children in the household, as opposed to presence of children which we showed in Appendix Table 7, because we stratified on a
     dummy for presence of children during randomization for Study 6, ensuring perfect balance on that variable.
      Appendix Figure 1: Estimated income for filers and non-filers in Study 6 control group




Note: The figure plots the distribution of predicted annual income among subjects in the Study 6 control group sep-
arated by those who did and did not file a return. We group households into bins of $500. We also mark, using the
dotted and solid vertical lines, the income levels in TY 2018 at which the IRS requires single and married taxpayers
must file a return, which are $12,000 and $24,000, respectively.




                                                         x
  Appendix Figure 2: Estimated EITC amount for filers and non-filers in Study 6 control group




Notes. The figure plots the distribution of estimated EITC eligibility amounts among subjects in the Study 6 control
group, separated by those who did and did not file a tax return. We group households into bins of $50. The heaps at
around $500, $3,500, $6,000 and $6,500 correspond to the maximum EITCs for families with zero, one, two, or three
or more children in TY2018, respectively. The dotted line marks predicted EITC amount of $300, representing the
approximate cost that families are charged by some for-profit preparers to file their return.




                                                        xi
               Appendix Figure 3: Study 1, Golden State Opportunity text messages


Messages sent in March read:

     Hello, this is a volunteer from CalEITC4Me, we're texting to let people know they may be leaving up
     to $6,000 in tax money on the table, visit our website to see if you are eligible for the EITC and free tax
     preparation! Have you filed your taxes yet? goo.gl/42PR24

Messages sent in April read:

     Hello! My name is <name> with CalEITC4me. Have you filed your taxes yet? You may want to file this
     year because of the recently expanded California Earned Income Tax Credit! Thousands of Californians
     are claiming this cash-back credit. You don't want to miss out! If you want to know how to claim
     it, text me back! We are here to help! Click here! Para Espanol responda con la palabra: Espanol
     bit.ly/CalEITC4Me




                                                        xii
Appendix Figure 4: Study 2, treatment arm 1 (FTB messenger, formal letter)




                                   xiii
Appendix Figure 5: Study 2, treatment arm 2 (FTB messenger, informal letter)




                                    xiv
Appendix Figure 6: Study 2, treatment arm 3 (GSO messenger, formal letter)




                                   xv
Appendix Figure 7: Study 2, treatment arm 4 (GSO messenger, informal letter)




                                    xvi
         Appendix Figure 8: Study 3, Golden State Opportunity text messages

· Treatment 1: Basic Informational Message + Link

    ­ Hi-this is <volunteer name>, a volunteer with CalEITC4Me. I'm contacting households
      who might qualify for a tax refund. Even if you don't owe taxes, you could get cash
      back by filing a tax return. Visit caleitc4me.org/CashBack to learn more about your
      eligibility and to claim your EITC refund.

· Treatment 2: Phone number/call option

    ­ Hi-this is <volunteer name>, a volunteer with CalEITC4Me. I'm contacting households
      who might qualify for a tax refund. Even if you don't owe taxes, you could get cash
      back by filing a tax return. Call <local hotline phone number> to get free help with filing
      your return and to claim your EITC refund.

· Treatment 3: Offer Text-based Assistance

    ­ Hi-this is <volunteer name>, a volunteer with CalEITC4Me. I'm contacting households
      who might qualify for a tax refund. Even if you don't owe taxes, you could get cash
      back by filing a tax return. Text "yes" and I can help you claim your EITC refund.

· Treatment 4: Benefit Value

    ­ Hi-this is <volunteer name>, a volunteer with CalEITC4Me. I'm contacting households
      who might qualify for a tax refund. Even if you don't owe taxes, you could get cash
      back by filing a tax return. Eligible families got back an average of $2,000 last year. Text
      "yes" and I can help you claim your EITC refund.




                                            xvii
Appendix Figure 9: Study 4, treatment arm 1 (formal, simple)




                           xviii
Appendix Figure 10: Study 4, treatment arm 2 (formal, credit amount)




                                xix
Appendix Figure 11: Study 4, treatment arm 3 (formal, VITA info)




                              xx
Appendix Figure 12: Study 4, treatment arm 4 (formal, credit amount + VITA info)




                                      xxi
Appendix Figure 13: Study 4, treatment arm 5 (informal, simple)




                             xxii
Appendix Figure 14: Study 4, treatment arm 6 (informal, credit amount)




                                xxiii
Appendix Figure 15: Study 4, treatment arm 7 (informal, VITA info)




                              xxiv
Appendix Figure 16: Study 4, treatment arm 8 (informal, credit amount + VITA info)




                                       xxv
Appendix Figure 17: Study 5, CA Department of Social Services/CalFresh text messages, tax year
2017
Text 1:

      Hi, this is <county>. Have you claimed your tax refund? We estimate you're owed about $x,xxx from
      state and federal earned income tax credits. File your taxes to get the refund you earned! Reply "1" to
      learn how to get your taxes done for free or "2" to stop these texts. Standard messaging rates apply.

Text 2:

      You can use free online software to prepare your taxes at www.myfreetaxes.org (sponsored by the United
      Way). For in-person assistance, find the closest volunteer site at irs.treasury.gov/freetaxprep. Would
      you like information for a nearby site? If yes, reply "1".

Note: Those who responded with a "1" to the first message were sent the second message. Those
who responded with a "1" to the second message were sent the address and hours of the closest
VITA site to the client's 9 digit zip code. When that site required appointments, the text also
included a link for registration. Texts were sent in English or Spanish, depending on the language
indicated in the CalFresh record, and were delivered over two days in a single blast in March 2018.




                                                      xxvi
Appendix Figure 18: Study 6, CA Department of Social Services/CalFresh text messages, tax year
2018

   · Treatment 1: Control Text

        ­ Text 1: Hi <name>. This is <county name> County. You may qualify for cash back thanks
          to tax credits.
        ­ Text 2: Claim your refund by filing a tax return.             See if you're eligible at
          caleitc4me.org/Cash. Call 211 to file your taxes for free.

   · Treatment 2: Average Benefit

        ­ Text 1: Hi <name>. This is <county name> County. You may qualify for cash back thanks
          to tax credits. Eligible families got back $2,500 on average last year.
        ­ Text 2: Claim your refund by filing a tax return.           See if you're eligible at
          caleitc4me.org/YourMoney. Call 211 to file your taxes for free.

   · Treatment 3: Personalized Benefit

        ­ Text 1: Hi <name>. This is <county name> County. You may qualify for cash back thanks
          to tax credits. Based on our records, you could get back <$ credit amount>.
        ­ Text 2: Claim your refund by filing a tax return.             See if you're eligible at
          caleitc4me.org/Money. Call 211 to file your taxes for free.




                                              xxvii
References
National Society of Accountants. (n.d.). 2016-2017 Income & Fees of Accountants and Tax Prepar-
  ers in Public Practice Survey Report.
US Government Accountability Office. (2014). Paid Tax Return Preparers: In a Limited Study,
  Preparers Made Significant Errors, testimony presented to the US Senate Committee on Finance
  (GAO-14-467T).




                                            xxviii
