                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BUILDING AN EPIDEMIOLOGY OF HAPPINESS

                                      John F. Helliwell
                                       David Gyarmati
                                        Craig Joyce
                                       Heather Orpana

                                     Working Paper 28095
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28095


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




This paper is a draft chapter for Anders Hayden, Céo Gaudet, and Jeffrey Wilson, eds. Toward
Sustainable Wellbeing: Moving Beyond GDP in Canada and the World. University of Toronto
Press. The authors are grateful for helpful comments and suggestions from Aneta Bonikowska,
Ceo Gaudet, Anders Hayden, Bev Holmes, Aziz Mulay-Shah, Grant Schellenberg, Meik Wiking,
and Jeff Wilson. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Finance Canada or the Public
Health Agency of Canada.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John F. Helliwell, David Gyarmati, Craig Joyce, and Heather Orpana. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Building an Epidemiology of Happiness
John F. Helliwell, David Gyarmati, Craig Joyce, and Heather Orpana
NBER Working Paper No. 28095
November 2020
JEL No. H12,H51,I14,I18,I31

                                           ABSTRACT

Starting from the assumption that improving well-being is the central consideration for public
policies, we show how subjective well-being research can help, and already is helping, to choose
public policies based on their consequences for all aspects of life. The core of the paper lies in
examples where the methods we propose, often in systematic experimental contexts, have already
been used to guide the evaluation and ranking of alternative policy options in public health,
education, workplace training, and social welfare. The arrival of COVID-19 has increased the
urgency for a well-being focus, since the policy decisions being faced by governments dealing
with the pandemic require an approach much broader than provided by more typical policy
evaluations in all disciplines, including especially the social context and the distribution of costs
and consequences. A broader approach to policy design and choice is fully consistent with the
underlying aims of epidemiology, with similar gains likely in other policy disciplines. A focus on
subjective well-being as an umbrella measure of welfare might help to restore to economics the
breadth of purpose and methods it had two centuries ago, when happiness was considered the
appropriate goal for private actions and public policies.

John F. Helliwell                                         Craig Joyce
Vancouver School of Economics                             Finance Canada
University of British Columbia                            90 Elgin Street
6000 Iona Drive                                           Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0G5
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                                     Canada
CANADA                                                    craig.joyce@canada.ca
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca                                     Heather Orpana
                                                          Public Health Agency of Canada
David Gyarmati                                            785 Carling Avenue
Social Research and Demonstration Corporation             Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0K9
55 Murray Street, Suite 400                               Canada
Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 5M3                                  heather.orpana@canada.ca
Canada
dgyarmati@srdc.org
Introduction
The title of this chapter, and the pre-2020 examples, were chosen before COVID-19 changed the
world. Starting with the assumption that improving well-being is a central consideration for
public policies, we aim to show how subjective well-being research can help, and already is
helping, to choose public policies based on their consequences for all aspects of life. The arrival
of COVID-19, and the attendant attempts to slow or stop its pace, have made even more obvious
the need for a broader epidemiology ­ one that considers not just the sources and physical
consequences of disease, but of all the sources and consequences of healthy and happy lives.
When deciding how and when to establish lock-downs and other mitigation strategies, and how
to plan low-risk ways to restore mobility, governments all over the world aim to save lives and
maintain essential services while minimizing the costs to the economy and the social fabric. The
three main pillars of happier lives ­ physical and mental health, jobs and incomes, and a
supportive social structure (Helliwell el al. 2020)­ were all hit by COVID-19, requiring policy
choices that consider all three types of consequence comparably. Our focus on well-being rather
than illness involves a deliberate shift in the caring sciences from a problem-solving to a building
mode, from the investigation and curing of disease to the creation of happier and healthier
physical and social environments.


Epidemiology, the "study of the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in
specified populations, and the application of this study to the control of health problems," (Last
et al, 2001, p. 62) has its origins in infectious diseases. In the mid 20th century, epidemiology
expanded its focus to include chronic diseases and risk factors, followed by injuries and violence,
and more recently the social determinants of health (Berkman et al. 2014, Pickett and Wilkinson
2015, and Kawachi and Subramanian 2018) and even loneliness (Holt-Lunstad 2017). Most
recently, epidemiology has begun to include positive states of health (VanderWeele et al. 2020),
and to supplement risk factors with protective and salutogenic factors (Orpana et al. 2016).


Happiness, which we are using here to cover life evaluations (cognitive measures of how happy
people are with their lives as a whole) as well as positive and negative emotions, monitors how
well things are going and not just whether disease and other problems are absent. The techniques
of epidemiology are as well suited to study the origins and consequences of happiness as they are



                                                  1
to trace the sources of disease. Such extended applications of epidemiology can be seen as a
natural step in implementing a broader definition of health to include not just the absence of
hardship and disease, but also the creation of better lives from any starting point. This larger
mandate was already in the founding constitution of the World Health Organization (1948), viz:
"Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence
of disease or infirmity."


Over the past 40 years there has been increasing interest in refocusing government policies with
the explicit aim of increasing equitable and sustainable human well-being. This change in policy
perspective has been decades in the making, built on a growing dissatisfaction with using GDP
per capita as a sufficient measure of human progress (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2009), inspired
by the Bhutanese choice more than 40 years ago to make happiness a national objective, and
fuelled by decades of research aimed at creating a transdisciplinary science of happiness. These
converging threads came together on July 19, 2011, when the United Nations General Assembly
adopted a Bhutan-sponsored resolution that "called on United Nations Member States to
undertake steps that give more importance to happiness and well-being in determining how to
achieve and measure social and economic development." The subsequent High Level Meeting on
Well-Being and Happiness, convened by Jigme Y. Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan, at the
United Nations on April 2, 2012, was supported by the first World Happiness Report (Helliwell,
Layard, and Sachs 2012), which assembled the available global data on national happiness and
reviewed the related evidence from the emerging science of happiness. That evidence, which
built on many other reviews of the science of well-being, provided strong support for the
conclusion that the quality of people's lives can be coherently and reliably assessed by a variety
of subjective well-being measures, collectively referred to in this chapter as "happiness". It also
built upon, as did the UN meeting itself, the UK launch of a well-being initiative in November
2010, still unique in combining engagement at the highest level from the political,
administrative, and data-gathering pillars of government. The initial constellation of these three
supporting pillars was probably crucial in establishing widespread data-gathering and discussions
in the United Kingdom (Allin, forthcoming). Once started, these data and discussions have
fueled a broad swath of innovations in firms and communities, and a variety of within-
government and cross-pillar organizations, that have continued to deliver research and



                                                  2
applications even without being a central feature of the political environment (Bache, this
volume).


Progress before 2020
This chapter, which is part of a volume largely focussed on a variety of ways of moving beyond
GDP as a measure of national and community well-being, was intended to show that government
researchers and policy-makers have already moved beyond general discussions about alternative
measures of human progress to a stage where the science of well-being can now be harnessed (as
argued in Helliwell forthcoming and Barrington-Leigh in this volume) to enable research based
on subjective well-being to be used to design and rank policy options.


There is a growing range of government policies intended to improve happiness in many policy
areas. At the broadest level, the OECD has recommended that countries adopt a whole-of-
government approach to improving well-being, supported by broader and more systematic
collection of well-being data, and the development and application of policy tools that use
subjective well-being as the objective and as the means for comparing monetary and non-
monetary costs and outcomes (Durand and Exton 2019). Within healthcare, using the happiness
lens to evaluate different treatment alternatives has been advocated as a means of producing
better health and more happiness with less drain on scarce resources (Peasgood, Foster, and
Dolan 2019). Within Canada, the increasing importance attached to this sort of analysis was
apparent in the Prime Minister's mandate letter of late 2019 directing the new Associate Minister
of Finance to "lead work within the Department of Finance (and in other ministries)...to better
incorporate quality of life measurements into government decision-making and budgeting,
drawing on lessons from other jurisdictions such as New Zealand and Scotland." 1


There have been two global happiness and well-being policy reports (Global Happiness Council
2018 and 2019), each intended to draw together best practice examples from around the world in
several key policy areas including health, education, cities, workplaces, and the community.
Subsequently, in October 2019 the OECD held an international workshop on putting well-being
metrics into policy action, drawing participants from many local and national governments. Both
New Zealand and Scotland, mentioned above, had high-level delegations, and there was



                                                 3
widespread interest in using wellbeing metrics in the policy-making process. Both Scotland and
New Zealand had gone further than most national governments in making well-being the official
focus for policy design. New Zealand has had since 2015 an extended cost benefit tool (The
Treasury 2019) to explicitly attach monetary values to intangible social outcomes, while the
United Kingdom has gone furthest in the development and application of policy assessment tools
that explicitly use subjective well-being research to support policy choices (Layard and
O'Donnell 2015, Frijters and Krekel 2019).


There was no representation from Canadian federal policy-making departments at the 2019
OECD workshop, probably reflecting the fact that until recently there has been little explicit use
of well-being as a central organizing principle in as public a way as has been the case for New
Zealand and Scotland. Thus there is perhaps less recognition in Canada that subjective well-
being research has in fact been used for several years to support cost/benefit analysis of just the
sort that has been advocated for use by governments (Layard and O'Donnell 2015, Frijters et al
2020) which wish to make well-being a central focus for their policy choices. Doing cost/benefit
analysis using the lens of subjective well-being requires a large base of data and research to
enable the estimation of the relative importance of various policy outcomes. Fortunately,
Statistics Canada has been in the forefront internationally, being the first among the OECD
countries (as reported by Durand and Smith 2013) to measure subjective well-being in mainline
surveys. Life satisfaction is now measured regularly in the General Social Survey, the Canadian
Community Health Survey, and other household surveys, making possible the use of combined
samples from different surveys (Bonikowska et al. 2014). This has permitted a large range of
studies estimating the relative well-being effects, in the Canadian context, of many aspects of
life, including income, unemployment, social trust (Helliwell and Wang 2011), and workplace
trust (Helliwell and Huang 2011). These large geo-coded samples have also enabled comparisons
of life satisfaction in cities and neighbourhoods (Helliwell, Shiplett, and Barrington-Leigh 2019),
to assess why some places are happier than others, and to show that immigrant life satisfaction
converges to the average in the region where they live (Helliwell, Shiplett, and Bonikowska
2020).




                                                  4
The above studies are generally based on the use of other data in the same surveys in which the
life satisfaction is measured. This permits analysis using individual-level observations, essential
for discovering the relative importance of different sources of well-being. It has also been
possible for health researchers to obtain agreement from individual respondents to the CCHS to
link their life satisfaction with their use of health resources over the following six years (Goel et
al 2019) and to estimate a dose-response relation between life satisfaction and subsequent
morbidity and mortality, even after adjusting for a large array of life circumstances and pre-
existing medical conditions (Rosella et al. 2018). This type of study only becomes possible when
there are large representative samples of individual life satisfaction observations to use as a basis
for linkage with other records.


Another important component for increasing the pace and range of policy applications is the
widespread understanding that life satisfaction, and other measures of how well life is going, are
important health statistics, adding substance to the 1948 WHO declaration that good health is
about the creation of positive states of health and mind, and not just the absence of disease and
infirmity. Since measurement is a pre-condition for evidence-based policy analysis, the adoption
of life satisfaction as a key national health statistic has the potential to bring the positive focus
more fully into policy evaluations. The Public Health Agency of Canada has adopted a positive
mental health surveillance framework in which life satisfaction is one of five key outcomes now
part of regular, national health surveillance and reporting (Orpana et al. 2016). This framework
has helped inform both subnational (Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care 2018) and
international (BMC Proceedings 2020) surveillance activities, expanding the inclusion of well-
being into surveillance in other jurisdictions. This important innovation marks Canada as one of
the few countries to establish life satisfaction as a key national health statistic. Because life
satisfaction, along with other measures of well-being, are monitored on a regular basis, this
provides additional incentive to study the epidemiology of happiness, tracing its impacts on other
aspects of physical health, as in the studies described above, and also to search for better
understanding of how life satisfaction is created and spread.


The existence of a solid base of life satisfaction research enables policy evaluations to bring
important intangible items directly into the analysis, making use of their estimated contributions



                                                   5
to overall life evaluations. Bringing these intangibles up from the footnotes into central positions
in project proposals changes the whole nature of policy evaluation, often leading to important
differences in the ranking of alternative policies. It also becomes easier to compare policies
coming to central agencies from departments with differing objectives and often competing
claims on public financial resources. Within applied policy domains, there are signs that
subjective well-being research has already begun to influence how policy evaluation is done.


Two federal department studies have used well-being research to better understand the value of
investments in health promotion, and to encourage participation in sport and cultural activities.
Both uncovered significant wellbeing impacts. In the health promotion example, the authors
monetized a set of health behaviours often targeted by federally funded programs, valuing
increased physical activity at $631 per week, increased fruit and vegetable consumption at $115
per week, and smoking cessation at $563 per week. These figures are intended to allow a
comparison of the results of health promoting programs to the program costs themselves, and
demonstrate value for money in an area of policy where it is not always obvious (Shi, Joyce,
Wall, Orpana, & Bancej, 2019). In the case of the study on participation in sport and cultural
activities, the monetized value of the well-being outcomes exceeded the costs of the programs
used to achieve them (Lemyre, Mader, and Ambarde, 2018).


There has been a general strengthening over the past twenty-five years in the demand for better
evidence to support policy decisions and to evaluate policy outcomes. The Social Research and
Demonstration Corporation (SRDC) was founded in 1991 as an independent non-profit research
organization created specifically by the federal government to develop, field-test, and rigorously
evaluate new policies and programs. SRDC conducts its research at a scale sufficient to provide
significant results, often employing field experiments to test programs in real-world settings. The
initial years saw the implementation of several large-scale social policy experiments on behalf of
the federal government. Over the past twenty years the range of clients has grown to include
many provincial governments, industry associations, foundations, and community partners as
well as covering a much broader set of policy areas beyond employment and workforce
development, including education and health. Over these same years, the range of outcomes
considered in much of SRDC's research has expanded to include a rich set of psychosocial



                                                 6
variables including trust, social capital, and life satisfaction. In particular, subjective well-being
research has been undertaken more frequently not only as part of impact analysis but also to
enhance cost-benefit studies by monetizing many intangible impacts of policy interventions that
were previously excluded. On many levels, this has been transformative for comparative policy
analysis, as it allows for the valuation of a fuller range of economic and social impacts and for
the comparison of these across policy interventions.


One such example, the Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP), was a jointly
sponsored initiative of Human Resources and Social Development Canada (HRSDC) and the
Nova Scotia Department of Community Services. It tested an active re-employment strategy for
unemployed individuals who volunteered to work on locally-developed community projects in
areas hit by chronic unemployment. In exchange for foregoing their Employment Insurance (EI)
or Social Assistance (SA) benefits, CEIP offered participants wages to work on community
projects for up to three years, giving them a significant period of stable income as well as an
opportunity to gain work experience, acquire new skills, and expand their network of contacts.
Beyond fulfilling the need for immediate employment, CEIP hoped to influence participants'
longer-term employability by helping them preserve and possibly improve their human and
social capital. At the same time, CEIP aimed to facilitate community development by supporting
the "third sector" and encouraging activities that are meaningful for both the participant and the
community.


SRDC was responsible for the design and implementation of the project, which started in 1999
and released its final report in 2008 (Gyarmati, de Raaf, Palameta, Nicholson, and Hui, 2008).
This policy evaluation was the first of its kind to rigorously measure how community-designed
and managed projects could positively impact the levels of social capital and trust among not
only participants but also in their communities, and to use subjective well-being to estimate the
monetary value of these social impacts. This was one of the earliest and most comprehensive
applications of subjective well-being in experimental policy analysis. The effects of the social
factors were substantial, significantly improving the resulting analysis of the program's cost
effectiveness. For instance, when only considering financial impacts of the program on outcomes
such as earnings, the analysis showed that for every dollar in net cost to government there were



                                                   7
combined net benefits for society of $1.39. However, by incorporating subjective well-being into
the analysis and monetizing even a small number of the intangible benefits of the program (e.g.,
social capital and trust) this improved the cost effectiveness substantially to $1.61 in combined
net benefits for every dollar in cost to government (Gyarmati, et. al. 2008, 117-118). Without the
inclusion of measures of subjective wellbeing, cost-benefit analyses such as these will
significantly under-estimate the cost-effectiveness of programs.


A second example from SRDC's research is a more recent study, UPSKILL, a large-scale
demonstration project that measured the impacts of literacy and essential skills (LES) training in
the workplace (Gyarmati, Leckie, Dowie, Palameta, Hui, Dunn, Hebert, 2014). The project used
a random assignment design to provide the most reliable measures of the impacts of workplace
training on skills, job performance, and a range of other social and financial outcomes of workers
and firms. Over 100 firms and 1,500 workers in the Accommodations sector participated across
the country in eight provinces.


The project involved the direct collaboration of many institutional and industry partners in the
design and delivery of the program, and measures of social capital, trust, and life satisfaction
were central to the analysis. The depth of collaboration increased the power and relevance of the
findings. Although the skills being built and assessed were of basic literacy and numeracy, and
hence were transferable, not tied to a particular job, the results were assessed using measures of
success actually employed in the Accommodations sector. This included industry-developed
certification assessments to measure worker performance and a number of business indicators
related to guest satisfaction, revenues, and productivity measures. The results could thus be
assessed from the perspective of hotel operators, employees, customers, and society as a whole.


The findings indicated that workplace literacy training does, indeed, have large positive impacts
on workers' skills and job performance, plus a wide range of social and financial outcomes for
workers and firms. The benefit-cost analysis also revealed a significant positive return on
investment for all stakeholders ­ including employers ­ of 23 per cent in the first year alone.
Importantly, the study also used subjective well-being to monetize the positive impacts on social
and psychological capital, permitting their inclusion in an extended cost-benefit analysis.



                                                 8
Strikingly, results illustrate that the inclusion of a modest number of social impacts increases the
cost-effectiveness of the program by over 80 per cent (Gyarmati, et. al. 2014, 117-120).


Furthermore, the measurement of trust and life satisfaction before, during and after the project
provided key insights not initially foreseen, thereby deepening understanding of how and when
workplace training will generate positive impacts. For example, while the overall results were
found to be significant for the sample as a whole, a more detailed subgroup analysis showed that
many of the gains were concentrated in hotels with high levels of mutual trust (Gyarmati et al.
2014, 133). High levels of workplace trust have been shown to deliver happier lives for
employees (Helliwell and Huang 2011), but this result goes further, showing that innovations in
workplace practices and employee training are more effective for all participants where trust
levels are high.


These examples all show the importance of having large samples of population-representative
data on subjective well-being, of undertaking research using these data to obtain estimates of the
relative values of tangible and intangible outcomes, and of using policy experiments to monitor
the impacts on subjective well-being and its key determinants. To put these essential components
to work in the service of a broader epidemiology of happiness requires that policy analysts are
convinced of the need to monitor diverse sources and outcomes in a consistent manner. They
also need enough exposure and training to put these pieces together, and a policy environment
that welcomes evaluations of this breadth. This is likely to be accelerated where there is a whole-
of-government commitment to well-being-based policy-making (Durand and Exton 2019). There
are also some advantages, as shown by examples from both Canada and the UK, in having a
solid background of data and research, along with a cadre of trained analysts able to deliver
useful results when the demand for them arises.


The epidemiology of happiness in the COVID-19 pandemic
Although the case for a broader epidemiology of happiness has existed for decades, its necessity
is made even more urgent by COVID-19. The scope and scale of the COVID-19 pandemic and
the response by governments around the world have been of proportions not seen in the past
century. Policies that stop population movements and close down most activities that bring



                                                  9
people physically close were adopted in varying degrees in almost all countries. While serving a
primary purpose of reducing the amount of sickness and death, they were also intended to slow
transmission by enough to avoid overloading health care systems by minimizing the number of
COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization, ICU admission, and ventilator support, while
waiting for the development of a vaccine or effective treatments. Conventional epidemiology has
been brought to the centre of the policy stage by identifying cases, tracking contacts, and
modelling transmission rates under alternative mitigation policies, all while what is known about
the novel virus evolves rapidly. The centre-stage role taken by public health officers has been
critical in helping to convince populations that severe disruption of their lives, on a scale never
experienced before, can save enough lives and suffering to justify the measures taken. Given the
risks of health care systems being overwhelmed, as shown by the early experiences in Wuhan
and Lombardy, dedicated critical-care capacity was increased in a variety of ways, including
delaying many other forms of medical diagnosis and treatment. As infection curves became
flatter in many countries, and the pressures on critical care capacity became less likely, the need
for a broader epidemiology became more obvious. What strategies provide the most well-being
benefits relative to their contributions to keeping infections low while waiting for a vaccine or
treatments? Mainline epidemiology remains in a central position in any broader analysis, since
identifying cases, tracking contacts, learning in more detail about the transmission process,
establishing the current and past prevalence of infection, and estimating the degree of population
immunity are all key requirements for subsequent stages of pandemic management. To be
effective, these studies need to be set in the particular circumstances of regions, communities,
living arrangements, institutions and occupations.


One broader form of epidemiology, although not as broad as we propose, uses life-years saved as
the key objective to help set priorities for the pace and scale of resuming other forms of medical
treatment. For example, survival chances for patients with many forms of cancer depend on
timely surgery, and many such surgeries were postponed or cancelled during the first stages of
pandemic response. It has been possible to model life-years saved by restarting different types of
cancer surgery (Sud et al. 2020), thereby inviting a broader analysis of the costs and benefits of
alternative use patterns for existing medical resources during the second and later stages of
pandemic management.



                                                 10
A further broadening, still using life years as the objective, might include the effects on self-
harm and violence, and transport injuries, ranking 11th and 12th respectively in terms of global
number of deaths in 2017 (http://ihmeuw.org/4srx). Lock-downs and physical distancing
measures kept people off the roads and at home, in some cases alone and possibly lonely. This
simple description would suggest a decrease in traffic fatalities and an increase in suicides.
Reality might be more complicated, as people drive faster on empty roads, and speed kills. As
for suicide, Japan had suicide rates in April 2020, during lockdown, that were significantly lower
than normal.2 Durkheim's (1897) still magisterial early statistical analysis found that suicide
rates were lower among population groups facing other risks to their existence, and that suicide
rates in countries further from the equator have peaks in the summer, when people are having
active social lives, leaving those left out more likely to have their hopes turn into hopelessness.
Aggregate data for excess deaths, such as those provided by EuroMOMO
(https://www.euromomo.eu) and Statistics Canada (2020) can help, as they accumulate over the
years, to show the number of excess deaths that include the combined effects of COVID-19,
delayed surgeries, traffic fatalities, suicide and other stress-related deaths. For some, lockdown
meant a reduction of commuting and office stress, permitting more family time, some in person
and the rest virtual. For them, life at home with the family became calmer and happier as it
became less frenetic. Others were not so fortunate.


Social connections with family and friends have been found to be crucial supports for happiness,
especially contacts with face-to-face rather than on-line friends (Helliwell and Huang 2013). The
COVID-19 physical distancing measures combined with lockdowns in many countries to remove
most possibilities for close encounters with friends and family, so the previous evidence would
suggest a very large hit to well-being. But in the absence of face-to-face possibilities, people
shifted from in-person to electronic visits with friends and colleagues near and far. The extent to
which this enabled individuals and families to maintain supportive and nurturing relationships,
and hence happiness, under physical distancing is still being assessed.


How broad must epidemiology be to enable a proper balancing of the costs and benefits of
alternative strategies for pandemic management? Useful examples are provided by two recent



                                                  11
studies in the United Kingdom, one assessing the well-being costs of the pandemic, and the
second, more ambitiously, providing an illustrative calculation of the costs and benefits of
alternative dates for exiting from general lockdown. The costs study (Fujiwara et al. 2020) uses
survey data from during the pandemic to estimate the well-being costs of lockdown, using
matched samples of official national data for April 2019 as a baseline. They estimate a 13% loss
in life satisfaction implicitly due to COVID-19, and attribute more than half of this to the costs of
social distancing. No account is taken of the costs of COVID-related deaths beyond bereavement
effects. What is needed for an overall well-being assessment of COVID-19?


The Happiness Research Institute (2020) and Layard et al. (2020) both advocate using Well-
being Adjusted Life Years (denoted WALYs in the former case, and WELLBYs in the latter). In
both cases, this involves an extension of the more usual well-being focus, which concentrates on
the well-being of those still living, which has been shown to depend importantly on the average
length of healthy life. But when a disease or other fatality-causing event takes place, and there
are alternative ways of mitigating its effects, it is essential to attach a well-being benefit to life-
years saved. Layard et al. (2020) apply this to the COVID-19 situation, using pre-COVID
research to set values for life-years saved, as well as the well-being consequences of the COVID-
related effects on unemployment, income, mental health, confidence in government, schooling,
road fatalities, COVID-deaths, commuting time, carbon dioxide emissions and air quality. They
calculate these effects for alternative dates of lock-down release. Approximate data are used to
estimate the lives saved by a longer lockdown, with assumed monthly savings diminishing over
time and eventually overshadowed by the reductions in income and employment and reductions
in mental health, all of which are assumed to grow with a longer lockdown. Confidence in
government handling is assumed to fall as the length of the lockdown increases. Setting the
declining benefits against the rising costs leads to their conclusion that the net gain from
lockdown diminishes as time passes. The authors were careful to say that they were illustrating
the importance of bringing these diverse factors into play, rather than arguing that their
calculations were supported by strong evidence. More complete application of well-being
analysis requires more explicit analysis of different ways to release restrictive measures and
broaden the range of safer activities, while keeping infection rates to zero (within COVID-free




                                                   12
bubbles) and at minimal and carefully tracked and traced levels where transmission is more
likely.


Looking Ahead
The pandemic has changed the policy environment in many ways. At a fundamental level, it has
exposed the need for flexibility and resilience. The pandemic has shown the benefits of greater
diversity of supply lines, adding another element to be included when choosing among policy
options. But at a deeper human level, individuals, families and firms have been seeing life in new
ways, some painful and others so positive as to incite pledges to maintain the social closeness
created as a by-product of physical distancing, including the cooking, games and laughter within
the physically-distanced family plus extended electronic social networks not previously used to
such good purpose. The opportunities and preferences for different forms of work, entertainment,
family life and vacations may have changed not just during the stages of the pandemic, but also
for the longer term.


COVID-19 also dramatically altered the distribution of well-being. The direct costs of the
disease have been much higher for those in exposed occupations or in elder-care or other forms
of housing where outbreaks have occurred or where physical distancing is harder to achieve. The
concentration of infection among the homeless and those with insecure housing, food and
employment, and the digital divide combine to suggest that the net effect is likely an increase in
the inequality of well-being, which itself has been shown to decrease average well-being by
more than does income inequality (Goff et al, 2018, Helliwell et al. 2020). This is exemplified by
evidence of higher COVID-19 incidence and severity among those who were already
disadvantaged, whether by race, health, income or housing.3


Trust also deserves special mention. Differences among countries and communities in the extent
to which people trust each other, and the related extent to which they reach out to help each
other, have big effects on the well-being consequences of COVID-19, just as they have been
shown to do in the face of other crises (Helliwell, Huang and Wang 2014). Similarly, the extent
to which people have confidence in their political and health systems is likely to influence how
highly people evaluate their own lives under COVID-19, and how fully and happily they follow



                                                13
the advice or directives they receive. Research has already shown that individuals who live
where they have trust in each other and in their shared public institutions are substantially
buffered against the wellbeing costs of adversities including unemployment, fear, discrimination,
low income and ill health (Helliwell et al 2020). Since COVID-19 has to varying degrees
inflicted all of these negative effects on at least some members of all societies, those living in
high trust communities and nations are likely in consequence to have life evaluations that fell
less and recovered faster during the first stages of COVID-19.


An epidemiology that aims to support the overall self-assessed quality of life will take all of
these factors into account, both during and after the pandemic. Never have the opportunities and
need for such an overarching analysis been greater. The same sea changes affecting all walks and
ways of life have by the same token made the analysis more difficult. In the pursuit of this
overarching goal in a rapidly changing environment, the best should not be made the enemy of
the good; responses need to be sure-footed but rapid. These circumstances require that policies
be tailored to local circumstances and risks. The attendant uncertainties invite responses that are
measured, examined carefully for their lessons, and altered in response to what is being learned.
The same flexibility and diversity that has been seen as an asset to families, firms and
communities coping with COVID are also likely to be features of the policies most likely to
support well-being.


We have argued in this chapter that public policies should be designed to consider their overall
effects on well-being and evaluated with this goal in mind. Research in subjective well-being has
come far enough over the past quarter century to have tangible implications for the setting and
ranking of policy priorities, evaluating the results of policy interventions, and enhancing the
manner in which cost-benefit analysis is done to understand policy impacts in a more holistic
way than was previously possible. We have illustrated the general case by specific examples
from epidemiology, which has gradually been broadening its scope and techniques to consider
positive measures of overall well-being. The arrival of COVID-19 has strengthened the need for
such broadening, since the policy decisions being faced by governments dealing with the
pandemic required an approach much broader than provided by more typical policy evaluations
in all disciplines. We have described how such a broader approach to policy design and choice is



                                                  14
fully consistent with the underlying aims of epidemiology. We could equally well argue that
well-being analysis of the sort we propose offers similar gains in other policy disciplines. In
particular, it could restore to economics the breadth of purpose and methods it had two centuries ago,
when happiness was considered the appropriate goal for private actions and public policies.




References

Allin, Paul. (In Press) "Reflections on the introduction and use of official measures of subjective
well-being in the UK." In Lee, Matthew, Laura Kubzansky, and Tyler VanderWeele, (Eds.).
Measuring well-being: Interdisciplinary perspectives from the social sciences and the
humanities. New York, NY: Oxford University.

Bache, Ian. (forthcoming) "Wellbeing in British Politics and Policy". (this volume).

Barrington-Leigh, Christopher. (forthcoming) "Wellbeing, sustainability, and progress: a
framework for public and policy discourse and for quantitative decision-making using the life
satisfaction approach." (this volume).

Berkman, Lisa F., Ichir Kawachi, and M. Maria Glymour, eds. 2014. Social epidemiology.
Oxford University Press.

BMC Proceedings. 2020. "Proceedings of the International Workshop `Integration of
International Expertise in the Development of a Mental Health Surveillance System in
Germany'". BMC Proc 14, 4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12919-020-00186-0

Bonikowska, Aneta, John F. Helliwell, Frank Hou, and Grant Schellenberg. 2014. "An
assessment of life satisfaction responses on recent Statistics Canada surveys." Social Indicators
Research, 118(2), 617-643.

Durand, Martine, and Carrie Exton. 2019. Adopting a Well-being Approach in Central
Government: Policy Mechanisms and Practical Tools. In Global Happiness and Wellbeing
Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 140­62.

Durand, Martine, and Conal Smith. 2013. "The OECD Approach to Measuring Subjective Well-
being." In World Happiness Report 2013, edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard Layard, and
Jeffrey D. Sachs, 112­37. New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Durkheim, Emile. Le suicide: étude de sociologie. Alcan, 1897.

Frijters, Paul, and Chris Krekel. 2019. A handbook for wellbeing policy-making in the UK:
history, measurement, theory, implementation, and examples.



                                                  15
Frijters, Paul, Andrew Clark, Chris Krekel, and Richard Layard. 2020. A happy choice:
wellbeing as the goal of government. Behavioural Public Policy, 1-40. doi:10.1017/bpp.2019.39

Fujiwara, Daniel, Paul Dolan, Ricky Lawton, Fatemeh Behzadnejad, Augustin Lagarde, Cem
Maxwell, and Sebastien Peytrignet. 2020. The well-being costs of COVID-19 in the UK.
https://www.jacobs.com/sites/default/files/2020-05/jacobs-wellbeing-costs-of-covid-19-uk.pdf

Global Happiness Council. 2018. Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2018. New
York, NY: Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Global Happiness Council. 2019. Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019. New
York, NY: Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Goel, Vivek, Laura C. Rosella, Longdi Fu, and Amanda Alberga. 2018. "The relationship
between life satisfaction and healthcare utilization: a longitudinal study." American journal of
preventive medicine 55, no. 2: 142-150.

Goff, Leonard, John F. Helliwell, and Guy Mayraz. 2018. "Inequality of Subjective Well-being
as a Comprehensive Measure of Inequality." Economic Inquiry, 56, no. 4: 2177­94.

Gyarmati, D., S. De Raaf, B. Palameta, C. Nicholson, and T. Hui. 2008. Encouraging work and
supporting communities: Final results of the Community Employment Innovation Project. Social
Research and Demonstration Corporation, Ottawa.
http://www.srdc.org/media/8508/CEIP_finalrpt_ENG.pdf

Gyarmati, David, Norm Leckie, Michael Dowie, Boris Palameta, Taylor Shek-wai Hui,
Elizabeth Dunn, and Sophie Hébert. 2014. UPSKILL: A credible test of workplace literacy and
essential skills training. Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, Ottawa.
http://www.srdc.org/media/199774/upskill-technical-report-en.pdf

Happiness Institute and Leaps by Bayer. 2020. Wellbeing Adjusted Life Years: A universal
metric to quantify the happiness return on investment. Berlin.

Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang. 2011. "Well-being and trust in the workplace." Journal
of Happiness Studies 12, no. 5: 747-767.

Helliwell, John F., and Shun Wang. 2011. "Trust and Wellbeing." International Journal of
Wellbeing 1, no. 1.

Helliwell, John F., Richard Layard, and Jeffrey Sachs. 2012. World Happiness Report. New
York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network. http://worldhappiness.report/download/

Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang. 2013."Comparing the Happiness Effects of Real and On-
Line Friends." PLoS ONE 8, no. 9: e72754.




                                                16
Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. 2014. "Social Capital and Well-being in
Times of Crisis." Journal of Happiness Studies, 15, no. 1: 145­62.

Helliwell, John F., and Lara B. Aknin. 2018. "Expanding the social science of
happiness." Nature human behaviour 2, no. 4: 248-252.

Helliwell, John F. (In Press). "Measuring and Using Happiness to Support Public Policies"
In Lee, Matthew, Laura Kubzansky, and Tyler VanderWeele, (Eds.). Measuring well-being:
Interdisciplinary perspectives from the social sciences and the humanities. New York, NY:
Oxford University. Previously National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 26529.

Helliwell, John F. 2019. "How to Open Doors to Happiness." Global Happiness and Wellbeing
Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness Council, 8-25. https://s3.amazonaws.com/ghwbpr-
2019/UAE/GH19_Ch2.pdf

Helliwell, John F., Hugh Shiplett, and Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh. 2019. "How happy are
your neighbours? Variation in life satisfaction among 1200 Canadian neighbourhoods and
communities." PloS one 14, no. 1.

Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang, Shun Wang and Max Norton. 2020. "Social Environments
for World Happiness." In World Happiness Report 2020, edited by John F. Helliwell, Richard
Layard, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Jan-Emmanuel De Neve. Chapter 2. New York: UN Sustainable
Development Solutions Network.

Helliwell, John F., Hugh Shiplett, and Aneta Bonikowska. 2020. "Migration as a test of the
happiness set point hypothesis: Evidence from immigration to Canada and the United Kingdom."
Canadian Journal of Economics 53, No. 4. https://doi.org/10.1111/caje.12474


Holt-Lunstad, Julianne. 2017. "The potential public health relevance of social isolation and
loneliness: Prevalence, epidemiology, and risk factors." Public Policy & Aging Report 27, no. 4:
127-130.

Kawachi, Ichiro, and S. V. Subramanian. 2018. "Social epidemiology for the 21st
century." Social Science & Medicine 196: 240-245.

Last, John, Susan Harris, Michel Thuriaux, and Robert Spasoff. A dictionary of epidemiology.
International Epidemiological Association, Inc., 2001.

Layard, Richard, and Gus O'Donnell. 2015. How to make policy when happiness is the
goal. World happiness report 2015, 76-87. https://worldhappiness.report/ed/2015/

Layard, Richard., Andrew Clark, Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, Chris Krekel, Daisy Fancourt, Nancy
Hey, and Gus O'Donnell. 2020. When to Release the Lockdown? A Wellbeing Framework for
Analysing Costs and Benefits (No. 13186). IZA Discussion Papers.




                                               17
Lemire, Xavier, Joelle Mader, and Marke Ambard. (2018) Quantifying and Valuing the
Wellbeing Impacts of Arts, Culture and Sports in Canada. Ottawa: Heritage Canada.
https://cudo.carleton.ca/system/files/dli_training/4330/wellbeing-impacts-arts-culture-and-sports-
canada-final.pdf

OECD. 2013. OECD Guidelines on Measuring Subjective Well-being. Paris: OECD Publishing.
http://www.oecd.org/statistics/Guidelines%20on%20Measuring%20Subjective%20Well-
being.pdf

OECD. 2019. Putting Well-being Metrics into Policy Action. Report of meeting held October 3-
4, 2019. Paris: OECD. http://www.oecd.org/statistics/putting-well-being-metrics-into-policy-
action.htm

Ontario Ministry of Long-Term Care. 2018. Mental Health Promotion Guideline 2018.
http://health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/publichealth/oph_standards/docs/protocols_guidelines/
Mental_Health_Promotion_Guideline_2018.pdf

Orpana, Heather, J. Vachon, J. Dykxhoorn, L. McRae, and G. Jayaraman. "Monitoring positive
mental health and its determinants in Canada: the development of the Positive Mental Health
Surveillance Indicator Framework." Health promotion and chronic disease prevention in
Canada: research, policy and practice 36, no. 1 (2016): 1.

Peasgood, Tessa, Derek Foster, and Paul Dolan. 2019. "Priority Setting in Healthcare through the
Lens of Happiness." In Global Happiness and Wellbeing Policy Report 2019, Global Happiness
Council, 27­52. https://s3.amazonaws.com/ghwbpr-2019/UAE/GH19_Ch3.pdf

Pickett, Kate E., and Richard G. Wilkinson. 2015. "Income Inequality and Health: A Causal
Review." Social Science & Medicine 128, 316­26.

Rosella, Laura C., Longdi Fu, Emmalin Buajitti, and Vivek Goel. 2019. "Death and chronic
disease risk associated with poor life satisfaction: A population-based cohort study." American
journal of epidemiology 188, no. 2: 323-331.

Shi, Yipu, Craig Joyce, Ron Wall, Heather Orpana, and Christina Bancej. 2019. "A life
satisfaction approach to valuing the impact of health behaviours on subjective well-being." BMC
public health 19, no. 1: 1547.

Statistics Canada. 2020. "Provisional death counts and excess mortality, January to March 2019
and January to March 2020. The Daily, May 13, 2020. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-
quotidien/200513/dq200513d-eng.htm

Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. 2009. The measurement of economic
performance and social progress revisited: Reflections and overview. Paris: Commission on the
Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.




                                               18
The Treasury. 2019. CBAx Tool User Guidance: Guide for Departments and Agencies using
Treasury's CBAx tool for cost benefit analysis. https://treasury.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2019-
09/cbax-guide-sep19.pdf

Sud, Amit, Michael Jones, John Broggio, Chey Loveday ...and Clare Turnbull. 2020. "Collateral
Damage: The Impact on Outcomes from Cancer Surgery of the COVID-19 Pandemic." Annals of
Oncology. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.05.009

VanderWeele, Tyler J., Ying Chen, Katelyn Long, Eric S. Kim, Claudia Trudel-Fitzgerald, and
Laura D. Kubzansky. 2020. "Positive epidemiology?" Epidemiology 31, no. 2: 189-193.

World Health Organization. 1948. Preamble to the Constitution of WHO as adopted by the
International Health Conference, New York, 19 June - 22 July 1946; signed on 22 July 1946 by
the representatives of 61 States (Official Records of WHO, no. 2, p. 100) and entered into force
on 7 April 1948.



1
  https://pm.gc.ca/en/mandate-letters/minister-middle-class-prosperity-and-associate-minister-finance-mandate-letter
2
  https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/14/japan-suicides-fall-sharply-as-covid-19-lockdown-causes-shift-
in-stress-factors
3
  This has been exemplified by outbreaks and deaths in elder-care facilities, prisons, and camps for migrant workers.
On differing incidence by race in the United States, see https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-
abstract/2766098




                                                         19
