                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DYNAMIC GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODELING OF LONG AND SHORT-RUN
                         HISTORICAL EVENTS

                                        Gary D. Hansen
                                        Lee E. Ohanian
                                         Fatih Ozturk

                                      Working Paper 28090
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28090


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




This paper was written for "The Handbook of Historical Economics," Alberto Bisin and Giovanni
Federico, Editors, Elsevier. We thank Jaeyoung Jang and Greg Clark for very helpful discussions,
Greg Clark for providing historical data, Xiaoxia Ye for computational help, and Pedro Brinca
and Francesca Loria for advice and for providing us with their Business Cycle Accounting
programs. Abhi Vemulapati provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gary D. Hansen, Lee E. Ohanian, and Fatih Ozturk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamic General Equilibrium Modeling of Long and Short-Run Historical Events
Gary D. Hansen, Lee E. Ohanian, and Fatih Ozturk
NBER Working Paper No. 28090
November 2020
JEL No. E0,N1

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide quantitative analyses of two striking historical episodes, the timing of the Industrial
Revolution in England, and the sources of U.S. economic fluctuations between 1889-1929.
Applying data from 1245-1845 within the "Malthus to Solow" framework shows that the timing
of the Industrial Revolution reflects a subtle interplay between large changes in TFP and deaths
from plagues. We find that U.S. economic fluctuations, including the Panics of 1893 and 1907,
were driven primarily by volatile TFP, and that growth during the "Roaring Twenties" should
have been even stronger, reflecting a large labor wedge that emerged around World War I.


Gary D. Hansen                                  Fatih Ozturk
UCLA                                            UCLA
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall                                f.ozturk@ucla.edu
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ghansen@econ.ucla.edu

Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
1     Introduction

Macroeconomists have increasingly been studying historical events using quantitative general

equilibrium tools, with a focus on important historical episodes that previously had been studied

using traditional historical methods (see for example Ohanian (1997), Cole and Ohanian (1999,

2004), Kehoe and Prescott (2007), McGrattan (2012)). The application of general equilibrium

analysis is shedding new light on important historical episodes by using diagnostic methods

that help identify potential classes of models for evaluating these events, and by quantifying

the impact of dierent shocks on macroeconomic activity during historical periods within fully

articulated general equilibrium models.

    The recent integration of macroeconomics with economic history involves the practice of

combining general equilibrium analytical methods and historical narratives with existing and

recently constructed historical datasets. This is creating new insights about long-run growth

and cyclical uctuations.

    This chapter advances the use of quantitative general equilibrium tools within the eld of

historical economics to study two important and very dierent historical episodes that have

received little attention using general equilibrium macroeconomic growth models.       The rst

is the Industrial Revolution, which captures the transition of Western economies from the

Malthusian era, in which there was little, if any growth in per-capita income, to that of the era

of Modern Economic Growth, which has featured persistent, long-run per capita growth and

rising living standards, all of which took place around the middle of the 18th century. This

analysis uses Hansen and Prescott (2002) model of the Industrial Revolution to analyze newly

constructed data from Britain that dates back to 1245 (Clark (2010)).

    Clark's data include total factor productivity (TFP), real output, population, factor prices,

and capital stocks, among other variables, which allow us to provide the rst quantitative-

theoretic analysis of the transition from the Malthusian era to the modern growth era. Our

main nding advances our quantitative understanding of the timing of the transition to modern

economic growth that occurred in the 1700s.

    We nd that this transition realistically could never have occurred much before that time,

as the productivity of the the Malthusian sector peaked around 15th century, virtually guar-

anteeing that the nascent capital-intensive technologies of that time would not be close to

being competitive. Instead, a 300 year stagnation of the Malthusian sector implicitly allowed

the newer capital-intensive production methods to catch up, become viable alternatives to the

Malthusian technology, and ultimately dominate the labor and land-intensive Malthusian tech-

nologies. Moreover, we nd that the timing of this catchup is robust to plausible amounts of

historical TFP mismeasurement.

    The second episode studied is the U.S. economy from 1889-1929. This is a particularly strik-

ing period in the history of the U.S., involving World War I, two major nancial panics, the

diusion of several important new technologies, including electricity and the internal combus-

tion engine, and the Roaring Twenties, one of the most rapid growth decades in U.S. history,

and the period which immediately preceded the Great Depression. This section uses variants



                                                2
of Business Cycle Accounting (Cole and Ohanian (2002), Chari et al. (2007), and Brinca et al.

(2016)), a general equilibrium diagnostic tool, to study this period in its entirety, and well as

analyze individual events, including World War I and the Panics of 1893 and 1907, and the

Roaring Twenties.

    One main nding is that technology shocks are remarkably important drivers of economic

activity between 1889 and 1916, including the Panics of 1893 and 1907. This nding stands in

sharp contrast to the perception that technology shocks today are quantitatively unimportant.

Our second main nding is that labor is substantially depressed during World War I, and this

labor depression continues through the 1920s, one of the highest growth decades in U.S. history.

We nd that a large labor wedge is the key factor depressing growth during the 1920s, and

that output per capita should have been about 15 percent higher by 1929 in the absence of the

increased labor wedge. We nd that standard factors, such as tax rates, do not account for

the post-1916 labor wedge, and that future research should study this decade to gain a better

understanding of the specic factors that created this wedge.

    The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the analysis of the Industrial Rev-

olution.   Section 3 presents the analysis of the U.S. economy between 1889-1929.      Section 4

concludes.




2     Growth in the Very Long Run

In this section, we use the model studied in Hansen and Prescott (2002) to interpret data from

Clark (2010).   In particular, this model features an endogenous transition from Malthusian

stagnation to sustained growth. Malthusian stagnation is the result of rms choosing to use

a production process where land's share of income is positive, and hence there are decreasing

returns to capital and labor. Another important feature required for Malthusian stagnation is

that the population growth rate is an increasing function of living standards. Sustained growth

begins when a production process is employed that exhibits constant returns to capital and

labor.

    Perhaps the most important feature of this model is that both production process are

available throughout history and the choice to employ one or both processes is made by rms

in response to the total factor productivity associated with each of these processes.     In the

early stages of development, when TFP for the second production process is low, only the land

intensive technology is used. Eventually, if TFP associated with the second production process

grows over time, that process will inevitably begin to be employed. At this point an industrial

revolution occurs and the economy converges to a standard Solow type balanced growth path.

    The approach followed by Hansen and Prescott (2002) diers from other contributions to

the literature using dynamic general equilibrium models to understand the industrial revolution

in two respects.   First, Hansen and Prescott (2002) study the consequences of technological

progress while papers such as Galor and Weil (2000) or Lucas (2018) aim to explain technological

progress itself. Second, the transition to sustained growth happens in the Malthus to Solow




                                               3
model when a production process with a lower land share becomes protable and is adopted. In

the other two papers, sustained growth results from an increase in the rate of return to human

capital that leads to a demographic transition resulting from endogenous fertility decisions of

the sort modeled in Becker and Barro (1988). Doepke (2004) develops a model that aims to

unify these two approaches.



2.1     The Malthus to Solow Model

The model of Hansen and Prescott (2002) is a version of the Diamond (1965) overlapping

generations growth model.     Households live for two periods.     They earn labor income when

young which is used to nance consumption, investment in physical capital and land. In the

second period of life, households are the owners of capital and land and nance consumption

from renting these assets to rms, who use them along with labor as inputs in production. At

the end of the period, old households sell their land to the young, which also helps nance

their consumption. An additional important feature of the model is that population growth is

a function of living standards as is generally assumed in a Malthusian growth model.



2.1.1   Technology
This is a one-good economy in which the single consumption good can be produced from two

available production processes that are assumed to be accessible throughout time.           The rst

is called the Malthus process and requires capital, labor and land (KM , NM , andL) to produce

output according to the following Cobb-Douglas technology:


                                                       µ    1--µ
                                     YM t = AM t KM t NM t LM                                     (1)


   The second production process uses only capital and labor (KS and          NS ):

                                                        1-
                                         YSt = ASt KSt NSt                                        (2)



   Given that these two processes are always available and that    YM   and   YS   are the same good,

the aggregate production function can be described as follows:


                                                             µ 1--µ        1-
                Y = F (K, N, L) =       max           AM KM NM L    + AS KS NS                    (3)
                                    KM ,KS ,NM ,NS




                                     subject to      KM + KS  K
                                                     NM + NS  N

   Here,   AM   is total factor productivity specic to the Malthus production process and      AS   is

total factor productivity specic to the Solow process.




                                                      4
     Land is in xed supply, it can't be produced and does not depreciate. Its only use is for

production employing the Malthus process. Hence we normalize this to be one (LM                         = L = 1).
     Total output,        Yt = YM t + YSt ,    can be consumed or invested to produce capital productive

the following period. Capital depreciates fully in the period it is used in production. Hence,

the resource constraint is

                                                Ct + Kt+1 = YM t + YSt                                              (4)


     One way of decentralizing this economy is to assume that one rm, called the Malthus rm,
                                                                                                               1
operates the Malthus production process (1) and another operates the Solow process (2).                            Let

w   be the wage rate,       rK   be the capital rental rate and      rL be the rental rate for land.   Given these

factor rental prices and values for            AM   and   AS ,   each rm maximizes prot,



                                   max {Yj - wNj - rK Kj - rL Lj } , j = M, S                                       (5)
                                 Nj ,Kj ,LJ


2.1.2     Households
We assume that    Nt households are born in period t live for two periods. A household born in
period   t consumes c1t units of consumption in the rst period of his life and c2,t+1 units in the
second. His utility is given by



                                          U (c1t , c2,t+1 ) = log c1t +  log c2,t+1                                 (6)



     The number of new households born in a given period is assumed to grow at rate that is a

function of living standards. Living standards at date                 t   are assumed to be given by   c1t   and   Nt
evolves as follows:

                                                     Nt+1 = g (c1t )Nt                                              (7)

                                                                                                  1
     The initial old at date         t0   are assumed to be endowed equally with land (
                                                                                                Nt0 -1
                                                                                                       units) and
               Kt0
capital (            units). In addition, each young household is endowed with one unit of labor that
              Nt0 -1
is supplied inelastically. Old households are assumed to rent land and capital to rms and then

sell their land to the young at the end of the period. This nances consumption in the second

period of life,    c2 .   The young supply labor and earn labor income which is used to nance                    c1 ,
investment (kt+1 ), and the purchase of land from the old. The price of land is denoted                        by q .

Hence, a household born in period              t will choose consumption,       investment and land purchase to

maximize (6) subject to the following budget constraints:



                                                c1t + kt+1 + qt lt+1 = wt                                           (8)




                                      c2,t+1 = rK,t+1 kt+1 + (rL,t+1 + qt+1 )lt+1                                   (9)
    1 Given   constant returns to scale, the number of rms does not matter.




                                                             5
2.1.3       Competitive Equilibrium
Given   Nt0 , Nt0 -1 and Kt0 , as well as a sequence of sector specic total factor productivities
{AM t , ASt }t=t0 , a competitive equilibrium consists of sequences of prices {qt , wt , rKt , rLt }t=t0 ,
                                                                                                           

                                                                                                                
rm allocations {KM t , KSt , NM t , NSt , YM t , YSt }t=t , and household allocations {c1t , c2t , kt+1 , lt+1 }t=t
                                                         0                                                         0

such that


          Given the sequence of prices, the rm allocations solve the problems specied in equation

          (5).


          Given the sequence of prices, the household allocation maximizes (6) subject to (8) and
                                                                   1                      Kt0
          (9). Recall that the old in period t0 are endowed with       units of land and        units
                                                                 Nt -1                   Nt0 -1
                                                                                       0
          of capital.


          Markets clear:


             KM t + KSt = Nt-1 kt
             NM t + NSt = Nt
             Nt-1 lt = 1
             YM t + YSt = Nt c1t + Nt-1 c2t + Nt kt+1

      Nt+1 = g (c1t )Nt

2.1.4       Characterizing the Equilibrium
Here we briey summarize how we solve for an equilibrium sequence of prices and quantities.

More details are provided in Hansen and Prescott (2002) and Greenwood (2020).                                           The key

results show that the Malthus sector will always operate, but the Solow sector will only operate

if   AS   is suciently large. In particular, the papers cited establish the following results:


     1. For any    wt   and   rKt ,   the Malthus sector will operate. That is,               YM t > 0   for all   t.

     2. Given values for       wt     and   rKt ,   maximized prot per unit of output in the Solow sector is

          positive if and only if
                                                                                      1-
                                                             rKt              wt
                                                     ASt   >                                                               (10)
                                                                             1-
          Prots are zero if equation (10) holds with equality.                        Hence, the Solow rm will only

          produce output (YSt         > 0)   if   ASt    is greater than or equal to the right hand side of (10).


                                                                                  M          M
Given values for        AM t , ASt , Kt     and     Nt   for some    t,   dene   wt   and   rKt   as follows:


                                                      M
                                                     wt  µAM t Kt Ntµ-1                                                    (11)




                                                      M
                                                     rKt  AM t Kt-1 Ntµ                                                    (12)



                                                                 6
                                                                                                                           M
      Our solution procedure involves rst evaluating the right hand side of equation (10) at                              wt
         M
and     rKt   each period.   If   ASt   is less than or equal to this value, only the Malthus sector will

operate. In this case, in equilibrium
                                                      M
                                                wt = wt          M
                                                        , rKt = rKt                 and    rLt = (1 -  - µ)AM t Kt Ntu .    If

ASt    is greater than this value, both sectors will operate and the marginal product of labor and

capital will be equated across sectors (see problem (3)). Hence, the equilibrium rental rates are

as follows:

                       
                                                                                                   M            M    1-
                         M                                                                        rKt          wt
                       w t                                                          if   Ast 
                       
                                                                                                               1-
                wt =                                                                                M            M   1-   (13)
                                   µ-1                   -                                         rKt          wt
                                t NM t = (1 -  )ASt KSt NSt
                       µAM t KM
                                                                                    if   ASt >                  1-

                         
                                                                                                  M             M   1-
                         r M                                                                     rKt           wt
                                                                               if    Ast 
                         
                             Kt                                                                                1-
                 rKt =                                                                            M             M    1-   (14)
                               -1 µ            -1 1-                                             rKt           wt
                         AM t KM
                         
                                 t NM t = ASt KSt NSt                          if    ASt >                     1-


                                                                     u
                                          rLt = (1 -  - µ)AM t KM t NM t                                                  (15)


      The rst order conditions for choosing               kt+1    and     lt+1       in the household's problem can be

written
                                                               wt
                                                      c1t =                                                               (16)
                                                              1+

                                               qt+1 = qt rK,t+1 - rL,t+1                                                  (17)


      Finally, the budget constraints and market clearing conditions imply that



                                             Kt+1 = Nt (wt - c1t ) - qt                                                   (18)



      Given a value for      qt0 , {AM t , ASt }t=t0 , Kt0    and      Nt0 ,   the equations (3), (7) and (13) - (18)

determine the equilibrium sequence of prices and quantities,



                                   {Yt , wt , rKt , rLt , c1t , qt+1 , Kt+1 , Nt+1 }t=t0 .


                            qt0 , is not given but is also determined by the equilibrium conditions
      The initial price of land,

of the model. In particular, qt0 turns out be uniquely determined by the requirement that

iterations on equation (17) do not cause qt to eventually become negative or Kt+1 (determined

by equation 18) to become negative. We use a numerical shooting algorithm to nd this value

of   qt0 .

2.1.5         Calibration of Population Growth Function
In the application carried out here, we interpret one model time period to be 25 years.                                    We

use the same population growth function,                   g (c1t ),   as in Hansen and Prescott (2002).                  This

function, which was based on data from Lucas (1988) on population growth rates and per

capita income, has the following properties: (1) the population growth rate increases linearly


                                                              7
in living standards until population doubles every 35 years or 1.64 periods; (2) at the point

where population doubles every 35 years, living standards are twice the Malthusian level; (3)

the population growth rate decreases linearly from this point until living standards are 18 times

the Malthusian level at which point the growth rate of population is zero; and (4) population is

constant as living standards continue to rise. Here,                     c1M   is the Malthusian steady state level of

c1t   and   M   is the growth factor of      AM t       in a Malthusian steady state. This will be characterized

fully in the next subsection.

                             
                              1/(1-µ-)           c 1t                 c 1t
                             
                              M        2-       c 1M
                                                          + 1.64     c 1M
                                                                             -1    for   c1t < 2c1M
                             
                g (c1t ) =                  c1t -2c1M                                                                (19)
                              1.64 - 0.64     16c1M
                                                                                   for   2c1M  c1t  18c1M
                             1                                                     for   c1t > 18c1M

2.1.6       The Malthusian Steady State
As in Hansen and Prescott (2002), we will assume that this economy begins in a Malthusian

steady state, which is the asymptotic growth path for a version of the model with only the

Malthus production process available or where                    AS   is suciently low for all        t that equation (10)
is never satised.            Also, prior to period        t0 , A M   is assumed to grow at a constant rate equal

to    M - 1, c1t < 2c1M ,         and the population growth rate is determined according to the rst

segment of the function           g   in equation (19). In this case, the Malthusian steady state growth
                                             1/(1-µ-)
rate of population will be            gN = M              . Both the price of land and the stock of capital will

also grow at this same rate on this steady state growth path.

      It will be useful for our empirical exercise if we choose a value for steady state income per

capita, call it     yM ,     and compute the rest of the steady state to be consistent with that value.

From steady state versions of equations (11) and (16), we can compute                            c1M   as


                                                           wM    µ
                                              c1M =           =    yM .                                              (20)
                                                          1+    1+

Next, the following three equations, which are steady state versions of equations (14), (17) and

(18), can be solved to obtain the rental rate of capital,                    rK,M ,   the steady state capital to labor

ratio,   ^M ,
         k      and the steady state land price to labor                ratio, q
                                                                               ^M :

                                                                        y
                                                                        ^
                                                          rK,M =                                                     (21)
                                                                        ^
                                                                        k

                                              rK,M
                                                   -1 q
                                                      ^ = (1 - µ - )^
                                                                    y                                                (22)
                                               gN

                                                ^=                µ
                                             gN k           µ-                ^-q
                                                                              y ^                                    (23)
                                                                 1+




                                                                 8
2.2       Quantitative Exercise: England from 1245 to 1845

The model presented in the last subsection is now used to interpret time series taken from Clark
          2
(2010).       Clark uses a variety of sources to construct data that can be used in a quantitative

general equilibrium model, including TFP, national income, the capital stock, and payments to

capital and labor. This allows us to study the Industrial Revolution in much more quantitative

detail than previously possible.

    Given that one model time period is interpreted to be 25 years, we use 25 year averages

of annual data on total factor productivity, output per capita, and population constructed by

Clark using the methodology described in Clark (2010). In particular, data for a given year,
                                                                                                3
say 1845, is actually an average constructed from annual data from 1845 to 1870.

    Figure 1 shows Clark's total factor productivity series from 1245 to 1845.                  The series is

extended to 2020 by allowing it to grow from 1845 according to the value we assign to the

parameter       M .    Twenty ve year averages of Clark's estimate of England's population from

1245 to 1845 is shown in Figure 2 and his estimate for real per capita income is in Figure 3.



2.2.1         Model Calibration
The model parameter values we used were            µ = 0.65    and    = 0 .1   for the Malthus production

process and       = .35     for the Solow process. These values imply that labor's share of income is

the same (0.65) for both production processes, following Hansen and Prescott (2002). Land's

share in the Malthus process is 0.25. The growth factor for Malthus total factor productivity

prior to 1245 and after 1845, when our measured data series ends, is given by                   M = 1.0074.
This was set to match the average population growth rate from 1245 to 1745 and characterizes

our Malthusian steady state. Similarly, the growth factor for Solow total factor productivity

beginning in 1895 is         S = 1.27.   This implies an asymptotic growth rate of real output per

capita equal to 1.5 percent per year. The value of the discount factor,            ,   was set equal to one

following Hansen and Prescott.

    The value of       yM   used is equal to 55. The movements in per capita income exhibited by our

model economy are both the direct result of TFP movements and the Malthusian dynamics

associated with the economy converging back to steady state following a given change in TFP.

We chose       yM   by simply trying dierent values above and below the mean of per capita income

from 1245 to 1745 and taking the one that allowed our model to best t the time series on per

capita income during that period.

    The nal calibration issue to be resolved, other than initial conditions               Kt0   and   Nto ,   is a

time series for       AS   prior to 1895. Recall that the Solow production process will be employed

only when       AS    satises equation (10). We construct our        AS   time series so that this happens

   2 Clark (2010) provides data at ten year intervals on a variety of macroeconomic aggregates. The data we
actually use was received from the author and includes annual data that enabled us to compute 25 year averages.
   3 Specically, total factor productivity is from the third column of Table 33 in Clark (2010), which was
constructed using a price index of domestic expenditures. An alternative measure is provided using the price
of net domestic output. Similarly, we chose to measure per capita output using real national income that was
also constructed using domestic expenditure prices. This series is contained in Table 28 of Clark (2010). The
population series we use is from Table 7 of that paper.

                                                      9
for the rst time in the year 1745. Prior to that, the value of          AS   is perhaps growing at a slow

rate, but is irrelevant to the computation of an equilibrium. We set            AS,1745 equal to 25, which
is the smallest integer value that satises equation (10). Following            that, AS grows 10 percent

each period until 1870.         This value was chosen so that a demographic transition would not

occur until at least this date given that the rate of population in our data sample continues

to raise with living standards. That is, we chose this value so that the population growth rate

would continue to be determined by the rst branch of equation (19). Figure 4 is a plot of our

assumed        AS   series from 1745 to 1845.



2.2.2      Benchmark Simulation
We assume that the economy was in a Malthusian steady state at date        t0 - 1 = 1220. Given
yM = 55 and Nt0 -1 = 5, we obtain Kt0 -1 = kN       ^ t -1 . Also, so that y1220 = yM , we set
                                                        0
                                                                                               -1
AM,1220 = AM,1245 and normalize the AM sequence so that yt0 -1 = YM = AM,t0 -1 Kt      0 -1
                                                                                            Ntµ
                                                                                              0 -1
                                                                                                   .
                                                                            ^ t.
In this case, our initial conditions for 1245 are Nt0 = gN Nt0 -1 and Kt0 = kN 0

    We also add an additional element in our benchmark simulation that is not part of the

model described so far. In particular, England suered from a series of plagues that decimated

its population for three centuries from 1345 (the Black Death) to 1645 (the Great Plague

of London).         In particular, there is a downward sloping portion in Figure 2 that shows that
                                                    4
population was declining from 1320 to 1470.             We capture this by replacing equation (7) with



                                            Nt+1 = Pt g (c1t )Nt ,                                        (24)



    wherePt , which we interpret as a plague            shock, is equal to one for all   t   except for   t=
1295 - 1445. For these dates, we set Pt = 0.8.
    Figure 5 shows that our benchmark simulation successfully captures the decline in popula-

tion from 1295 to 1445. After that, England's actual population increased more rapidly than

in the model economy.          This is particularly true after 1750.    Figure 6 shows that the model

economy captures the uctuations in per capita income quite well.

    The transition from employing all inputs in the Malthus production process to having almost

all of the capital and labor assigned to the Solow process is shown in Figure 7. In particular,

in the rst period of the industrial revolution, 1745, 31 percent of capital and 12 percent of

labor is employed in the Solow process. The fraction of inputs employed in Solow production

increases over time and exceeds 95 percent in 1895 for labor and in 1870 for capital. At this

point, the economy has come close to converging to a standard neoclassical steady state growth

path where real output per capita is growing by 1.5 percent per year.



2.2.3      No Plagues
As a counterfactual experiment, we recompute the benchmark under the assumption that                 Pt = 1
for all   t.   In this case, as shown in Figure 8, model population is as much as three times larger

   4 We   will discuss how the model would respond to the plagues beyond 1470 in subsequent experiment.


                                                        10
than in the actual data during the period of plagues from 1345 to1645.              Similarly, Figure 9

shows that per capita income in our model is signicantly lower than in the actual data during

this period due to population in the model economy being so high.



2.2.4     More Plagues
As mentioned previously, England suered plagues pretty continuously from 1245 to 1645. In

this experiment, we set    Pt = 0.8   for   t = 1295 - 1620.     As shown in Figure 10, this leads to

model population being as much as a third of what is observed in the actual data from 1550

to 1750. This result is simply a more extreme version of what is observed with population in

the benchmark simulation. Model and data series for per capita income look fairly similar in

this experiment as shown in Figure 11. Clearly there is something happening with population

during the period 1550-1750 that is not captured solely by plagues and Malthusian dynamics.



2.2.5     Timing of the Industrial Revolution
In the experiments done so far, we constructed the         AS   sequence so that the Solow production

process is initially adopted in 1745. Note that in Figure 12,       AM   (the solid line) reaches a peak

in 1445 and then drops signicantly. In this counterfactual experiment, we assume this drop

never occurred and that    AM   simply grew at rate   M - 1 after 1445 (see dotted line in Figure 12).
Will this relative success of the Malthusian production process, given the same sequence for

AS   as in the benchmark, cause the Industrial Revolution to happen at a later date? Turns out

that the adoption of the Solow process begins at exactly the same date as in the benchmark

(1745). Figure 13 shows the right hand side of equation (10) for both the benchmark and this

counterfactual case from 1245 to 1745. We see that while this threshold is very high when             AM
reached its peak in 1450 in both cases, the threshold falls very quickly in the benchmark due

to declines in   AM .   In the counterfactual, however, Malthusian dynamics dominate.            As   AM
continues to grow, population also grows (see Figure 14).           This causes income per capita to

decline as it converges to the Malthusian steady state of        yM = 55   (see Figure 15). These same

dynamics cause the Solow threshold to decline and, as it turns out, it is still protable to adopt

the Solow process in 1745 when      AS   is equal to 25.

     The key here is that in the Malthusian steady state, the right hand side of equation (10) is

a constant. This threshold might deviate from this steady state due to short run uctuations in

AM ,   but over time will converge back to this constant. Hence, while we chose the        AS   sequence

in the benchmark so that the Solow production process would be adopted in 1745, this result

turns out to be robust in the absence of signicant upward movements in the              AM   process in

the period near 1745.




                                                   11
3     Business Cycle Accounting of the 1889-1929 U.S. Econ-

      omy

To apply Business Cycle Accounting (BCA) for this period, we use data constructed by John

Kendrick (1961). Kendrick constructed data from 1869-1957 for the U.S. economy using NIPA

principles.   These data include real measures of consumption, private and government xed

investment, inventories, government consumption, and exports and imports.           The data also

have consistent measures of labor and capital input that are aggregated from sectoral measures

of these variables. These data are considered to be high quality and the best available for this

time period. The data are decennial from 1869-1889, and are annual from 1889 onwards, which

leads us to begin in 1889.

    The period from 1889-1929 is striking from a macroeconomic perspective because of a num-

ber of short-run events and also because of it its importance in the long-run evolution of the

American economy. This period includes the Roaring Twenties, well-known for its high eco-

nomic growth rate and as the runup to the Great Depression. It also includes World War I, in

which government consumption rose enormously, taking away resources from the private sector.

There were also two very famous nancial panics, the Panic of 1893 and the Panic of 1907.

    More broadly, 1889-1929 is a period of enormous technological change, including the diu-

sion of electrication and the expansion of the internal combustion engine, which transformed

production methods (electrication) and transportation (internal combustion engine).          1889-

1929 also includes the heyday of American monopolies, including the famous Standard Oil

trust and John D. Rockefeller, and Andrew Carnegie's U.S. Steel trust, both of which mo-

tivated the passage of the country's major antitrust acts, the Sherman Act in 1890 and the

Clayton Act in 1914.

    To our knowledge, neither this period in its totality, nor any of the individuals events within

the period, have been analyzed using quantitative general equilibrium tools. This chapter thus

provides the rst such evaluation of this remarkable period.        BCA, rst used in Cole and

Ohanian (2002), and Chari et al. (2002), and then developed further in Chari et al. (2007), and

Brinca et al. (2016), henceforth BCKM, is ideally suited for investigating this period, because it

is the leading diagnostic general equilibrium framework for identifying a set of possible factors

aecting macroeconomic performance and for measuring the quantitative importance of these

factors for output, consumption, investment, and hours worked. Moreover, we show that BCA

is not only useful for analyzing uctuations at the business cycle frequency (e.g. four years),

but also is useful for studying lower frequency phenomena that evolve over a decade or more.

    1889-1929 represents a period of unique long-run economic evolutions that are overlayered

with several large short-run uctuations that are of interest in their own right. As we show

below, BCA highlights a number of key factors that are striking and surprising relative to

the literature, and surprising relative to ndings from postwar business cycles and the Great

Recession. They also will suggest specic theoretical classes of models for understanding this

important episode.




                                                12
   We summarize BCA and its application protocol here, and refer the reader to BCKM for

details. BCA begins with a standard optimal growth model. Each period                                    t,   a random event st
is realized. Let      st = (s0 , . . . , st )   denote the history of events up through and including                  period t

and   t (s ) be the probability of history st being realized at period t.
           t
                                                                                               Preferences are dened over

expected sequences of consumption and leisure. There is a standard Cobb-Douglas constant

returns to scale production function with labor-augmenting technological change.                                     Output is

divided between consumption, investment, and government consumption. There is a standard

law of motion for capital, and the household time endowment is normalized to unity:

                                                
                                  max E0                     t t (st )U (Ct (st )/Nt , 1 - lt (st ))
                                                t=0   st


subject to:

                           F (Kt (st-1 ), (1 +  )t Nt lt (st ))  Ct (st ) + Xt (st ) + Gt (st )

and the capital accumulation law:



                                          Kt+1 (st ) = Xt (st ) + (1 -  )Kt (st-1 )

All variables except for time allocated to market production are then divided by technological

progress   (1+  )t      and population          Nt = (1+ n )t         to induce stationarity, and the transformed vari-

ables are denoted by lower case letters. The optimality conditions for this problem (assuming
                                                                  5
that transversality is satised) are given by :



                                                           Ult (st ) = Uct (st )flt



                         Uct (st )(1 +  ) =                   t (st+1 |st )Uct+1 (st+1 ){fkt+1 + 1 -  }
                                                      st+1




               f (kt (st-1 ), lt (st ))  ct (st ) + kt+1 (st )(1 +  )(1 + n ) - (1 -  )kt (st-1 ) + gt (st )

To use this model for diagnostic purposes, we rst augment these optimality conditions with

multiplicative terms known as wedges, that are functions of state                                st .   The wedges will allow

this model to completely account for the data. As you will see below, several of the wedges

appear to be tax rates, though we do not give the wedges structural interpretations at this

stage of analysis. The augmented rst order conditions are below:



                                          Ult (st ) = Uct (st )[1 - lt (st )]At (st )flt
  5 We   will be using log utility, therefore   denotes  (1 + n ).




                                                                      13
       At (st )f (kt (st-1 ), lt (st ))  ct (st ) + kt+1 (st )(1 +  )(1 + n ) - (1 -  )kt (st-1 ) + gt (st )



Uct (st )(1 +  )[1 + xt (st )] =                 t (st+1 |st )Uct+1 (st+1 ){At+1 (st+1 )fkt+1 + (1 -  )[1 + xt+1 (st+1 )]}
                                          st+1


    We begin with the wedge              At (st ),   which multiplies the production function. This wedge is

observationally equivalent to the Solow Residual, and thus accounts for movements in output

not due to movements in capital and labor. This is called an                       eciency wedge         . Next, consider

the rst order condition for allocating time between market work and leisure. The wedge here

is denoted as        1 - lt (st ),    and is written in this way because it is observationally equivalent

to a tax on labor income. This is called the                  labor wedge    , and as noted above, is not given a

structural interpretation at this stage. The economy's intertemporal condition is augmented

with a wedge denoted as              1/[1 + xt (st )],   and is written in this way because it is similar to a

tax on investment. It is called the              investment wedge     . The last wedge is called the             government
consumption wedge         , which accounts for the sum of government consumption and net exports.

With a Markovian implementation there is one to one and onto mapping from the event                                    st   to

the wedges    (At , lt , xt , gt ).
    The stochastic process for the event                 st = (At (st ), lt (st ), xt (st ), gt (st ))   is governed by a

rst-order VAR:

                                         st+1 = P0 + P st + t+1 , E ( ) = V

in which    P0   and P     are matrices of autoregressive coecients to be estimated,                         is a vector of

innovations,     and V     is the variance-covariance matrix of the innovations. As BCKM show, it is

straightforward to estimate the coecients and the elements of the variance-covariance matrix

using maximum likelihood after log-linearizing the model, setting it up in state space form, and

using the Kalman Filter.

    With these wedges, which equal the number of endogenous variables, the augmented model

ts the data perfectly, and therefore the model is used as an                         accounting device       .   To do this,

we rst measure the wedges as realizations from their stochastic process, and we then use the

wedges within the linearized model to conduct various experiments, including quantifying the

contribution of one or more wedges in accounting for the endogenous variables. We then use

the results from these experiments to evaluate dierent classes of structural models.                                 Below,

we report some very surprising ndings from this analysis in comparison from ndings from

postwar analyses, and from the perspective of narrative historical studies about this period.



3.1        Business Cycle Accounting Findings

Real GNP and its components, and labor input, measured as hours worked, are from Kendrick

(1961). Following standard practice, all variables are rst divided by the population, 16 years
                 6
old and over .        As is standard practice, we divide all growing variables by a common trend,

   6 The data are available from 1900 to 1929. Linear interpolation is used to construct the data from 1889 to
1899 using the data on the population 15 years old and over. Details are available upon request.

                                                              14
in which we use 1.6 percent annually. We divide government spending into government con-

sumption and government investment, in which the latter is put in the investment category,

and following BCKM and Hansen and Ohanian (2016), we add net exports to government

consumption.

   Figure 16 shows these data. There are several noteworthy features. One is the very large

increase in government consumption during World War I, which suggests potentially large eects

of the war on the economy. Ohanian (1997) and McGrattan and Ohanian (2010) quantitatively

analyze how well a neoclassical model can account for the World War II economy, and how much

government scal policy aected output, labor input, investment and consumption. Applying

BCA to this period will provide an assessment of the neoclassical model for the World War I

economy which will be a natural complement to the existing World War II studies.

   Another notable feature is the behavior of the economy around the two major nancial

panics, the Panic of 1893 and the Panic of 1907. Both episodes feature above-normal economic

growth for some years prior to the panic, followed by a drop in real GDP and hours worked,

then followed by a rapid rebound in economic activity.

   But perhaps the most striking feature of these data is the pattern of hours worked. These

average around 1/3 of the households time endowment from the mid-1890s up to the mid-teens,

but then hours drop around the end of World War I and remain at that low level through the

booming 1920s. This raises an important question: Why do hours worked remain so low during

an economic boom with sharply rising investment and productivity? Standard theory indicates

that hours should be higher than average during the 1920s, not lower than average.

   To quantitatively evaluate these three issues, we log-linearize the model, set it up in state

space form, and estimate the parameters of the wedge stochastic process using maximum like-

lihood via the Kalman Filter. To model the stochastic process for the wedges, we use a VAR.

We use one lag for the VAR because the data are annual.

   Figure 17 reports the four wedges between 1889-1929. Panel A shows the eciency wedge

over time. This shows large and stationary movements until World War I, then it rises sub-

stantially through the 1920s, likely reecting the rapid diusion of electricity and the internal

combustion engine.   Given the large literature on 1920s productivity growth and innovation

diusions, we refer to the eciency wedge during this period as productivity growth.

   The investment wedge shows a large trend decline, which is observationally equivalent to a

continuously declining tax on investment goods. It also features temporary increases around

the times of the Panics of 1893 and 1907. The World War I spending increases dwarfs all other

movements in the government wedge, as government spending rises by about a factor of four

during the war. The labor wedge declines in the early teens, which is equivalent to a higher

labor income tax. This higher labor wedge continues through World War I and the 1920s.



3.1.1   Contribution of the Wedges
Figure 18 shows the contribution of the eciency wedge to output, hours worked, and invest-

ment. This is the model prediction for these variables over time with only the eciency wedge




                                              15
included, and the other wedges set to their steady state values. We have split the graph between

the period 1889-1916 and 1917-1929. We do this because the ndings are so remarkably dierent

between these two periods, and these large dierences are economically very interesting.

   Note that between 1889 and 1916, the eciency wedge accounts very closely for output

uctuations which is just before the U.S. entered World War I in 1917. The gure shows this

very close relationship between data and the model, in which the detrended model economy is

driven just by stationary productivity shocks. Table 1 provides complementary information on

goodness of t by presenting what is analogous to an                     R2   statistic for this procedure. Known
                                                              2
as the  -statistic within the literature, this            R       -type measure is given by:


                                                     1/ t (yt - yit )2
                                       Y
                                       i =                              2
                                                                           ,
                                                     j (1/ t (yt - yjt ) )


where      Y
           i   is the percentage of variable         y   accounted for by wedge        i = (A, l , x , g ).   In the

numerator,     y   is the individual variable,   i   is the wedge individually driving the system, and           yit
is the model prediction of variable     y at date t using wedge i. In the denominator, the summation
over   j   indicates that all wedges are included, which delivers a perfect t of the model net of

approximation error. The statistic lies between 0 and 1, in which a perfect t is 1.

   The eciency wedge accounts for 83 percent of the squared model deviations from trend

(see Table 1). This is high when compared to similar calculations made for dierent episodes

and across countries. BCKM calculate this statistic for the Great Recession across 25 countries,

including the U.S., and nd an average of 64 percent. For the U.S, it was just 16 percent during

the Great Recession.

   After that, however, there is a signicant disconnect between eciency variations and output

variations, as the eciency wedge accounts for much less of output. Throughout the 1920s, the

eciency wedge is rising (see Figure 18), and by 1929, these large increases in the eciency

wedge alone drive output about 19 percent above its trend growth path within the model. This

stands in sharp contrast to actual output, which is about 4 percent above its trend growth path

in 1929.

   These ndings are striking when viewed within the context of the literature on twentieth

century economic growth and the context of BCA. There is a broad consensus that the 1920s

was one of the most striking decades of U.S. economic growth in its history, and that this

growth was fostered by an unusual wave of technological advances, including the diusion of

electrication, which transformed production methods, and the internal combustion engine,

which revolutionized transportation. The BCA eciency wedge only economy result presented

here indicates that the famous 1920s economic boom is much weaker than it should have been

relative to the technological improvements that took place.

   As a related point, we are unaware of any other period, in the U.S. or in other countries, in

which the eciency wedge accounts for so much of output (83 percent), and is then followed

by an immediate and large change in this accuracy, in which the eciency wedge accounts for

so little of output. Note that the eciency wedge accounts for only about 10 percent of output




                                                          16
following 1916.

   The post-1916 gure and the associated     -statistic   indicate that some other factor changed

substantially around this time, and it persistently depressed the economy relative to what it

could have achieved with the measured, positive eciency wedge realizations. The gure also

shows the accounting of labor and investment using just the eciency wedge, and these patterns

reveal more about the pre and post-1916 economy.

   Note that the eciency wedge's accuracy in accounting for hours is also very dierent

between these two sub-periods.    Table 1 shows that the eciency wedge accounts for about

46 percent of hours worked between 1889 and 1916, which is very high relative to similar

calculations in the real business cycle literature.   In particular, much of the criticism of real

business cycle models is that productivity shocks account for very little of hours worked in

post-1983 data (Kehoe et al. (2018)).

   The fraction of hours worked that the model accounts for declines from 46 percent to about

two percent, in which the large positive eciency wedge changes of the 1920s generate much

higher labor than what actually occurs. This predicted large rise in labor reects increases in

both labor demand and in labor supply, both of which are driven by higher eciency which

raises worker productivity.

   The pattern for investment (bottom Figure 18 panels) is qualitatively similar to that of

hours, in that the model with just the eciency wedge generates much higher investment than

observed. Quantitatively, the deviation between model and data is much larger. By 1929, the

model driven just by the eciency wedge predicts investment that is about 70 percent above

trend, compared to the actual value which is modestly above trend.

   Figure 19 provides complementary information about the impact of the eciency wedge by

plotting the model predictions including all wedges    except   the eciency wedge. Note that the

prediction of the model with all other wedges is far from the data for output, and surprisingly,

also for labor through the 1916 period. This latter nding is particularly noteworthy given that

the labor wedge is included in making this prediction.

   The post-1916 deviations present a consistent pathology about the 1920s. Rapidly growing

eciency should have led to higher labor input, which in turn should have led to much higher

investment, given the complementarity between capital and labor in production. The fact that

the post-1916 prediction errors are so large and of a consistent pattern suggests that a quantita-

tively important factor emerged around this time to simultaneously depress labor, investment,

and output, and that was suciently large to negatively oset much of the expansionary eect

of higher eciency.

   Simulating the model in response to just the labor wedge provides important information

about this factor. Figure 20 shows that the labor wedge captures nearly all of the movement

in labor after 1916.   Recall that Figure 17 Panel B showed that the labor wedge, which is

observationally equivalent to a labor income tax, becomes larger (more negative) around the

time of World War I through the 1920s. Driven by just the labor wedge alone, the model predicts

that the 1920s would have been one of the     worst   growth decades for the U.S. economy, with




                                               17
output remaining about six percent below trend through the decade, and with labor averaging

about seven percent below trend through the decade.

   This indicates the key reason why output was low was because labor was low, and while the

labor wedge alone doesn't account for the uctuations in investment, it does accurately predict

that investment was depressed below its normal level during the 1920s. Since the labor wedge

creates a wedge between the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure,

and high productivity, this suggests that the economic factor(s) behind the rising importance

of the labor wedge during this period depressed either the incentives and/or the opportunities

for individuals and rms to trade labor services.

   Figure 21 and Figure 22 show the model's ability to account for output, labor, and invest-

ment from the investment wedge individually, and the government wedge individually.         The

gures suggest that neither of these wedges are broadly important for understanding output,

labor, or investment over the full period. The   -statistics   indicate that government accounts

for more than 50 percent of output and investment after 1916, but that largely reects the

very large increase in government spending in 1917-19. Ohanian (1997) and McGrattan and

Ohanian (2010) show that neoclassical models driven by large scal shocks closely account for

the World War II economy. The World War I scal shock generates higher hours worked, higher

output, and lower investment, all of which are qualitatively similar to the actual World War I

economy. The model is not as quantitatively accurate for World War I as World War II, which

likely reects the fact that the World War I shock is not nearly as large as the World War II

shock.



3.2      Business Cycle Accounting and the Panics of 1893 and 1907

The years 1889-1912 occurred under the The National Banking Era, a monetary and nancial

system created by the National Banking Act of 1863. As a precursor to the Federal Reserve

system, the National Banking Era featured nationally chartered banks that were under the

oversight of the Comptroller of the currency.      The goal was to create a de facto national

currency in which national chartered banks would accept each other's currency. The system

had aws, however, and panics occurred frequently.

   The Panics of 1893 and 1907 were two of the most severe panics in the history of the

U.S. Previous research by Jalil (2015) as well as earlier studies of these panics, dates them

consistently, with the Panic of 1893 occurring around the middle of the year, and the Panic

of 1907 beginning around October of 1907.    This section uses BCA to study these episodes

and compares them to the most recent ndings within the historical literature. BCA ndings

show that these two episodes dier regarding the importance of wedges, particularly regarding

the labor market, and we nd very dierent contributions of the panics on economic activity

relative to the literature.




                                             18
3.2.1    The Panic of 1893
The Panic of 1893 features large declines in output, hours worked, and investment, which began

declining before the panic. Other authors have noted in higher frequency data that the economic

decline began before the run on banks, and this makes it in principle dicult to evaluate how

much of the panic was a symptom of economic weakness compared to its potential depressing

eect on the economy by disrupting the nancial system.

   A recent assessment of the National Banking era panics by Jalil nds very large and per-

sistent eects. He ts a VAR to Davis's (2004) constructed industrial production series, along

with indicator variables that are based on how the nancial press of that time viewed the panic.

By reading the nancial newspapers at that time, he grades a panic on a 1-3 scale as to the

extent that the panic was an independent event, or whether it was more a symptom of the

downturn. He constructs another indicator variable regarding the state of the economy at the

time of the panic, also on a 1-3 scale, depending on its underlying strength. He nds that a

panic has very large and persistent eects on industrial production during this period, with a

one-unit change in the nancial indicator variable leading to a 10 percent change in industrial

production, and that the impact of the shock persists roughly unchanged for at least 3 years.

   BCA provides a dierent, and complementary analysis to Jalil's VAR study. We nd the

eciency wedge plays a very important role in the 1893 panic.         The left panel of Figure 23

shows the predicted movements from the eciency wedge alone from 1889 to 1905. The gure

shows a close correspondence between predicted and actual changes, particularly for output,

which ts nearly perfectly.

   The eciency wedge also captures the qualitative features of labor and investment move-

ments.   For labor, it predicts a somewhat smaller increase before the panic, but predicts an

overall decline in labor over the downturn in percentage terms that is very close to the actual

decline. Table 2 shows the    -statistics   for the eciency wedge, which accounts for   92%, 51%,
and   66%   of the movements, respectively. This episode looks like it was generated largely by a

classic real business cycle model, as the eciency wedge substantially accounts for changes in

output, labor, and investment.

   This real business cycle interpretation of the Panic of 1893 is consistent with some earlier

research. Sprague (1910) presents evidence of declining economic activity prior to the panic,

including slowing investment in railroad expansion and building construction, and in silver pro-

duction (see Figure 24). Davis (2004) shows that a broader-based index of industrial production

declined in 1893 (see Figure 25). Moreover, the real investment to output ratio did not drop

in 1893, which stands in contrast to what should have occurred if an impaired nancial system

was substantially impacting the economy. These data support the view that the Panic of 1893

was more of a symptom of the downturn, rather than a primary contributing factor, and that

the downturn partially reects a natural slowing of business following a boom.




                                                  19
3.2.2   The Panic of 1907
The Panic of 1907 is similar in that the eciency wedge accounts largely for output, but diers

in that it doesn't account as closely for labor or investment.      The right panel of Figure 23

shows the predicted movements from the eciency wedge alone from 1903 to 1909. Table 3

shows the   -statistics   for the Panic of 1907. It shows that the labor wedge plays a central role

in the Panic of 1907 (see also Figure 26). The labor wedge accounts for       73%   and   82%   of the

movements in labor and investment, respectively, while the eciency wedge accounts for            73%
of the movements in output.

   A hint about the factors that generated the rising labor wedge during the Panic of 1907 may

lie in the labor market and a failure for wages to adjust to slowing economic conditions at this

time. Figure 27 shows an index of composite wages from 1889 to 1909. The gure shows that

wages decline considerably around the 1893 downturn, but decline much less around the time

of the 1907 downturn. This suggests that labor market imperfections around that time that

slowed nominal wage adjustment may have signicantly depressed employment during 1907.

   The fact that we nd a signicant labor wedge in the Panic of 1907 is intriguing because

this makes it similar to the Great Recession, in which a large labor wedge is also quantitatively

important (see Ohanian (2010) and Brinca et al. (2016)). This comparison also emerges among

economic historians comparing the two periods, including Bernanke (2013) and Tallman (2013).

They argue that the Panic of 1907 is similar to the Great Recession from the perspective of

lightly regulated nancial intermediaries.      For example, one can think of trust companies in

1907, which were relatively less regulated, and not part of the New York Clearinghouse, like

shadow banks during the Great Recession, which were also less regulated and did not have

immediate access to the Federal Reserve System.



3.3     Potential Interpretations of the 1920s BCA Findings

The BCA results after 1916 indicate very large changes in either the shocks hitting the economy

relative to the pre-1916 period, and/or how these shocks aected the economy. The ndings

stand in sharp contrast to the literature, which focuses on relatively rapid 1920s economic

growth that was driven by the increased diusion of new technologies, specically electricity

and the internal combustion engine. The BCA ndings show that technology did rise rapidly

during this period, but that its large and positive contribution was substantially attenuated

by some factor(s) creating a labor wedge that is observationally equivalent to a rising labor

income tax distortion. This section considers some possibilities that may have created the large

increase in the labor wedge.

   The post-1916 ndings regarding rapidly rising productivity in conjunction with a sizable

labor market imperfection are similar to ndings from studies that have analyzed why the re-

covery from the Great Depression was not stronger.         Cole and Ohanian (1999) showed that

the eciency wedge rose rapidly after 1933, which should have promoted strong growth and

returned hours worked back to normal after a few years. However, similar to 1917-1929, hours




                                                  20
worked remained depressed as productivity increased. Cole and Ohanian analyzed a number

of possible factors that could have depressed hours worked, including labor and capital income

taxes, and nancial market stability and monetary policy. They concluded that neither mon-

etary policy, which eliminated deation, nor nancial markets, which were stabilized by new

legislation, were at fault. They found that modestly higher labor and capital income taxes were

minor factors. This led them (Cole and Ohanian (2004)) in subsequent research to study how

much industry-labor cartel policies depressed hours worked, and found that it accounted for

most of continuation of low hours worked. Chari et al. (2007) found that a very large labor

wedge was responsible for the continuation of depressed hours, and also cited industry-labor

cartels.

   We now apply a similar approach as used in Cole and Ohanian (1999) to evaluate potential

factors that could have kept labor depressed after 1917. Regarding tax rates, statutory tax rates

declined substantially after World War I, which would motivate higher hours worked, ceteris

paribus.   Average tax rates were low, and did not change much over the period.       Barro and

Sahasakul (1983) construct average tax rates and nd an average tax rate of about 0.5 percent

in 1916, which rises to about two percent during the war, and then declines to about one to

1.5 percent during the 1920s. These data indicate that changes in taxes were quantitatively

unimportant in accounting for the 1920s labor wedge.

   Immigration slowed in the 1920s, as the population rose about 15 percent in the decade

compared to about 21 percent in the two decades before that. This is frequently discussed in

the literature on the 1920s as an important factor (Smiley (1994)). However, a relative decline

in the labor force should motivate   higher   hours per worker, because hours per worker are a

substitute for workers.   A relative decline in labor should also lead to higher wages, ceteris

paribus. Smiley notes that manufacturing wages for men rose 5.3 percent for semi-skilled males

to 8.7 percent for unskilled males, but manufacturing output per hour worked rose 29 percent

this same period. These data indicate that reduced immigration is not a promising candidate

in accounting for the labor wedge.

   The data on real manufacturing wages, and real manufacturing output per hour, suggest

another issue within the labor market, and one that may be related to the 1920s labor wedge.

The standard model of labor supply and demand predicts that the real wage will move closely

with worker productivity. This is not the case in the 1920s, with manufacturing output per

hour rising 29 percent, but real wages rising only between 5.3 and 8.7 percent.     Why didn't

competitive pressure increase wages?    Why didn't comparatively low wages stimulate more

hiring?

   These observations about the 1920s labor market reveal dysfunction that is more dicult

to identify than that of the Great Depression. During the 1930s, wages were far above trend,

while labor was far below trend. This naturally suggested excess supply, in which labor market

policies prevented the wage from falling and clearing the labor market. In this case, both the

relative price of labor and the quantity of labor hired are below trend, despite the fact that

productivity was high. Given these ndings, future research should consider addressing these




                                                21
important questions about the 1920s.




4     Conclusion

This chapter provides quantitative general equilibrium analyses of the Industrial Revolution

and the period of 1889-1929 in the United States. These episodes were selected because of their

importance and interest, the lack of existing quantitative general equilibrium studies of these

episodes, and the simplicity of applying quantitative general equilibrium models and methods.

    Previous discussions about the Industrial Revolution have focused on inventions such as the

steam engine and the Spinning Jenny. But this analysis shows that these developments are only

half of the story. These new, capital intensive technologies were substitutes for the older, less

capital-intensive technologies.   The new technologies, which improved over time, would only

be implemented if they were competitive with the alternatives.      Given TFP data from that

time, there was no chance that the Industrial Revolution could have taken place in the 1500s,

or before, as the productivity of the Malthusian technologies were temporarily high around

that time. After that, the Malthusian productivity stagnated, which meant that it was only

a matter of time before the Solow technologies ultimately caught up and became protable to

adopt over the alternative, land-intensive Malthusian technologies.

    In addition, our analysis of the period from 1245 to 1845 reveals some puzzling issues

concerning population movements during this period that deserve additional study.

    Moving from the very long-run to a shorter horizon, we studied the remarkable 1889-1929

period in the U.S., one of the most important episodes in American economic history.          In

particular, the decade of the 1920s is known as perhaps the greatest peacetime growth decade.

The research presented here shows that growth could easily have been much higher, given the

remarkable productivity growth of the decade.

    Instead, puzzlingly low labor input depressed the economy by a cumulative 15 percent

relative to predicted model output driven by just productivity shocks. The decade reveals a

large labor wedge, and we nd that the labor wedge does not have an obvious interpretation.

The coincidence of a large labor wedge, low labor input, and low wages suggest a labor market

puzzle more challenging to identify that the labor market dysfunction that occurred just a

decade later.   What factor depressed employment in such a booming economy?         Why didn't

wages grow at nearly the same rate as productivity? Why didn't rms hire more labor, given

its low relative price? These are open and important questions for future research.




                                               22
References

R. J. Barro and C. Sahasakul. Measuring the average marginal tax rate from the individual

  income tax.    The Journal of Business   , 56(4):419452, 1983.


G. S. Becker and R. J. Barro. A reformulation of the economic theory of fertility.   The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics   , 103(1):125, 1988.


B. S. Bernanke. The crisis as a classic nancial panic, 11 2013. Remarks by Ben S. Bernanke

  Chairman Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at Fourteenth Jacques Polak

  Annual Research Conference Sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington,

  D.C. [Accessed: 2020 10 15].


P. Brinca, V. V. Chari, P. J. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan. Accounting for business cycles. In

  Handbook of Macroeconomics     , volume 2, pages 10131063. Elsevier, 2016.


V. V. Chari, P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan. Accounting for the great depression.      American
  Economic Review    , 92(2):2227, 2002.


V. V. Chari, P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan. Business cycle accounting.        Econometrica , 75

  (3):781836, 2007.


G. Clark. The macroeconomic aggregates for England, 12092008. volume 27 of             Research in
  Economic History   , pages 51140. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2010.


H. L. Cole and L. E. Ohanian. The great depression in the United States from a neoclassical

  perspective.   Quarterly Review, 23:224, 1999.


H. L. Cole and L. E. Ohanian.       The U.S. and U.K. great depressions through the lens of

  neoclassical growth theory.   American Economic Review    , 92(2):2832, 2002.


H. L. Cole and L. E. Ohanian. New deal policies and the persistence of the great depression:

  A general equilibrium analysis.   Journal of Political Economy    , 112(4):779816, 2004.


J. H. Davis. An annual index of U. S. industrial production, 17901915.      The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics   , 119(4):11771215, 2004.


P. A. Diamond. National debt in a neoclassical growth model.       The American Economic Review    ,

  55(5):11261150, 1965.


M. Doepke. Accounting for fertility decline during the transition to growth.   Journal of Economic
  Growth , 9(3):347383, 2004.


O. Galor and D. N. Weil. Population, technology, and growth: From malthusian stagnation to

  the demographic transition and beyond.      American Economic Review     , 90(4):806828, 2000.


J. Greenwood.     Numerical methods for macroeconomists.       Manuscript, Department of Eco-

  nomics, University of Pennsylvania, 2020.


                                                 23
G. Hansen and L. Ohanian.       Neoclassical models in macroeconomics.        In J. B. Taylor and

  H. Uhlig, editors,   Handbook of Macroeconomics  , volume 2, pages 20432130. Elsevier, 2016.


G. D. Hansen and E. C. Prescott. Malthus to solow.     The American Economic Review        , 92(4):

  12051217, 2002.


A. J. Jalil. A new history of banking panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construction and

  implications.   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics         , 7(3):295330, 2015.


P. J. Kehoe, V. Midrigan, and E. Pastorino.        Evolution of modern business cycle models:

  Accounting for the great recession. Journal of Economic Perspectives      , 32(3):14166, 2018.


T. Kehoe and E. Prescott.   Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century     . Research Department,

  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 2007.


J. W. Kendrick.      Productivity Trends in the United States   .   National Bureau of Economic

  Research, Inc, 1961.


R. E. Lucas. On the mechanics of economic development.        Journal of Monetary Economics   , 22

  (1):342, 1988.


R. E. Lucas. What was the industrial revolution?     Journal of Human Capital      , 12(2):182203,

  2018.


E. R. McGrattan. Capital taxation during the U.S. great depression.         The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics    , 127(3):15151550, 2012.


E. R. McGrattan and L. E. Ohanian. Does neoclassical theory account for the eects of big

  scal shocks? Evidence from World War II.     International Economic Review       , 51(2):509532,

  2010.


L. E. Ohanian. The macroeconomic eects of war nance in the United States: World War II

  and the Korean War.     The American Economic Review    , 87(1):2340, 1997.


L. E. Ohanian.     The economic crisis from a neoclassical perspective.      Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 24(4):4566, 2010.


G. Smiley. The American Economy in the Twentieth Century       . College Division, South-Western

  Publishing Company, 1994.


O. Sprague.   History of Crises Under the National Banking System        . History of Crises Under

  the National Banking System. U.S. Government Printing Oce, 1910.


E. Tallman. The panic of 1907. In E. P. Randall and R. Whaples, editors,       Routledge Handbook
  of Major Events in Economic History    . Routledge, 2013.




                                              24
Tables and Figures


                   Table 1:    -Statistics     for output, labor, and investment


                         Output                            Labor                      Investment
 Samples:        Y
                 A      Y
                        l    Yx          Y
                                         g       L
                                                 A        L
                                                          l       L
                                                                  x       L
                                                                          g      X
                                                                                 A     Xl    Xx     X
                                                                                                    g
 1889-1916      0.83    0.07    0.04    0.06    0.46    0.22   0.05   0.27     0.26   0.27   0.10   0.37
 1917-1929      0.09    0.19    0.18    0.54    0.02    0.75   0.16   0.07     0.02   0.29   0.13   0.56
 1889-1929      0.29    0.25    0.16    0.30    0.01    0.56   0.12   0.31     0.07   0.32   0.12   0.49




                          Table 2:     -Statistics     for the Panic of 1893


                                 Output                   Labor              Investment
            Samples:       YA     Y l     Y x       LA     Ll      L x    A X
                                                                                 Xl   X x
            1889-1890     0.65    0.01    0.30     0.42    0.03    0.25   0.47  0.03  0.46
            1989-1891     0.86    0.01    0.09     0.47    0.03    0.31   0.57   0.03   0.36
            1889-1892     0.95    0.01    0.02     0.22    0.04    0.52   0.83   0.03   0.10
            1889-1893     0.88    0.02    0.05     0.41    0.06    0.14   0.72   0.05   0.14
            1989-1894     0.92    0.02    0.02     0.61    0.10    0.03   0.65   0.11   0.06
            1889-1895     0.92    0.02    0.02     0.51    0.11    0.04   0.66   0.10   0.06




                          Table 3:     -Statistics     for the Panic of 1907


                                 Output                   Labor              Investment
            Samples:       YA     Y l     Y x       LA     Ll      L x    A X
                                                                                 Xl   X x
            1903-1904     0.73    0.14    0.05     0.65    0.31    0.01   0.05  0.78  0.03
            1903-1905     0.73    0.14    0.05     0.71    0.27    0.01   0.04   0.83   0.02
            1903-1906     0.87    0.06    0.02     0.18    0.75    0.01   0.02   0.90   0.01
            1903-1907     0.88    0.06    0.02     0.24    0.69    0.01   0.01   0.92   0.01
            1903-1908     0.85    0.08    0.02     0.25    0.69    0.01   0.03   0.83   0.02
            1903-1909     0.86    0.07    0.02     0.18    0.73    0.01   0.03   0.82   0.02




                                 Figure 1: Malthusian TFP (AM )




                                                   25
          Figure 2: Population of England, 1245-1845
                         (millions of people)




Figure 3: Real national income per capita of England, 1245-1845
                     (average from 1860-69 = 100)




                  Figure 4: Solow TFP (AS )




                                 26
   Figure 5: Population from Benchmark experiment


           model
           data




Figure 6: Output per capita from Benchmark experiment


            model
            data




    Figure 7: Fraction of inputs employed in Solow


            Fraction K in Solow
            Fraction N in Solow




                                  27
   Figure 8: Population from No Plagues experiment


            model
            data




Figure 9: Output per capita from No Plagues experiment


             model
             data




 Figure 10: Population from More Plagues experiment


            model
            data




                         28
              Figure 11: Output per capita from More Plagues experiment


                                model
                                data




     Figure 12:   AM   for Timing of Industrial Revolution and Benchmark experiments


                                Counterfactual
                                Benchmark




Figure 13: Solow threshold from Timing of Industrial Revolution and Benchmark experiments


                                Counterfactual
                                Benchmark




                                                 29
   Figure 14: Population from Timing of Industrial Revolution experiment


                       model
                       data




Figure 15: Output per capita from Timing of Industrial Revolution experiment


                       model
                       data




                   Figure 16: Detrended macro aggregates




                                    30
      Figure 17: Estimated wedges




Figure 18: Eciency wedge only economy



  data                        data
  model                       model




  data                        data
  model                       model




  data                        data
  model                       model




                  31
Figure 19: All wedges except eciency wedge economy



                 data
                 model




                 data
                 model




                 data
                 model




                         32
Figure 20: Labor wedge only economy



 data                       data
 model                      model




 data                       data
 model                      model




 data                       data
 model                      model




                33
Figure 21: Investment wedge only economy



                                data
                                model




                                data
                                model




                                data
                                model




                  34
Figure 22: Government wedge only economy



                                data
                                model




                                data
                                model




                                data
                                model




                  35
      Figure 23: Eciency wedge only economy in the Panics of 1893 and 1907



                                                                             data
                                                                             model




                             data
                             model




                                                                             data
                                                                             model




                             data
                             model




                                                                             data
                                                                             model




                             data
                             model




Figure 24: Industrial production of metals and machinery for United States, 1889-1909

                                                          Metals
                     7000

                     6000

                     5000

                     4000

                     3000

                     2000

                     1000
                            1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904    1906   1908


                                                        Machinery
                     2000



                     1500



                     1000



                      500
                            1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904    1906   1908




                                                        36
Figure 25: Index of industrial production for United States, 1889-1909

             1800



             1600



             1400



             1200



             1000



              800



              600
                    1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904    1906   1908




Figure 26: Labor wedge only economy in the Panics of 1893 and 1907




                     data                                            data
                     model                                           model




                     data                                            data
                     model                                           model




                     data                                            data
                     model                                           model




                                                37
Figure 27: Index of composite wages for United States, 1889-1909

          90



          85



          80



          75



          70



          65



          60
               1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904   1906   1908




                                            38
