                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY:
                    EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S MICRO DATA

                                           Kaiji Chen
                                           Qing Wang
                                            Tong Xu
                                            Tao Zha

                                       Working Paper 28092
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28092


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kaiji Chen, Qing Wang, Tong Xu, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate and Distributional Impacts of LTV Policy: Evidence from China's Micro Data
Kaiji Chen, Qing Wang, Tong Xu, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 28092
November 2020
JEL No. E02,E21,E50,G11,G12,G18

                                         ABSTRACT

Using three unique micro datasets, we find that an unexpected and unprecedented loosening of
China's LTV policy for non-primary houses fueled the entire mortgage boom during
2014Q4-2016Q3. The mortgage expansion disproportionately increased the share of mortgages to
middle-aged homeowners with high education, while their consumption growth declined
persistently. To interpret these empirical findings, we develop a quantitative model and identify
that homeowners' trade-up of their primary homes as speculative housing investment is a key
channel for a change in LTV policy to exert aggregate and distributional impacts on mortgage
markets. Our cross-city evidence provides empirical support for this channel.


Kaiji Chen                                      Tong Xu
Emory University                                Southwestern University of Finance
1602 Fishburne Drive                            and Economics
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240                          555 Liutai Avenue, Wenjiang District
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta             Chengdu, Sichuan, 611130
kaiji.chen@emory.edu                            China
                                                xutong1985@gmail.com
Qing Wang
Southwest University of Finance                 Tao Zha
and Economics                                   Department of Economics
Chengdu                                         Emory University
China                                           Rich Memorial Building
wqing@swufe.edu.cn                              1602 Fishburne Drive
                                                Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
                                                and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
                                                and also NBER
                                                tzha@emory.edu
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                    1

  A country's mortgage market is essential to the boom and bust of its housing market.
Understanding what drives the mortgage market has profound policy implications on the
housing market in general. This paper aims to answer two important open questions about
the mortgage market. How does a relaxation of loan-to-value (LTV) policy aect the mort-
gage boom? And what are the aggregate impacts on the housing market and distributional
impacts on households of such a policy change?
  There are three challenges to address these questions. The first is to find a case in which
there is a large unexpected change in LTV policy. China's recent changes in its LTV policy
provide an ideal policy experiment. In 2014Q4, China relaxed its LTV policy until 2016Q3
by lowering the requirement of the minimum downpayment ratio (MDR) for non-primary
houses from 60-70% to 30%.1 The annualized growth rate of average real house prices across
the 70 major Chinese cities reported by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) increased by
5.94% per annum during the mortgage boom period of 2014Q4-2016Q3.2 The annual newly
issued mortgage amount for theses cities was, on average, 92% higher during 2014Q4-2016Q3
than in 2013. The outstanding mortgage debt nationwide increased from 10.6 trillion RMB
in December 2014 to 17.9 trillion RMB in December 2016. At the same time, the growth rate
of aggregate consumption began to decline since 2014Q4 and the decline continued even after
the loosening of LTV policy was reversed in 2016Q4 (Figure 1).3 The unexpected nature
of such a change in LTV policy and its unprecedented magnitude provide an ideal policy
experiment to assess, empirically, how this loosening policy generated the housing boom and
how it aected mortgage demands and consumption across households.
  The second challenge is to gather granular data about mortgage loans for empirical anal-
ysis of distributional impacts. To understand how distributional impacts of a change in
LTV policy aected aggregate movements, we exploit three unique micro datasets: (a) a
proprietary loan-level mortgage dataset, provided by one of the largest banks in China, that
covers all newly issued mortgages over the 70 cities during 2011-2018; (b) the China House-
hold Finance Survey that contains household-level information on consumption, education

  1
      The main purpose of this unprecedented policy change was to remove the hurdles for middle-aged high
income households to enter the housing market. The 2015 Central Economic Work Conference stated the
Chinese government's mandate clearly: "It is necessary to encourage natural persons and various institutional
investors to purchase inventories of commodity housing, ... to eliminate outdated restrictive measures (http:
//finance.people.com.cn/GB/8215/392239/401049/index.html)."
  2
      Note that 5.94% is an increase of growth (not the level) of the real house price.
  3
      According to Financial Times on February 1, 2019, the slowdown in consumption growth had much
to do with "consumption downgrading" by "middle-class Chinese households," which were heavily bur-
dened by mortgage debts ( http://www.ftchinese.com/story/001081321?full=y&amp;ccode=
2G178003&archive).
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                    2

(income), and various balance-sheet variables (e.g., mortgage loans and house values); and
(c) monthly city-level consumption from China UnionPay Merchant Services Corporation.
  An unexpected large change in LTV policy and the three micro datasets together help iden-
tify the impact of such a policy change on mortgage demands and consumption across house-
holds. Our main empirical finding is that a relaxation of China's LTV policy for secondary
houses played a crucial role in fueling the entire mortgage boom, including mortgages on pri-
mary houses.4 During the mortgage boom (2014Q4-2016Q3), the share of mortgages newly
issued to middle-aged homeowners with high education (incomes) increased significantly in
both the origination amount and the origination number, while the share of mortgage newly
issued to young households declined. Moreover, cities with high exposure to housing specu-
lations experienced a larger increase in the mortgage share of middle-aged homeowners with
high education than did cities with low exposure. The slowdown in growth of aggregate
consumption was driven mainly by slow growth of consumption of middle-aged homeowners
with high education. Availing themselves of the rapid rise of the house price, these home-
owners took out more mortgages to trade up their primary homes than other households.
As a result, mortgage loans were reallocated toward middle-aged and highly educated house-
holds, who ended up with higher mortgage debts and lower growth of consumption during
the mortgage boom than in the pre-boom period.
  The literature has taken two dierent views on the driving force of the mortgage and
housing boom: changes in credit supply5 and changes in expectations.6 By exploiting the
unique micro data and the unique change of LTV policy in China, we provide empirical
evidence of important interactions between credit supply and housing speculations in fueling
the housing boom. We find that an increase in the LTV limit on secondary houses had
significantly positive impacts on mortgage demands by high income homeowners (middle-
aged homeowners with high education) because of the expectations of higher house prices
in the future. On the other hand, our empirical evidence demonstrates that a reallocation
of mortgage credit to middle-aged homeowners with high education (incomes) does not

  4
      A secondary house is a non-primary house in addition to the primary house, which can be a second,
third, or fourth house, for example. In this paper, we use "secondary house" and "non-primary house"
interchangeably.
   5
     This line of research, following the seminal work of Mian and Sufi (2009, 2011), argues that changes in
credit supply aect mostly the subprime borrowers, especially low income households.
   6
     Recent empirical findings that are used to support the expectations view include Foote, Loewenstein and
Willen (2016) who find a uniform increase in mortgage debt across income levels during the boom, Albanesi,
De Giorgi and Nosal (2017) who show that credit growth between 2001-2007 is concentrated both in the
middle and at the top of credit scores, and Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2018) who establish that during
the housing boom, mortgage credit was extended to households with dierent incomes and credit scores.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                      3

necessarily stem from changes in expectations of higher house prices as the expectations
view states, but from changes in credit conditions.7
  The third challenge is to interpret our empirical findings with a structural model. There
is a growing literature that uses quantitative models to study the role of changes in credit
conditions or standards in the housing boom and bust8 and to understand how various factors
aect the house price and consumption across households.9 We build a life-cycle model with
household heterogeneity, which closely relates to this literature. What is new in our model
incorporates two institutional facts in China as key ingredients: (i) primary and secondary
houses are subject to dierent MDR requirements, and (ii) households' utility of housing
services has two stochastic regimes to capture expectations (beliefs) about the rise of future
housing demands. The first ingredient helps isolate the impacts of a change in the LTV
limit on the mortgage market via changes in the house price, and the second one allows a
significant fraction of middle-aged high income households to be subject to the binding LTV
constraint for investment purposes. While the second ingredient draws heavily from earlier
work on the housing market (Kaplan, Mitman and Violante, 2020, for example), our model's
particular specification is supported by the evidence of cross-city variations in exposures to
housing speculations.
  We calibrate the key parameters to match various aggregate and disaggregate moments in
the data. The model not only is capable of predicting our empirical results but also identifies
a new channel for the distributional impacts of a change in LTV policy on the mortgage
market. The conventional channel for changes in the LTV limit to influence housing demands
is housing tenure decisions of credit-constrained households.10 Our new channel relies on two
key facts: (1) middle-aged wealthy households, with a nontrivial fraction of total housing
demands, are constrained for housing investment (rather than housing services); and (2) a
reduction of the MDR for secondary houses aects credit conditions of households' primary

  7
      Our paper also contributes to the emerging literature on China's housing boom. Empirical papers include
Fang, Gu, Xiong and Zhou (2016), Wei, Zhang and Liu (2017), Chen, Liu, Xiong and Zhou (2017), and Gu,
He and Qian (2018); theoretical papers include Zhao (2015), Chen and Wen (2017), and Han, Han and Zhu
(2018).
  8
      See, for example, Landvoigt et al. (2015), Favilukis et al. (2017) and, Kaplan et al. (2020).
  9
      These factors include monetary policy (Wong, 2016; Beraja, Fuster, Hurst and Vavra, 2018; Eichenbaum,
Rebelo and Wong, 2019), heterogeneous expectations (Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo, 2016)), tax policy
(Sommer and Sullivan, 2018)), and changes in the payment-to-income requirement (Corbae and Quintin,
2015; Greenwald, 2016).
  10
     In a recent paper, Greenwald and Adam (2019) show that the degree to which credit-insensitive agents
(e.g., landlords) and credit-sensitive agents (mortgage borrowers) are segmented in housing markets deter-
mines the importance of credit conditions in aecting the price-to-rent ratio via housing tenure decisions.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                     4

houses only through indirect eects via change in the house price. Capital gains from higher
house prices allow existing homeowners to overcome the credit constraint and trade up their
existing homes. This new channel emphasizes households' investment motive for mortgage
demands and an intertemporal substitution for future consumption. It generates the sizable
aggregate impact of a change in LTV policy for secondary houses on the house price, overall
mortgage demands, and consumption. We call this channel the investment channel.
  In contrast to the existing literature that emphasizes positive wealth eects of the housing
boom11, our model generates an opposite eect of the housing boom on household consump-
tion. Underlying this result is an intertemporal substitution of consumption for illiquid
houses and an increasing debt burden borne by middle-aged households with high incomes.
We show that the investment channel is important for the house price to have eects on
aggregate consumption, as consumption of those households constitutes a sizable fraction
of aggregate consumption. Because houses are illiquid, moreover, the eects on consump-
tion through the investment channel persist even after the mortgage boom is over. This
theoretical prediction is consistent with our empirical finding.
  Our welfare analysis shows that an increase in the LTV ratio for secondary houses benefits
middle-aged households with high incomes and generates an unintended welfare loss dispro-
portionately born by young households with low incomes, who do not own a house when the
policy changes. Higher house prices crowd these households out of the housing market. As a
consequence, a relaxation of LTV limits generates a loss of welfare for the overall economy.12
  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides the institutional back-
ground of China's LTV policy and its mortgage and housing markets. Section II discuss the
three micro datasets used in this paper. Section III provides and discusses the empirical
findings of mortgage demands and consumption growth across households during the period
when LTV policy was loosened. In Section IV, we build and calibrate a life-cycle equilibrium
model with household heterogeneity. In Section V, we use the model to quantify the impacts
of a relaxation of LTV policy and those of alternative policies. Section VI concludes the
paper.



  11
       See, for example, Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni and Vavra (2017), and Guren,
McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018).
  12
     There is a strand of literature that highlights the redistributive eects of the house price on incomes.
For example, Kiyotaki, Michaelides and Nikolov (2011) argue that net house buyers (such as young workers
or tenants) lose and net house sellers (such as retired homeowners) gain from a sharp rise of the house price.
Along a similar line, Glover, Heathcote, Krueger and R´
                                                      ios-Rull (2011) show that young households may
benefit from a slump in asset values in the downturn by buying assets at low prices.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                           5

                       I. China's Housing Market and Policy

  In this section, we discuss China's housing market and its policy that are pertinent to
the subsequent empirical analysis as well as the theoretical framework for interpreting our
empirical findings.

I.1. The housing stock as a store of value. In China, the availability of financial assets
for household savings is very limited: stock markets are poorly regulated and dominated by
state owned enterprises (SOEs), the national capital account is severely restricted, and the
exchange rate is tightly managed. Under these circumstances, houses have become the most
important store of value with an extremely high concentration of housing wealth among most
Chinese households. According to our own calculation from the China Household Finance
Survey (CHFS) data for urban China, the housing stock comprised 80.4% of households'
wealth in 2013, as compared to about 40% for U.S. households. Within the financial asset
category (i.e., bar housing wealth), the share of bank deposits was 65.21% in 2013, but the
share of financial assets in Chinese households' total wealth was only 8.63%, compared to
37.9% in the U.S.
  The land available for home construction is limited by the "red-line lower limit" imposed
by Chinese governments for arable land. According to a law passed by the State Council of
China in 2008, the amount of cultivated land was 1.818 billion acres in 2010 and remained
at 1.805 billion acres in 2020. This red-line lower limit implies a de facto upper bound for
the supply of land for real estate construction. Since 1994, the revenues from selling the land
have been important revenue sources of local governments. A combination of revenue sources
and the upper bound of the land for real estate constructions has given local governments a
strong incentive to limit the supply of land to boost the land price.
  The use of housing as a store of value, together with the limited supply of land, has
created speculative investment demands for houses. In 2013, for instance, around 15% of
urban Chinese households owned a second home as an investment. The ratio of house value
to income (price-to-income ratio) is much higher than the developed economies. According
to Fang, Gu, Xiong and Zhou (2016), the price-to-income ratio for the bottom income group
has been sustainably above 8. For the middle income group, the ratio reached a level above
6 in 2012. By contrast, the price-to-income ratio for the U.S. was only around 3 during and
after the housing bubble that peaked in 2006.
  In recent years, the vacancy rate of houses of urban homeowners in China has been per-
sistently high. According to our own calculation from the CHFS data, the average housing
vacancy rates remained stabe around 20% during 2011-2017 among 35 major cities. The
housing vacancy rate for secondary houses was even higher (e.g., 42.06% in 2017). Chen and
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  6

Wen (2017) show that underlying the fast price-to-income growth and the high vacancy rate
in urban China were speculative demands of houses.


I.2. Mortgage market and housing policy. Since 1998, China's mortgage markets have
developed rapidly. In 2013, for instance, the share of residential mortgage loans in total
consumer loans was 69.4% and the share in medium and long term (MLT) consumer loans
was 87.4%. All residential mortgage loans in China are for home purchases. Unlike in the
U.S., Chinese households cannot use home equity to obtain a line of credit for consumption
and neither can they refinance their original mortgage debts to use a cash-out refinance for
consumption. Moreover, there is no secondary market for mortgage loans through securiti-
zation (e.g., via mortgage-backed securities).13 As a result, the maximum LTV ratio that an
individual bank can oer closely follows the government's LTV policy.
  LTV policy has been an eective tool used by the Chinese government to influence housing
demands. It has two separate components: the minimum downpayment for financing (1) the
primary home and (2) a second house or additional houses. In 2008, as part of the economic
stimulus package, the government reduced the MDR from 30% to 20% for financing the
primary home and from 40% to 20% for financing a second house or more houses. In
January 2010, to curtail speculative housing demands, the government reversed its previous
LTV policy by raising the MDR to 30% for financing the primary home that had more
than 90 square meters and to 50% for financing a secondary house. In January 2011, the
government further increased the MDR for financing a second house to 60% and prohibited
commercial banks from making mortgage loans to any household who would finance houses
beyond the first two houses.
  To boost housing demands again, China relaxed its LTV policy from 2014Q4 to 2016Q3
by reducing the MDR for financing secondary houses from 60-70% to 30%.14 Since 2016Q4,
however, LTV policy has been tightened again. In 2016Q4, local governments in 20 cities
(most of them were first and second tier cities) tightened their LTV policy by increasing the
MDR for financing a secondary house from 30% to 70%.15 By June 2017, local governments in

  13
       The reverse mortgage market did not exist until 2014 when the Chinese government launched a two-year
pilot program for reverse mortgages introduced by a life insurance company. This pilot program, however,
proved to be unpopular in China. By July 2017, only 65 households participated in the program nationwide
(Fang and Feng, 2018).
  14
     During this period, the downpayment requirement for financing the primary house was reduced only
from 30% to 25% on August 27, 2015. Since this change was marginal relative to the MDR change for
secondary houses, our paper focuses on LTV policy on secondary houses.
  15
       The MDR for financing primary houses reverted back to 30%.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         7

44 cities across China followed suit by tightening their LTV policy, especially on a secondary
house.


                                                  II. Data

II.1. Data description. We use three unique micro datasets for our empirical work. The
first is a proprietary loan-level dataset for mortgage originations in one of the largest Chinese
commercial banks (we call the Bank Loan Data in the rest of this paper). The outstanding
mortgage loans issued by this bank have remained around 14% of total outstanding mortgage
loans in China since 2011. Our data contains all residential mortgage loans newly originated
by this bank from 2011Q1 to 2018Q2. It comprises more than 3.2 million mortgage loans,
covering 70 cities that correspond to the city sample used by the NBS to construct their stan-
dard 70-city housing price index. The most important information contained in the dataset
relates to whether a particular mortgage is issued for the borrower's primary or secondary
house. This crucial information allows us to distinguish direct and indirect eects of a change
in the LTV limit on demands for mortgage financing. The dataset also contains informa-
tion about each homebuyer's characteristics, including age, gender, occupation, education,
self-reported income, number of houses, city, zip code, and credit score.16
  The second dataset is the CHFS, conducted by Southwestern University of Finance and
Economics every two years since 2011 (Gan, Yin, Jia, Xu, Ma and Zheng, 2014). The inau-
gural 2011 survey interviewed about 9,000 households; since then, the number of households
interviewed has increased steadily in each subsequent survey. The 2013 survey sample, for
example, includes 19,181 urban households. Within each survey, a subset of households were
repeatedly interviewed, which allows us to calculate consumption growth at the household
level. This dataset is the most comprehensive source of household data on wealth, consump-
tion, and income in China. It has a clear advantage over traditional data on household
spending in the United States and the United Kingdom, such as Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX), Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF), and Living Costs and Food Survey
(LCFS), because it contains disaggregate information of both household balance sheets (in-
cluding wealth) and a rich array of household expenditures. We use these two pieces of
information to establish an empirical linkage between the ratio of household mortgage debt
to household income and its consumption growth, a key result for this paper.
  The third dataset contains monthly city-level consumption from China UnionPay Mer-
chant Services Corporation (we call China UnionPay in the rest of this paper), which is

  16
       We do not use the information of self-reported incomes as they are very unreliable.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                      8

China's largest bankcard supplier of acquiring and professional services. Monthly consump-
tion in each city is calculated as the sum of all consumed expenses through UnionPay Point-
of-Sale (POS) machines from 2013M7 to 2017M10. China UnionPay oers services to 8
million oine merchants in various oine spending categories, such as groceries, restau-
rants, hotels, transportation, finance, and health care. In 2017, China UnionPay recorded
7.26 billion transactions, with a transaction volume of 28.6 trillion RMB. The dataset covers
330 prefecture-level cities or regions in China. To merge with the other two datasets, our
analysis uses consumption in the NBS's 70 cities.

II.2. Summary statistics. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the main variables in
our mortgage data sample. For each variable, we report its average and standard deviation
for two subperiods (2011Q1-2014Q3 and 2014Q4-2016Q3) as well as the full sample period,
which covers the period 2011Q1-2018Q2. The full sample has 3, 011, 765 borrowers to finance
primary homes and 259, 024 borrowers to finance secondary houses.
  We first compare individual borrower characteristics for the primary and secondary houses
during 2011Q1-2014Q3--the period before LTV policy was relaxed (comparing panels A and
B in the table). The share of primary home mortgages in total mortgage origination numbers
during this period is 94.8%. Borrowers for primary houses were, on average, four years
younger than those for secondary houses. The fraction of borrowers with college degree
and above was smaller for primary houses than for secondary houses (47% versus 62%).
This observation implies that borrowers for secondary houses were, on average, wealthier
than those for primary homes. The average house size and value were larger for secondary
houses than for primary houses. On the other hand, the average mortgage balance when
mortgages for primary homes were originated was similar in size to that for secondary houses
(438,250 RMB versus 436,900 RMB). Since the average monthly mortgage payment for a
secondary house was 20% higher than for a primary home (4,046 RMB versus 3,347 RMB),
the mortgage maturity for secondary houses was shorter than that for primary houses.
  The average LTV ratio when mortgages for primary houses were originated was higher
than that for secondary houses (63% versus 38%), reflecting the dierent LTV policies for
these two types of houses. The average mortgage rate for primary houses was about 1% lower
than that for secondary houses (6.55% versus 7.40%), also reflecting the dierent mortgage
rate policies on primary versus secondary houses. The ratio of debt to income (DTI) is 4.0
when mortgages were originated for primary houses, but only 2.52 for secondary houses,
implying that borrowers for secondary houses had on average higher incomes than those for
primary houses.17

  17In   this paper, DTI is mortgage DTI unless stated otherwise.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         9

  We now compare borrower characteristics for primary and secondary houses between the
two subperiods 2011Q1-2014Q3 and 2014Q4-2016Q3. For primary houses, the fraction of
borrowers with college degree and above increased from 47% in the first subperiod to 59% in
the second subperiod, while the average age of borrowers increased from 34.50 to 34.68 (panel
A of the table). The average size for primary homes also increased because many homeowners
traded up their homes (i.e., sold their existing homes and bought larger houses) during the
boom. The average initial mortgage loan increased by about 30% (from 438,250 RMB to
566,590 RMB), whereas the average LTV ratio changed little. An increase of mortgage
loans for primary homes led to a higher mortgage debt burden with a 13% increase in
monthly mortgage payment (from 3,347 RMB to 3,800 RMB) and an increase of the average
mortgage DTI from 4.0 to 4.19, even when the average mortgage rate fell from 6.55% in the
first subperiod to 5.14% in the second subperiod.
  For secondary houses, we observe a similar increase in the fraction of borrowers with
college degree and above (from 62% to 72%) as well as an increase in the average age of
mortgage borrowers (from 38.6 to 39.37). The initial mortgage loan per borrower was 94%
higher in 2014Q4-2016Q3 than in 2011Q1-2014Q3 (849,030 RMB versus 436,900 RMB),
partly because the LTV ratio increased from 0.38 to 0.59 and partly because the average
house value increased by 23%. As a result, the mortgage debt burden for secondary houses
increased substantially with a 44% increase in the monthly mortgage payment and an increase
in the ratio of mortgage debt to income from 2.52 to 3.39. The average mortgage rate for
secondary houses fell by more than 2% from 7.40% to 5.20% and the share of mortgage loan
amount (number) for secondary houses increased from 5.2% to about 11% (8%).
  Table 2 reports summary statistics for the CHFS data. We include all three surveys
from 2013 onward, as the sample in the 2011 survey (the first survey) has relatively few
observations. While our mortgage loan dataset includes only households with new mortgages,
the CHFS dataset includes households with and without mortgages as well as those who paid
their mortgages in full. For example, the two variables, outstanding mortgage debt and the
ratio of mortgage debt to income, include households without mortgage. This inclusion is
necessary to account for both extensive and intensive margins in our regression analysis in
the later part of this paper.
  In this dataset, (non-housing) consumption is the sum of household expenses on food,
utility, daily necessities, transportation and travel, entertainment, education, and durable
goods. The average household consumption fell between the 2015 and 2017 surveys (55,400
RMB versus 54,280 RMB), despite an increase in the average household income. The out-
standing mortgage debt, on the other hand, increased significantly from 2013 to 2015 and
from 2015 to 2017. The share of housing assets in total household assets declined slightly
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  10

from 80.38% in 2013 to 79.24% in 2015 and then to 76.22% in 2017. The average homeown-
ership rate increased from 86% in 2013 to 89.26% in 2015 and then fell slightly to 88.09% in
2017.

                                       III. Empirical findings

  We begin with an analysis of how newly originated mortgage loans and consumption
growth changed during the period when LTV policy was relaxed. We provide this analysis
at both aggregate and disaggregate levels. We then establish an empirical linkage between
mortgage debt and consumption growth at a granular level of households.

III.1. Mortgage. In this subsection, we provide detailed results about age profile and other
characteristics of mortgage loans from our granular loan data.

III.1.1. LTV ratios. Figure 2 reports the age profile of average LTV ratios across years when
mortgage loans were originated (at origination). The three years, 2011, 2013 and 2015, are
chosen to highlight changes of the age profile that were potentially attributable to changes in
LTV policy. The first two years are prior to the policy changes and the third year is during
the period when LTV policy was relaxed. The left and right panels plot the age profile of LTV
ratios for primary and secondary houses. The LTV ratio for primary houses in three years
peaked at age 30 (left panel). More important, LTV ratios for primary houses across these
three years were close to one another, consistent with the fact that the relaxation of LTV
policy aected mostly the leverage of secondary houses during the boom.18 The age profile
of LTV ratios for secondary houses diers significantly from that for the primary house in
several aspects (right panel). First, the levels of LTV ratios were smaller in magnitude than
those for primary houses in all three years, and were close in magnitude to the maximum
value stipulated by LTV policies in these years. Second, the age profile of LTV ratios
sprang up from a level below 40% in 2013 to a level above 55% in 2015, as the maximum
downpayment ratio for a secondary house was reduced from 60-70% to 40% in March 2015
(and further to 30% in February 2016). The relaxation of LTV policy allowed homeowners
who purchased secondary houses to increase their leverage substantially.
  To show the extent to which LTV constraints of households are binding, we calculate the
distribution of LTV ratios over time for primary and secondary houses separately (Figure 3).
For visual clarity, we report the distribution of LTV ratios across four quantiles of households:
the 90th, 75th, 50th, and 25th percentiles. For the primary home, except for households in
  18Recent   empirical studies on the U.S. housing booms and busts find very small changes in the LTV ratio
at origination over the boom and bust cycle across the whole distribution of LTV ratios. See, for example,
Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2018).
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  11

the bottom 25th percentile, the LTV ratios for all households were close to the maximum
value allowed by LTV policy.19 For secondary houses, LTV ratios were below or at the
maximum value allowed by LTV policy prior to its relaxation (40%). Following the relaxation
of LTV policy for secondary houses in 2014Q4, LTV ratios for all quantiles of households
sprang up substantially.20 A relaxation of the LTV constraint on second houses allowed
households to borrow more against the values of secondary houses as investment.
  One of our key findings is that a relaxation of LTV constraint on secondary houses had
significant spillover impacts on the dynamics of mortgage loans for primary houses. Figure 4
reports the dynamics of mortgage loans and financial burdens of households for primary
homes versus all houses. The time series of mortgage loans for both primary homes and
all houses, aggregated from our loan-level data, tracked each other very closely prior the
relaxation of LTV policy (top panels of Figure 4). The two series began to diverge when
LTV policy was relaxed in 2014Q4, with an increasing share of mortgage loans for secondary
houses due to the direct eect of LTV policy on secondary houses. As shown in top panels
for both loan amount and number of originations, the sharp increase in aggregate mortgage
loans during the boom period was mainly attributable to the increase of mortgage loans
for primary home. A relaxation of LTV policy for secondary houses, therefore, had large
spillover eects on mortgage demands for primary houses.21
  We find a similar pattern in the dynamics of households' financial burdens at origination.
Prior to the relaxation of LTV policy, the ratio of mortgage debt to income (DTI) was below
4. During the mortgage boom after this policy relaxation, the DTI ratio increased steadily
to about 4.5 in 2016Q3 (top left panel of Figure 4). In comparison, during the U.S. housing
boom in 2001-2006, even households in the lowest income quantile had the DTI ratio below
3.50 (Adelino, Schoar and Severino, 2016). The bottom right panel reports the ratio of house

  19The   maximum LTV allowed was 70% prior to the LTV policy change and 75% after the policy change
with some exceptions. The most important exception was for households with primary houses less than 90
square meters and were qualified for the Housing Provident Fund Loans designed by the Chinese government
to help low income households meet their housing needs. These households were allowed to have the MDR
lower than 25%.
   20The maximum LTV allowed for secondary houses was 70% with one exception. Homeowners who had

paid in full the mortgages on their primary homes qualified for mortgage loans with the MDR below 30%.
After 2016Q3, local governments tightened LTV policy, especially for secondary houses. There was, however,
no uniform policy change mandated by the central government, and there were varying degrees and timings
of the tightening across cities. Nonetheless, LTV ratios for primary houses and especially for secondary
houses fell gradually after 2016Q3 (Figure 3).
  21As discussed in Section I, the change in the LTV constraint on primary homes during this period was

marginal relative to the change in LTV policy on secondary houses.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                               12

value to income (HVTI) over time. Prior to the LTV policy change, the HVTI ratio was
6.2 for households with only primary homes and with secondary houses. During the housing
boom after the relaxation of LTV policy, the HVTI ratio increased steadily to a level of 6.75
in 2016Q3. The steady increase of DTI and HVTI ratios indicates homeowners' increasingly
heavy financial burdens since the housing boom.22

III.1.2. Mortgage loans across ages and across education levels. Another important empirical
finding relates to the distribution of mortgage loans across ages. We calculate the age profile
of mortgage loans in 2011, 2013, and 2015 for both the amount of loans and the number
of loan originations. Top panels of Figure 5 report the share of mortgage loans for each
age group in the total loan amount as well as the total number of originations for all ages.
The age profiles of these shares were hump-shaped. The age profiles for 2011 and 2013
were very similar, and households of ages 25-30 had the highest share (more than 20%). In
2015, the age profile shifted to the right: the share for households of ages 30-40 (middle-age
households) increased significantly, whereas the share for households of ages 20-30 (young
households) declined. This distributional shift holds for both the amount of mortgage loans
and number of originations.
  To understand the role of extensive margins in household indebtedness, we calculate the
age profile of the DTI ratio and a fraction of households with positive mortgage debts in
all households including those without mortgages (a mortgage participation rate). The age
profiles between 2011 and 2013 were similar and hump shaped with peaks at age 30 (bottom
left panel of Figure 5). The peak age is consistent with top panels of Figure 5. From
2013 to 2015, however, the DTI ratio for households of ages 30-65 increased significantly.
This increase was attributable to a combination of an increase in the mortgage participation
rate (extensive margin) and a higher DTI ratio for those households who had outstanding
mortgage debts prior to the housing boom (intensive margin). As the bottom panels show,
the age profile of mortgage participation rates was similar to the age profile of DTI ratios.
Extensive margins in the age profile of DTI ratios for households of ages 30-50 were important
as the mortgage participation rate for these households increased most (bottom right panel).
  We summarize all these findings by classifying households into three age groups: those
of ages below 30 as young households, of ages 30-49 as middle-aged households, and of
ages 50 and above as old households. This classification is consistent with the age profile
of mortgage loans prior to the relaxation of LTV policy, which peaked at age 30. We then
classify households into a high-education group and a low-education group: those with college

  22As   LTV policy was tightened again after 2016Q3, however, the total amount of mortgage loans, the
number of mortgage originations, and the DTI ratio reversed their upward trends.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                               13

degree and above as a proxy for a high income group and with high school diploma and below
as a proxy for a low income group.23
  Table 3 reports mortgage shares across age-education groups in 2013, the year prior to the
relaxation of LTV policy. The mortgage loan amount for all houses was more or less evenly
distributed among middle-aged households with high education, middle-aged households
with low education, and young households with high education, all of which were above
25% (panel A). Panel B exhibits a similar pattern for primary houses, implying that the
distribution of mortgage loan amounts across age-education groups was mainly driven by
the distribution for primary houses. For the number of originations, middle-aged households
with low education had the largest share (above 33%), followed by young and middle-aged
households with high education (panels C and D).
  We find that a loosening of LTV policy after 2013 redistributed mortgage loans across
age-education groups. In particular, middle-aged households with high education were the
only age-education group whose mortgage share increased substantially, by 13.32% in the
loan amount and by 8.07% in the number of originations (panels A and C of Table 4).
By contrast, the mortgage shares of age-education groups other than old highly-educated
households, especially middle-aged households with low education and young households with
high education, declined substantially. Although the maximum LTV ratio barely changed for
primary houses, this reallocation was mainly driven by the reallocation of mortgage credit
to primary houses, as shown in panels B and D of Table 4.
  What drove the increase in the mortgage share of middle-aged households with high educa-
tion, especially in their primary houses? Figure 6 provides a quantitative answer. It reports
the age profile of the average value of newly purchased houses with mortgages in 2011, 2013
and 2015. The average house value of each household in a particular year was scaled by the
constant-quality house price index of the city where the household resided at the time during
that year when the mortgage was originated. For a given age of the household, therefore,
changes in the average house value captured an increase in the average house size or the
quality of the average house for households of that age.
  Between 2011 and 2013, the average house value increased across households of dierent
ages with low education in similar magnitude (left panel of Figure 6). This pattern holds
for the increase of the average house value for households with high education (right panel
of Figure 6). Between 2013 and 2015 after the relaxation of LTV policy, however, the
average house value for households of age 30-55 with high education increased by about
20%, significantly higher than the increase of the average house value for young households
  23Unlike   the education data in the CHFS, the income series reported in the Bank Loan Data were frag-
mentary and unreliable.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 14

with high education and those whose age was 60 and above. This asymmetric increase of the
average house value between 2013 and 2015 is not true for households with low education,
implying that a disproportionate fraction of middle-aged households with high education
traded up their primary homes during the mortgage boom. In Section IV, we build a life-
cycle model to help interpret these novel findings from our granular data.
  Summary. We find that a loosening of LTV policy for secondary houses had spillover eects
on mortgage loans for primary homes. The share of mortgages to primary homes of middle-
aged households with high education increased significantly during the mortgage boom. At
the same time, the share of mortgages to primary homes of other age-education groups,
especially of young households with high education, declined. Underlying the increase of
mortgage demands by middle-aged households with high education was the fact that these
households traded up their existing homes with an increased burden of their mortgage debt.

III.2. Consumption growth. In this section, we first use the CHFS data to provide a
descriptive analysis of changes in consumption growth during the mortgage boom across
households of dierent ages and education levels. We then establish an empirical linkage
between households' consumption growth and their mortgage debt burden by controlling for
various household characteristics.

III.2.1. Consumption across ages and across education levels. We now explore the impacts of
LTV policy on consumption growth across ages and across education levels. Table 5 reports
the results for two periods: 2013-2015 survey years (prior to the relaxation of LTV policy) and
2015­2017 survey years (during the relaxation of LTV policy).24 For each panel in this table,
we also report (surveyed) income growth in each of the two periods to control for its eects on
changes of consumption growth within each period. Consistent with Figure 1, consumption
growth during 2015-2017 is slower than its counterpart during 2013-2015, despite faster
income growth during the second period (panel A).
  The main factor attributed to this slowdown in aggregate or average consumption during
the housing boom (the second period) is slower consumption growth of middle-aged house-
holds. Despite their faster income growth in 2015-2017, middle-aged households experienced
a decline of 2% (annualized) in consumption growth from the first period to the second pe-
riod, whereas consumption growth of the other two age groups either increased or remained
almost the same (panel B). A further analysis finds a significant decline of consumption
growth both statistically and in magnitude (3.59% per year) in middle-aged households with

  24In   the CHFS, the questionnaire for household consumption is about expenditures that occur during the
previous year of each survey. For instance, 2017 in this table indicates consumption in 2016.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 15

high education (panel C). This finding is in contrast to an insignificant change in consump-
tion growth of middle-aged households with low education. Clearly, as shown in panel C
of Table 5, the consumption slowdown of middle-aged households with high education in
2015-2017 was not due to a slowdown of income growth, as their income actually grew from
2013-2015 to 2015-2017.
  Since the observed decline of consumption growth in middle-aged households with high
education was not associated with their income growth, we now analyze whether this de-
cline was related to these households' housing demands and their mortgage debt burdens.25
We calculate consumption growth for two subgroups of households in the CHFS sample:
homeowners and renters. If housing demands and mortgage debt burdens are the key to
understanding a consumption slowdown, we should observe this slowdown for homeowners,
not for renters. As shown in panel A of Tables 6 and 7, we find a significant slowdown in
consumption growth between 2013-2015 and 2015-2017 for homeowners, but not for renters.
For homeowners, average consumption growth fell by 1.23% between these two subperiods;
for renters, it increased by 3.32%. These findings remain true especially for middle-aged
households: average consumption growth fell by 2.62% for homeowners but increased by
4.39% for renters (panel B of Tables 6 and 7). Moreover, consumption growth of middle-
aged homeowners with high education fell by 3.61% even though their incomes increased
by 5.25%, while there was no statistically significant evidence of a decline in consumption
growth and of an increase in income growth for the same age-education group of renters
(panel C of Tables 6 and 7).
  In short, during the mortgage boom, middle-aged households with high education expe-
rienced a significant increase of their mortgage share but a decline of consumption growth.
The observed slowdown in average consumption growth was driven entirely by a slowdown
in consumption growth of middle-aged homeowners, especially those with high education,
but not of renters. This observation holds despite the fact that middle-aged homeowners
experienced faster income growth in 2015-2017 than in 2013-2015 (survey years).

III.2.2. Consumption growth and mortgage debt burden. In this subsection, we establish an
empirical linkage between consumption growth and mortgage debt burden by quantifying
the eects of mortgage debt burden on households' consumption growth with both extensive
and intensive margins. Along the extensive margin, we regress consumption growth on a
mortgage dummy equal to 1 if the household had a mortgage debt and 0 otherwise. Along
the intensive margin, we use a subsample of households who had positive mortgage debts, and

  25We   show in Section V.4 that housing demands were driven most by speculative motives for investment,
rather than by housing services, even for households with only primary houses.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                      16

regress consumption growth on the ratio of outstanding mortgage debt to income. Because
households with mortgage debts or with a higher ratio of mortgage debt to income were
more financially burdened by mortgage payments and thus less cash on hand than other
households, our main control variable is income growth.26
  Table 8 presents these regression results. Households with mortgage debts had, on aver-
age, slower consumption growth than households without mortgage debts by 2.66% (column
(1)). If households' DTI ratio increased by one, their consumption growth rate would fall
by 0.27% (column (2). In both regressions, the estimated coe cients are statistically signif-
icant. These empirical findings imply that an increase in the mortgage share of middle-aged
households with high education during the period when LTV policy was relaxed contributed
to a significant slowdown of their consumption growth by making them more financially
burdened with mortgage debts.
  In the next section, we use a theoretical model to explain our empirical findings. The
model aims at answering the following three questions: Why did middle-aged households
with high education, rather than other households, respond to the relaxation of LTV policy
by demanding more mortgage loans? How did the relaxation of LTV policy on secondary
houses fuel the demands of these households for primary houses? Why did consumption
growth of these households fall while their demands for mortgage loans increased?


              IV. A model with LTV constraint on housing investment

  In this section, we develop a dynamic equilibrium model to interpret the empirical facts
we find in Section III. To this end, therefore, the model has two key ingredients: (i) primary
and secondary houses that are subject to dierent MDR requirements and (ii) households'
housing service utility that has two stochastic regimes to capture beliefs about future housing
demands. These ingredients are based on China's unique institutional facts.
  We begin with the household's problem and then introduce the rental and production
sectors into the model economy. The model is calibrated to match both aggregate and cross-
sectional moments of the Chinese economy. The technical details of how to formulate the
household problem recursively, as well as the definition of the equilibrium, are contained in
Appendices A and B. Appendix C provides details of how to solve the model numerically.

IV.1. Households. We first describe the economic environment for households in our model
and then specify the household decision each period.

  26Control   variables for both regressions include age, age squared (controlling for nonlinearity), an educa-
tion dummy, and growth of family size.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                17

IV.1.1. The environment. The economy is populated by a continuum of overlapping genera-
tions of households whose life cycle is divided between work and retirement. Each household
lives multiple periods, age is indexed by j = 1, 2, . . . , J , and the household retires at age
J ret . All households die with certainty after age J .
  The household's expected lifetime utility is
                              " J                                                           #
                               X
                                    j 1                                       J
                          E0            uj (cj , sj ; ) +                         v ( b) ,
                                     j =1

where      > 0 is the discount factor, cj is non-housing consumption, sj is consumption of
housing services. Each period, the household has a constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
utility over non-housing consumption and housing services in the form of
                                                                                        1
                                                ) c 1 + s1 ] 1
                                               [(1
                            u(c, s; ) =                        ,
                                                     1
where      determines the elasticity of substitution between non-housing consumption and
housing services and and       the relative risk aversion. The housing utility weight                       determines
the share of housing services in total consumption. It is a stochastic variable common for all
households, capturing the common belief about aggregate housing demands in the future.
                                                                      L           H
We assume a two-state Markov process for                    2 {           ,           } with the transition probability
matrix                                          "                     #
                                                    1   lh lh
                                           =                                  .
                                                        0         1
From the state of a low housing preference, there is a probability lh that the low hous-
ing preference moves into the state of a high housing preference and stays in that state.27
The stochastic belief about future housing demands can be interpreted as anticipated higher
future demands for urban housing due to the relaxation of China's unique policy on urban-
ization known as the "Hukou" restriction.28 A high housing preference is an absorbing state
because it captures the institutional fact that once the Hukou restriction was eased, the
relaxation would not be reversed.
  To evaluate the impact of a policy change, we assume that each household is endowed
with a low housing preference (       L)    in the initial state and stays in that state after housing
policy is relaxed. Since a preference change is not realized, this stochastic housing preference
  27Our   belief modeling follows Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2020). Unlike their paper, however, the
trigger for the housing boom in our model is a change in mortgage policy instead of an exogenous change in
belief about housing demands in the future.
   28According to Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012), the urbanization rate grew on average by 1.4% per year

between 1996 and 2015. Even with a slightly slower growth rate of urbanization since 2015, there have been
about 15 million new people entering urban areas every year.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                      18

captures a belief about higher housing demands in the future. This modeling approach shares
some key features of a rational bubble, but unlike the rational bubble literature it allows
for the utility of housing services. In the stochastic steady state in which the house price is
constant, households always demand speculative investment in houses because of a positive
probability of switching to the state of higher housing demands with higher house prices.
  We introduce a warm-glow bequest motive into the model to capture the reality in China
that old people tend to give houses to their children or grandchildren as a bequest. This
bequest takes the functional form
                                               b1
                                              v ( b) = '
                                                    ,
                                               1
where the parameter ' reflects the strength of a bequest motive.
  At birth, households are ex-ante heterogeneous in their endowment of permanent (lifetime)
labor ability, denoted by a binary variable k with k 2 {L, H }, where L stands for low ability
and H high ability. Working age households are subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks
to their e ciency of labor, denoted by  that follows a first-order Markov process. The
total labor income for each household is given by y = w"j k , where w is the wage rate
per e ciency unit of labor and "j is the deterministic e ciency profile determined by age.29
When a household retires, it receives a pension benefit each period equal to a fraction  of
the income in the last period of working age, denoted as y =  y ret .
  The household enjoys housing services by either renting a house at the rental rate h or
buying a house at the price ph . The size of a purchased or rented house is modelled discretely.
For a purchased house, the size h belongs to a set H; for a rented house, the size h ~ belongs
         e .30
to a set H
  Rental markets in China are underdeveloped because of various institutional frictions.
Home ownership has clear advantages over renting in several respects. First, homeownership
gives the homeowner's children a top priority over a residential lease to gain access to a high-
quality school district in which the purchased house is located. Second, incomplete laws of
leasing houses do not safeguard tenants' lawful rights and interests. According to a 2017
survey of 5000 young adults about their housing status conducted by the Beijing government,
one-third of the surveyed adults were evicted by landlords, 41.3% experienced rent increases
  29Since   our model abstracts from the government budget, a household's labor income in our model should
be interpreted as labor income after tax payments and government transfers.
   30Although our micro datasets do not have information about the quality of a house financed by a

mortgage, we do have information about the house value. After controlling for an increase of the house
price, an increase of the house value captures an increase of size or quality or both. In the model, therefore,
we assume that dierent house sizes reflect dierences not only in physical size but also in quality. For
tractability, we do not distinguish physical size and quality in the model.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                     19

that violated the lease agreement or contract, and 43.8% had to deal with rental agencies
that were not creditworthy. Third, owning a house has increasingly become a prerequisite
for a male to marry a female because of the unbalanced sex ratio in China. According to
Wei, Zhang and Liu (2017), the unbalanced sex ratio helps explain rapid increases in house
prices.
  All these institutional facts reflect China's rental market frictions, which have contributed
to high rates of homeownership among Chinese households, especially among those below
age 30. In 2013, the homeownership rate in China was 86%, compared to 65% in the U.S.
In particular, China has the highest homeownership rate among young households (reaching
66% in 2013), as compared to only 35% for the U.S. and 31% for the UK.
  To capture these rental market frictions in our model in a tractable way, we assume that
                                                                              ~ 0 with 0 < ! < 1.31
renting generates services less than the size of the rented house, i.e. s = ! h
Both rented and owned houses depreciate at a rate of             h.   When a household sells its home, it
incurs a transaction cost h ph h, which is proportional to the house value. When a household
sells its home or purchases a new house, there is a fixed cost j that is age-dependent, where
j denotes the household's age (i.e., the age of the head of the household in the CHFS). This
age-dependent cost reflects two factors in China: the reluctance for the old people to move
to a new neighborhood (the cultural factor) and the di culty of obtaining mortgage loans
by the old people (the legal factor).32
  Households can purchase multiple houses with the total housing size h. There is an upper
bound on the size of the first house, denoted by h^ , such that s = min{h, h
                                                                           ^ }. The rest of
h, max{0, h h ^ }, is the size of a secondary house. A secondary house provides no utility
to the homeowner. Homeowners do not rent out their secondary houses but hold them
purely for the purpose of possible capital gains in the future. This assumption is consistent
with China's institutional facts. China does not have a credit score system for individual
households such as FICO and Equifax in the U.S. As a result, it is di cult for the landlord
to identify potentially good tenants and eectively protect the landlord against defaults on
rental payments. More important is the fact that the rent-to-price ratio has long remained
low. In 2013, for instance, the average rent-to-price ratio for residential housing in first tier
cities was around 2.4%, while the benchmark deposit rate was 3% and the benchmark lending
rate was 6% during the same period. Such a low rent-to-price ratio discourages homeowners

  31Following                                                   ~ 0 indicates the current period and h
                the standard notation, the superscript prime in h                                    ~ without
the superscript prime indicates the last period. This notational convention applies to other housing-related
variables as well.
   32The longest mortgage term in China is 30 years. A borrower of age 50, for example, is not permitted

to obtain a 30-year mortgage loan and must pay a high cost to get a shorter term mortgage loan.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                          20

from leasing their secondary houses and encourages them to hold these empty houses for
investment purposes.
  Households can finance the purchase of both primary and secondary houses by mortgage if
their age is less than J M (corresponding to age 65 in China).33 The maximum LTV ratios at
origination for these two types of houses, denoted as          1   and   2,   are dierent. At the time of
origination, the borrower is subject to the maximum LTV ratio constraint m0                    m (h
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                          ) ph h 0 ,
where m0 is the amount of mortgage in the current period and m (h0 ) is defined as
                              8
                              >          0
                                                          if h0  h^ and j  J M
                              < 1 ph h
                    0      0
               m ( h ) ph h =
                                       ^
                                  1 ph h + 2 ph ( h
                                                    0             ^ and j  J M .
                                                      ^ ) if h0 > h
                                                      h
                              >
                              :
                                0                         if j > J M
All mortgages are subject to a fixed origination cost, denoted by m . The minimum mortgage
payment in each period, denoted by m , follows a constant amortization schedule during the
remaining lifetime such that
                                                 rm (1 + rm )J +1 j
                                         m =                        m,
                                                (1 + rm )J +1 j 1
where rm is the mortgage interest rate and  is an actual mortgage payment. The outstanding
principle evolves according to m0 = (1 + rm )m              . Consistent with China's institutional
facts, we assume that the mortgage, once originated, cannot be refinanced and there is no
mortgage default.
  In addition to houses as a financial asset, the household can own a one-period risk-free
government bond, denoted by b, at an exogenous price qb . The interest rate is rb = 1/qb                        1.
The household cannot borrow by short selling its houses. That is, homeowners have no
access to a home equity line of credit in our model (another institutional fact of China).
  In each period, a household's idiosyncratic state is represented by the vector            = (b, m, h, y ).
Let µ  µ( ) be a probability measure of households indexed by the idiosyncratic state
and let  = ( , µ) represent the aggregate state. We solve the household problem in two
steps. First, we solve for the household tenure decision (e.g., buying or renting a house).
Second, conditional on this decision, the household chooses the size of a house to purchase
or rent, along with its choice of consumption and savings in non-housing financial assets.

IV.1.2. The household decision. At the beginning of each period, a household with no house
chooses between renting and buying a house, and a household that owns a house chooses
between selling its house and keeping it while making mortgage payments. If the household
sells the house, it then needs to choose between buying and renting a new house. Diagram 1,
  33In   China, mortgage borrowers are required to be between 18 and 65 years of age.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                       21

below, summarizes the housing state at the beginning of the period and the housing tenure
decision choice during the period.
           Diagram 1: Initial state and housing tenure decision during the period34

                    State at beginning of the period Housing tenure decision

                    With house        Without house         Sell Pay Rent            Buy
                            H                N               S      P         R       B

                                                   Rent
                                      N
                                                   Buy
                                                                 Rent
                                                   Sell
                                      H                          Buy
                                                   Pay

In the decision tree, we rule out the possibility that a household purchases a house and at
the same time rents another house so that the housing decision is lumpy, depending on costs
and benefits of owning a house. The cost is a downpayment; the benefits are as follows: (1)
it generates more utility from housing services than renting a house and (2) it allows the
household to enjoy potential capital gains with expected returns much higher than investing
in risk-free assets.
  Homeowners have the option of keeping their houses or changing their housing positions.
In the model, a homeowner with an idiosyncratic shock that leads to high labor incomes is
likely to upsize her house for investment purposes, while a homeowner with an idiosyncratic
shock that leads to low labor incomes is likely to downsize her house or become a renter to
smooth consumption. In the stochastic steady state, therefore, there are always demands for
newly originated mortgages demand and a positive fraction of households trading up their
primary houses.


IV.2. The rental sector. In each period, the representative rental company purchases
houses and rents them to renters with an operating cost                     for each housing unit. The
problem of the representative rental company is

         ~ ; ) = max [h ()              ~0          ~0                  ~ +     1               ~ 0 ; 0 ),
      J (H                             ]H     ph ()[H       (1     h )H ]            E  0 | J ( H
                       ~0
                       H                                                      1 + rb

  34The   symbols S, P, R, B are used as superscripts for various value functions in the recursive household
problem described in Appendix A.
                  AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                           22

where h () is the rental price. The zero profit condition gives the equilibrium rental rate
as


                                                 1    h
                          h () =     + ph ()            E  0 [ p h ( 0 ) | ] .
                                                 1 + rb


In equilibrium, the rent is the sum of the operating cost and the user cost. The parameters in
this rental sector are calibrated to target China's high homeownership for young households
in the data, which in turn is important for our welfare analysis.
     For advanced economies such as the U.S., a traditional channel for a change in the LTV
ratio to influence the housing price is through housing tenure decisions. An increase of the
LTV ratio, for instance, would simultaneously reduce demands of houses for rent and increase
demands of owner-occupied houses. The response of house prices, as discussed in Greenwald
and Adam (2019), depends on how costly it is for the landlord (the rental company in our
model) to convert rentals into owner-occupied houses. This mechanism is absent in our
model for the following reasons. First, a change in the LTV ratio for secondary houses
does not have a direct eect on a household's housing tenure decision (except for the house
price in equilibrium) or on demands for homeownership. Thus, it does not influence the
rental company's available stock of rentals that it could convert to owner-occupied houses.
The increasing demand for owner-occupied houses in our model, which we show later in the
paper, stems largely from trading up the existing (primary) homes; this demand is largely
met by new houses supplied by real estate developers. Only through changes in the house
price does a change in the LTV limit on secondary houses influence households' demands
for homeownership. Even if we allow households to rent out their secondary homes as in
the traditional model, a change in the LTV ratio for secondary houses does not shift the
demand curve describing the relationship between the house price and the homeownership
rate, which makes the house price insensitive to the supply elasticity of owner-occupied
houses. Households' housing tenure decisions, therefore, are not the main channel for a
change in the LTV limit on secondary houses to drive housing demands and thus the house
price.
     For all these reasons, we assume that households with more than one house do not have
the option to rent their secondary houses. This assumption is also consistent with various
frictions on the supply side of China's rental market: the absence of a credit score system on
potential tenants, the lack of laws to penalize the tenant for the delay or delinquency of rental
payments, and no property tax. These institutional arrangements discourage homeowners
from renting their secondary houses.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                      23

IV.3. Production sectors. Following Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2020), there are two
production sectors in the economy: a non-housing consumption goods sector and a construc-
tion sector that produces new houses. Labor is perfectly mobile between the two sectors.
Competitive firms in the non-housing sector are endowed with a technology with constant
returns to scale in labor:
                                                 Y =  Nc ,
where Y is aggregate output,  the aggregate labor productivity, and Nc aggregate e ciency
labor employed in the non-housing sector. The first-order condition for labor determines the
wage rate as w = .
                                                                              ¯ units of land
  In the construction sector, the government issues new permits equivalent to L
each period, and these permits are sold in a competitive market to real estate developers.
The government collects all rents from its land ownership. After acquiring a land permit, a
competitive real estate developer combines labor and land to produce new houses according
to a Cobb-Douglas production technology

                                           max ph Ih          wNh
                                            Nh

                                                        ¯ )1
                                       s.t. Ih = (Nh ) (L             
                                                                         ,
where Ih represents new houses and Nh aggregate e ciency labor employed in the construc-
tion sector. The Cobb-Douglas technology implies that the developer makes zero profit in
equilibrium. The investment function follows from the first-order condition with respect to
Nh and the equilibrium condition w = :
                                                              
                                            I h = ( p h ) 1      ¯
                                                                 L.

IV.4. Calibration. We calibrate the model to match the key aggregate and cross-sectional
moments prior to the loosening of LTV policy in 2014Q4. Given the fact that the CHFS is
conducted every two years, we use the year 2013 to calculate these moments for the initial
steady state of the model, which maps into the Chinese economy prior to a change in LTV
policy in 2014Q4.35 The calibrated parameter values are summarized in Table 9 and a
comparison of the targeted moments between the model and the data in Table 10.
  There are two sets of parameters in our model. A first set of parameters are assigned
externally, whose values are taken from the existing literature. The other set of parameters
are calibrated to the key moments in the data.
  Demography. A period in our model corresponds to a two-year horizon. Households enter
the economy at age 20, work until age 55 (corresponding to J ret = 19), and live until age
  35When   some data in 2013 are not available, we use the data in 2012 or earlier.
                  AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                           24

76, the average life expectancy in China (corresponding to J = 29). Households with high
(low) labor ability in our model correspond to households with college degree and above
(high school diploma and below) in the data. The fraction of households with high labor
ability is calibrated to match the fraction of households with college degree and above in the
CHFS. In the rest of the paper, therefore, we refer to households with high labor ability in
our model as households with high education to be compatible with the data.
  Preference. The key preference parameter in our model is the transition probability lh ,
which governs the magnitude of the speculation incentive. We choose its value to target the
average value of exposures to housing speculations, measured across 70 cities in the data:
the share of the mortgage amount for secondary houses in the total mortgage amount in
2013, which is about 5%. A higher value of lh would lead to a higher steady-state share
of the mortgage amount for secondary houses in the total mortgage amount for speculative
investment purposes. This share is proposed by Gao et al. (2020) to measure a region's
exposure to housing speculations in the U.S. In Section V.4, our cross-city empirical evidence
shows that this share is more relevant to China as a measure of a city's exposure to housing
speculations, mainly because most non-primary houses were used for investment, not as
vacation homes. The housing preference parameter in the low state,        L,   is chosen so that
the average share of housing services in total expenditures is 0.2 in the stochastic steady
state, consistent with the weight used in the o cial consumer price index (CPI) basket in
China. We choose     H   to target the homeownership rate (14.6%) of secondary houses in 2013.
  We follow Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel (2007) and set 1/ , the elasticity of substitution
between non-housing consumption and housing services, at 1.25. The risk aversion param-
eter,   , is set to 2, which is also standard in the literature. The utility discount factor
is calibrated to target the average ratio of wealth to labor income in 2012, which is 9.2 as
estimated in Xie and Jin (2015) using the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) data. The
utility discount parameter for renting, ! , is calibrated as 0.50 to target the average home-
ownership rate of China in 2013 (86%). The parameter for bequest motives, ', is calibrated
to target the ratio of net worth of households in age 75 to net worth of those in age 55.
  Labor endowment. The age profile of labor e ciency units is the same as He, Ning and Zhu
(2017), who estimate the profile using the data in the China Health and Nutrition Survey
(CHNS). The process of an idiosyncratic labor income shock, , is specified as an AR(1)
                                                    
process in log with the same values of  and  as in Imrohoro glu and Zhao (2018). We
normalized the low labor ability L to 1 and set the high labor ability H = 2.4 to match
the the college premium as estimated by Wang (2012) with the data from China Household
Income Project. The social security replacement rate is set to 0.4, which is the average
national replacement rate in 2010-2013.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                    25

  Housing. We follow the strategy of Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2020) to choose three
parameters for the house size set H among homeowners: the minimum size of owner-occupied
housing units, the number of discretized house sizes in H, and the interval between two
adjacent house sizes. For the distribution of ratios of net housing wealth to total net wealth
among homeowners, we target the 10th percentile, median, and the 90th percentile. Total net
wealth is defined as the sum of housing wealth and net financial wealth, and we call total net
wealth "net worth." We use "total net wealth" and "net worth" interchangeably throughout
this paper. The distribution of housing wealth in the initial steady state is crucial for the
quantitative impacts of a change in LTV policy at both the household and aggregate levels.
                       e among renters, we calibrate the smallest size to target the ratio of
For the house size set H
the average earning of homeowners to that of renters under age 30 (this ratio was 2.65 in
2013) and keep the other two sizes the same as those for the first house. We normalize the
moving cost for the young to be zero and calibrate the moving costs of the middle-aged and
old households to target the corresponding shares of their mortgage origination numbers in
2013. We choose the threshold value of secondary houses, h^ , to target the share of mortgage
origination numbers for secondary houses in total mortgage origination numbers in 2013,
which is about 5%.
  The house depreciation rate,         h,   is set to 2%, the same as the depreciation rate for China's
urban owner-occupied houses estimated by OECD. The transaction cost for selling a house,
h equals 3% of the value of house. The rental company operating cost is chosen to match
the homeownership rate of households under age 30. The construction technology parameter
 is set to 0.9, so that the price elasticity of (new) housing supply equals 9. The value of a
new land permit L ¯ is calibrated to target the ratio of house price to income.36
  Financial instruments. The risk-fee interest rate, rb , is set to 3% per annum, which equals
the average benchmark deposit rate in 2010-2013. The mortgage interest rate, rm , is set
to 4.94%, which is the average mortgage interest rate for households in 2013 according to
the CHFS. The mortgage origination cost, m , is calibrated to target the average ratio of
homeowners' outstanding mortgage debt to their income in 2013, which is 3.38.
  LTV Policy. We calibrate the minimum downpayment ratio for the first and secondary
houses in the model to match actual LTV policies prior to 2014Q4 for these two types of
houses. Accordingly,       1   = 0.7 and     2   = 0.3.

IV.5. Distribution in stochastic steady state. To understand the dynamics following a
loosening of LTV policy, we first discuss a set of model predictions in the stochastic steady

  36For   the 35 major cities in China, the average ratio of house price to income was 7.3 in 2012, according
to E-House China (http://www.ehousechina.com/index).
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  26

state that are not targeted in the calibration. The eects on housing demands of a change in
credit conditions depend on both the initial LTV distribution and the distribution of housing
wealth across ages and incomes. The LTV distribution reflects how tight the LTV constraints
are, and the housing wealth distribution reflects the distributional eects on potential capital
gains via an increase in the house price following a relaxation of LTV policy. We show how
the model predict the LTV distributions for dierent age-education groups, followed by the
life-cycle profile and cross-sectional moments of housing wealth and net worth.
  LTV distribution. We compute the model distribution of LTV ratios for homebuyers with
positive mortgages and compare them to the empirical distribution from our Bank Loan
Data.37 Figure 7 displays the distribution of LTV ratios for primary houses at origination in
four age-education groups, and compares the model results to the data. Consistent with Fig-
ure 3, the empirical LTV distribution peaked at the value of 0.7 (the LTV limit for primary
houses in 2013) for all age-education groups. In particular, more than 70% of middle-aged
households with high education had their LTV ratios at the LTV policy limit. Such a find-
ing is explained by our model in which these households are constrained to invest in houses.
Indeed, the model's stochastic steady state can replicate the LTV distributions at origina-
tion across age-education groups reasonably well, and especially for middle-aged households
with high education. By contrast, these empirical distributions cannot be explained by the
standard life-cycle model because the LTV policy limit for middle-aged households with high
education is largely unbinding.38
  Life-cycle profile of wealth. Figure 8 demonstrate how much the model explains the em-
pirical life-cycle profile of wealth. The top two panels report net worth across ages for both
low income and high income households. The model matches the empirical life-cycle profile
of net worth for households with low education and high education, which was hump-shaped
and peaked around age 55. Net worth of households of age 40 with high education was about
three times that of households of age 40 with low education and twice that of young house-
holds with high education. The bottom panels show that the model replicates, reasonably
well, the empirical age profile of housing wealth of households with high education.
  Both net worth and housing wealth of households with high incomes (education) are higher
than those of households with low incomes (education) at the initial level and increase with
age at a much faster rate than those of households with low incomes (education). Housing
wealth of high income households of age 40, for instance, is about twice that of low income

  37Our   granular mortgage data contains homebuyers only with positive LTV ratios at origination.
  38In   Section V.2.1, we show that without a speculative investment incentive (lh = 0), only about 20%
of middle-aged households with high education in the stochastic steady state have their LTV ratios reaching
the policy limit.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  27

households of age 40 and about three times the housing wealth of high income households
of age 20. These results imply that middle-aged households with high incomes enjoy much
larger capital gains from increases of the house price than middle-aged households with low
incomes or young households with high incomes.
  Cross-sectional moments. To see how much the model can explain various empirical cross-
sectional moments, we begin with the Gini coe cients for housing wealth and net worth
(top portion of Table 11). The Gini coe cient for housing wealth produced by the model
is particularly close to the empirical Gini coe cient. The model's results are also close to
the empirical shares of net worth of households in the dierent quintiles (middle portion of
Table 11). The model matches the data reasonably well for the ratio of housing wealth to in-
come for median households, but does not predict this wealth-to-income ratio for households
in the bottom and top quintiles (bottom portion of Table 11).
  Summary. Our model predicts, reasonably well, the empirical LTV distribution across
age-education groups, the life-cycle profile of wealth, and other cross-sectional distributions
of wealth. Since the initial LTV distribution across age-education groups and the initial
distribution of housing wealth are crucial for understanding the transmission of LTV policy
into housing demands and consumption, our model provides a theoretical framework for
exploring the quantitative impacts of such a policy change.

                            V. Impacts of loosening the LTV limit

  This section provides a quantitative assessment of the aggregate and distributional im-
pacts of relaxing LTV policy. To follow the practical change of LTV policy for secondary
houses during the period 2014Q4-2016Q3, our policy experiment in the model is a surprising
relaxation of LTV policy for secondary houses. We explore, in Section V.1, the impacts of
this policy change on the house price, mortgage originations, and consumption. Section V.2
conducts counterfactual exercises to highlight key factors driving the benchmark results. In
Section V.3, we explore the welfare implications of a relaxation of the LTV limit on secondary
houses. Section V.4 uses cross-city evidence to provide additional support to the model's
key mechanism.

V.1. Benchmark results. Our benchmark policy experiment is to reduce the minimum
downpayment ratio for secondary houses. In period 0, the model economy is at the steady
state. At the beginning of period 1, the maximum LTV ratio for secondary houses increases
from 0.3 to 0.65 unexpectedly.39 Since a period in our model corresponds to two years in
  39
       According to actual LTV policy, a household who owned a house with mortgage fully paid could purchase
a second house with the MDR as low as 30%. But for households who owned a house with a positive mortgage,
the MDR is 40%. We take the midpoint 35% as the minimum downpayment ratio for secondary houses.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                           28

the data, the relaxation of LTV policy lasts for one period to be consistent with the two-
year period 2014Q4-2016Q3 when LTV policy was relaxed. During this period, however,
households expect that the new LTV policy (      2   = 0.65) will last forever. In period 2, the
LTV policy is reversed unexpectedly to the initial steady state value of   2   = 0.3. Throughout
this policy experiment, we keep unchanged the MDR for the primary house as well as other
parameters such as mortgage interest rates. In particular, the parameter lh is kept at its
steady state value to help isolate the eects of LTV policy.


V.1.1. Short-run eects. Table 12a shows how well the model can explain the aggregate
eects of this policy change on annualized growth rates of various key variables. The house
price increases by 3.97% (per annum) in the impact period, indicating that a relaxation of
LTV policy for secondary houses alone can explain about 70% of the observed increase in the
housing price between 2011Q1-2014Q3 and 2014Q4-2016Q3 (5.94%). The total amount of
newly issued mortgage loans is 91.75% higher than that in the initial steady state, accounting
for almost all the increase in newly issued mortgages in the data (91.78%). The number of
mortgage originations increases from the steady state by 30.84%, explaining about two-thirds
of the increase observed in the data (46.51%). For primary houses, the mortgage amount
increases by 53.54%, accounting for more than two-thirds of the observed increase (78.98%);
the number of mortgage originations increases by 19.22%, explaining 45% of the observed
increase (42%). These model results indicate that a relaxation of LTV policy for secondary
houses is a driving force of the observed mortgage boom, especially the boom of primary
houses via an increase of the house price in equilibrium.
  Table 12b reports the changes in mortgage shares by age-income groups in comparison to
these changes in the data by age-education groups. We highlight the results for the middle-
aged high income (high education) households. This group of households experiences the
largest increase, 11.62%, in the share of mortgage origination amount, close to the 13.32%
increase in the data. Such an increase can be explained largely by the increase in origination
numbers in the same group of households (8.75% in the model and 8.07% in the data). By
contrast, the shares of mortgage origination amount and number for young high income
households increase only by 1.51% and 2.60%.
  To understand the model's mechanism, we report in Table 12c the changes in mortgage
shares for primary houses by age-income groups. Similar to the results in Table 12b, we
see that across age-income groups only middle-age high income households experience a
significant increase in the shares of mortgage origination amount (7.94%) and number (5.8%).
These model results explain more than two-thirds of the increases in the data (11.78%
and 7.26%). By contrast, the share of mortgage origination amount of young high income
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 29

households declines by 1.11% while their share of origination number increases by only
1.98%, consistent with the corresponding changes in the data ( 1.17% and 0.52%). Thus,
our model can explain both aggregate and distributional impacts of a change in LTV policy
for secondary houses on the mortgage market.40
  In our model, mortgage demands arise from two groups of households in any period: those
who become new homeowners (from renters) and those who change their housing positions.
An increase in mortgage demands following a change in LTV policy is influenced mainly
by two factors: an increase of housing demands by the existing homeowners who choose
to trade up their primary homes and an increase in households who switch from renters
to homeowners.41 The literature emphasizes the second factor, which is the conventional
channel for changes in credit conditions to influence mortgage demands.
  For the Chinese mortgage market, the first factor is more important. An increase in
the house price encourages homeowners, who would otherwise keep their existing homes
(e.g., those with low idiosyncratic labor productivity) due to the fixed costs of moving
and mortgage origination, to trade up their existing homes with the help of capital gains.
As Table 13a shows, an increase in the number of households who trade up their existing
homes contribute to nearly half of the increase in mortgage origination amount, more than
90% of the increase in origination number, and 54% of the increase in housing demands.42
Table 13b shows that middle-aged households with high incomes account for 52% of the
increase in mortgage origination amount as well as in housing demands, the highest among
all age-income groups. Thus, a relaxation of the LTV limit influences middle-aged high
income households disproportionally, who trade up their existing homes with the help of
rising house prices. This channel is absent in standard life-cycle models because the LTV
limit for middle-aged households with high incomes is largely unbinding in those models.

V.1.2. Long-run eects. Despite a transitory change in LTV policy, transitional dynamics
following this policy change can last for many periods because of illiquid housing investments
and high mortgage debt burdens for those who purchased houses during the period when the
LTV limit is relaxed. The left panel of Figure 9 displays the transitional path of non-housing

  40In   Appendix D, we explore the implications of two alternative mortgage policies: a reduction of the
MDR for primary houses and a reduction of the interest rate. For the first policy experiment, we find that
the increase in the mortgage amount share of young high income households is the highest among all age-
income groups. For the second, the increase in the share of mortgage amount for middle-aged high income
households in total mortgage amount is substantially smaller than in the benchmark model.
  41The first factor can be driven by both an increase in the number of existing homeowners who choose to

trade up their primary homes, and a larger size of home purchased by these homeowners.
  42Housing   demand is measured as the total housing stock in our model (see Appendix B).
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         30

consumption of middle-aged high income households after LTV policy on secondary houses is
relaxed for one period. The impact is negative (below the steady state level) and persistent
mainly because of the persistent mortgage debt burdens of households who purchase houses
in response to the relaxed LTV policy. The ratio of outstanding mortgage debt to income for
middle-aged high income households rises sharply in the first two years and does not return
to its initial steady state level until period 5 (right panel of Figure 9).
  The existing literature emphasizes the wealth eects of house prices and does not predict
a fall in consumption of middle-aged high income households and a simultaneous rise in
the house price. In China, despite the positive wealth eects of higher house prices on
middle-aged high income households, most of whom are already homeowners when LTV
policy is relaxed, these households choose to trade up their existing homes by financing
larger houses in anticipation of capital gains in the future. The fall in their consumption on
impact reflects an intertemporal substitution for future consumption. It is persistent because
these households finance larger houses with a higher leverage against their incomes and are
responsible for serving their mortgages for a long time even after the reversal of loosened
LTV policy.

V.2. Understanding the benchmark results. In this section, we discuss two key factors
that underlie our benchmark results: the speculative investment in houses and the increasing
housing prices associated with relaxation of LTV limits for secondary homes.

V.2.1. Speculative investment in houses. A key element of our model is speculative invest-
ment in houses. With beliefs of future higher housing demands, the LTV constraint for most
middle-aged households with high incomes is binding in the steady state (Figure 7). Thus,
capital gains generated by higher house prices than those in the steady state allow them to
overcome the LTV constraint and trade up their existing homes. To quantify how important
this investment incentive is for our model results, we turn o the stochastic regime in the
utility of housing services by setting lh = 0.
  Comparing this counterfactual economy to our benchmark model, Figure 10 displays the
steady-state distribution of LTV ratios at origination for primary houses across age-income
groups. For all age-income groups except middle-aged households with high incomes, a ma-
jority of households borrow to the LTV limit on primary houses because these households are
constrained for consumption of housing services. For middle-aged high income households,
however, the story is dierent. Nearly 30% of homebuyers have LTV ratios between 0.05
and 0.15 and only about 20% of homebuyers borrow to the LTV limit on primary houses.
This result is in contrast to the benchmark economy in which a vast majority of middle-aged
high income homebuyers borrow to the LTV limit for investment purposes.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                      31

  Indeed, if we feed the sequence of high house prices in our model economy into the coun-
terfactual economy in which there is no speculative investment incentive,43 demands for
mortgage loans by households who trade up primary houses change little from their steady
state values, while middle-aged households with high incomes increase their non-housing
consumption because of capital gains associated with high house prices.44


V.2.2. The role of increasing house prices. An increase of the maximum LTV ratio for sec-
ondary houses aects households' mortgage demands for primary houses only indirectly by
influencing the house price. The key channel is a decision made by middle-aged high income
households to trade up their existing homes: an increase of the house price would increase
capital gains for existing homeowners when they sell their houses. The larger the existing
house is, the larger the capital gains are. Because a middle-aged household with high income
tends to have a large home, the wealth eects of trading up existing homes are large for this
group of households.45
  To quantify the importance of this channel, we experiment with a counterfactual exercise in
which a 100% tax rate is imposed on capital gains while keeping the increase of the maximum
LTV ratio for secondary houses the same as in our benchmark model. The dierence in results
between this counterfactual exercise and the benchmark model measures the indirect eects
of increasing house prices via capital gains on the mortgage market, as reported in Table 14.
From columns (1) and (2) one can see that the housing price with a tax rate of 100% on
capital gains increase by only 1.53%, 38.5% of the value in our benchmark model and only
one-fourth of the increase in the data. The increase in the total mortgage amount is only
25.56%, as compared to nearly the 92% increase in both benchmark model and data. The
increase in the mortgage amount for primary houses is even smaller (3.66%). The number
of total mortgage originations decreases by 0.13% as the number of originations for primary
houses declines even further by 6.97%. The declines are in sharp contrast to large increases
in both benchmark model and data. Capital gains from an increase in the house price,

  43Without   a speculative incentive for investment in houses, households would not invest in secondary
houses as there is no utility of housing services. When the LTV limit on secondary houses increases, therefore,
the equilibrium housing price does not change.
  44The   numerical results are available upon request.
  45Using   the NBS data, we find that during 2011Q1-2018Q1, the year-over-year growth rates of house
prices for houses of three size categories (i.e., less than 90 square meters, between 90 and 144 square meters,
and above 144 square meters) are quantitatively very close to each other. This evidence supports our model's
prediction that dierent magnitudes of capital gains among homeowners are driven by dierent sizes of their
existing homes.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                              32

therefore, are the key factor for understanding an increase of mortgage demands, especially
for primary houses.
  Table 15a reports the counterfactual results for primary houses. With the 100% tax rate
on capital gains, mortgage demands in origination amount and number, as well as housing
demands, by households who trade up their existing homes would be reduced by 84-85%
relative to the benchmark model. For the mortgage amount and housing demands, 46% of
this reduction is explained by the demand reduction among middle-aged households with
high incomes (Table 15b).
  Summary. Our counterfactual exercises show that the speculative investment incentive
for housing and capital gains from increases in the house price are the two main reasons
for middle-aged households with high incomes to trade up their existing homes when LTV
policy is relaxed. The first factor leads to a significant fraction of middle-aged high income
households with binding LTV constraints for investment purposes; the second factor allows
these households to overcome the credit constraints and trade up for larger homes. Since
middle-aged households with high incomes represent an important share of housing demands
in the entire economy, the increase of their mortgages and housing demands play a quan-
titatively important role for the increase in total demands for mortgages and houses when
LTV constraints are loosened.


V.3. Welfare analysis. This section analyzes the welfare eects of a change in LTV policy.
Following the literature, we measure a change of welfare by consumption equivalent variation
(CEV)
                                      h                     1    i
                               c
                               ~j =       VjT R /VjSS   1
                                                                1  100%,

where VjSS is the utility value of household j in the initial steady state and VjT R is the utility
value of household j in the first period of the transition. CEV captures a percentage increase
of (composite) consumption in the initial steady state so that household j is indierent
between the initial steady state and the transition state induced by a change in LTV policy.
  As a result of LTV policy change for secondary houses, households suer, on average, a
welfare loss of 0.53% of their consumption. This loss, however, is unevenly distributed across
households (Table 16a). Young households, for example, suer a welfare loss of 1.92% of their
consumption. The only exception is middle-aged households, who experience a small welfare
gain of 0.22% of their consumption. The welfare loss is entirely carried by those renters
in the initial steady state across dierent age-income groups, and an average renter in the
economy suers a welfare loss of 4.30%. By contrast, all existing homeowners, especially
middle-aged households, experience a welfare gain.
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         33

  By age and income, the welfare loss is concentrated in low income households and the gain
in high income households (Table 16b). For instance, young low income households suer
a welfare loss of 2.87%, while young high income households suer a welfare loss of only
0.51%. Among old households, low income households suer while high income households
gain in welfare. Among middle-aged households, high income households have a welfare gain
of 0.42%, while the welfare of low income households barely changes. Renters suer most in
welfare. Young low income renters, for example, suer a welfare loss of 4.66%, while young
low income homeowners suer a welfare loss of only 0.17%. Among renters, the welfare loss
of low income households is larger than that of high income households across all age groups.
Similarly, among homeowners, the welfare gain is smaller for low income households than
high income households.
  Why do young households with low incomes suer disproportionately from a relaxation of
LTV policy? The main reason is the crowding out eect: higher house prices crowd these
households out of the housing market and force them into the rental market in which renting
a house yields a lower utility of housing services than owning a house. To highlight the role
of house prices in transmitting a change of LTV policy into negative impacts on welfare, we
construct a counterfactual economy in which house prices are held constant throughout the
transition path when LTV policy on secondary houses is relaxed.
  In this counterfactual economy of constant house prices, the relaxation of LTV policy
would generate an increase of 0.08% in welfare for all households (Table 17a), in sharp
contrast to a welfare loss when house prices are allowed to respond. In particular, young
households experience a welfare gain of 0.07%. The welfare gain by middle-aged households,
however, is smaller than the gain in the benchmark economy (0.17% versus 0.21%). The
welfare for renters changes little. Thus, all the welfare gain comes from existing homeowners
who take advantage of relaxed LTV policy by purchasing second houses in expectation of
higher house prices in the future, even though the house price is constant at the present
time.
  Table 17b reports the impacts on welfare by age-income groups. The welfare gain for
middle-aged homeowners with high incomes is 0.41% of their consumption (cf. 0.50% in the
benchmark economy). In contrast to a significant welfare loss in the benchmark economy,
however, there is little welfare change for young households with low incomes in the coun-
terfactual economy, no matter whether they are existing homeowners or renters. A similar
result holds for middle-aged households with low income, especially for renters.
  To summarize, our welfare analysis shows that an increase of the LTV ratio for secondary
houses generates an unintended loss in welfare. And the welfare loss is disproportionately
born by young low income households, most of whom do not own a house when LTV policy
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                       34

changes. Higher house prices generated by this policy change crowd these households out of
the housing market.

V.4. Exposure to housing speculations: empirical evidence. One important mecha-
nism of our model is a speculative incentive to invest in houses. This incentive is modeled by
a probability to switch from low housing utility to high housing utility (lh ). In this section,
we provide additional evidence for this mechanism by merging the Bank Loan Data and the
city-level consumption data from China UnionPay.
  Assume that each city in our sample is an island and diers in lh that measures the
extent to which the city is exposed to housing speculations. We exploit cross-city variations
in exposure to housing speculations and examine how changes in mortgage demands, housing
prices, and consumption after LTV policy was loosened varied across cities of dierent ex-
posures. We follow Gao et al. (2020) and measure a city's exposure to housing speculations
by a fraction of mortgages for secondary houses in all mortgages in 2013, the year prior to
the loosening of LTV policy. We use these exposure measures to divide the NBS's 70 cities
into two groups: a high exposure group that contains 35 cities with exposure measures in
top 50 percentiles, and a low exposure group that contains the remaining 35 cities.
  The top row of graphs in Figure 11 display the dierence in the mortgage shares of middle-
aged households with high education between the high and low exposure groups of cities.
Before 2014Q4 (prior to the LTV policy change), the dierence was close to zero. During the
period when LTV policy was relaxed, however, the dierence widened, implying that cities
exposed more to housing speculations experienced more rapid increases in the mortgage share
of middle-aged households with high education. From the 2013 level, the share of origination
amount in high exposure cities increased by 8-10% relative to low exposure cities, and the
share of origination number by 5-7%. These dierences declined to about zero after LTV
policy reversed course in 2016Q4.46
  The middle row of graphs in Figure 11 displays the dierence in the mortgage origination
amount or origination number between the high and low exposure groups of cities, normalized
by the 2013 level. The dierence was close to zero before 2014Q4, but increased rapidly
after 2014Q4 before reverting to the 2013 level. In 2016Q1, for example, the mortgage
origination amount was 150% higher in high exposure cities than in low exposure cities, and
the origination number was 75% higher.

  46In   Appendix E, we regress changes in the mortgage share of middle-aged households with high education
in a city on the city's speculation exposure measure, controlling for various city-specific characteristics. Our
estimated coe cient for speculation exposure is significantly positive for the period 2014Q4-2016Q3, but
insignificant for the post-2016Q3 period.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         35

  For the house price, the dierence of its growth rates between the two groups of cities was
close to zero in the period prior to 2014Q4 (bottom left graph of Figure 11). During the
period when LTV policy was loosened, however, growth of the house price for high exposure
cities increased drastically (relative to low exposure cities). In 2016Q3, for instance, the
dierence was as high as 6%. Again, this dierence narrowed and fell rapidly to around zero
in 2017Q2.
  The consumption dierence between high and low exposure cities (normalized by their
respective levels in 2013Q3), however, moved in a direction opposite of the other series in
this figure during most of the policy relaxation period 2014Q4-2016Q3 and continued to
widen after 2016Q3 (bottom right graph of Figure 11). During the period when LTV policy
was relaxed, consumption in high exposure cities decreased steadily relative to low-exposure
cities, consistent with our model's prediction. After the relaxation of LTV policy was over,
consumption in high exposure cities continued to decline relative to low exposure cities,
again consistent with our model's prediction that a temporary loosening of LTV policy has
persistently negative eects on consumption.
  Summary. We find that on the one hand, following a nationwide relaxation of LTV
policy, cities exposed more to housing speculations experienced more rapid increases of the
mortgage share of middle-aged households with high education, total mortgage demands,
and the house prince during 2014Q4-2016Q3. On the other hand, these cities experienced
lower consumption growth during the period of LTV policy relaxation and continued to have
lower consumption after the loosening of LTV policy was over. All these empirical findings
are consistent with our model implications. Our cross-city evidence, therefore, provides
an additional support to the model's mechanism of how a change of the LTV limit aects
mortgage demands, the house price, and consumption via speculative housing investment.




                                     VI. Conclusion

  This paper studies the aggregate and distributional impacts of LTV policy. China's recent
changes of LTV policy are used as an ideal policy experiment because these policy changes
were unexpectedly large and the magnitude of these changes was seldom observed in history.
With three unique micro data sets, our key empirical finding is that a loosening of LTV policy
on non-primary houses stimulated demands of middle-aged households with high education
for mortgage loans to financing their primary homes at the cost of young households as well
as renters. As an unintended consequence, this policy change had a negative impact on
consumption of middle-aged households with high education.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                          36

  We explain our empirical findings with a life-cycle equilibrium model. The model uncovers
a self-reinforcing mechanism through changes in the house price: a reduction of the mini-
mum downpayment ratio for secondary houses triggers an initial rise in the house price by
encouraging investment in houses for speculative purposes. The initial rise, in turn, generates
capital gains for existing homeowners and encourages them to trade up an existing home
in expectation of future capital gains. Growth of non-housing consumption of middle-aged
households with high incomes falls partly because of their intertemporal substitution into
future consumption and partly because of increasing burdens of their mortgage debt relative
to their incomes. Young households and renters suer the most because rising house prices
make it less aordable for them to own houses. This self-reinforcing mechanism is in sharp
contrast to the standard mechanism in other life-cycle models. In those models, changes
in credit conditions aect aggregate housing demands mainly through housing tenure deci-
sions made by households who are credit constrained for housing services, not for housing
investment.
  By exploiting both the unique micro data and the unique change of LTV policy in China,
our empirical findings, along with theoretical interpretations, show how important the in-
teraction between credit supply and housing speculations was in driving the mortgage or
housing boom, and how this interaction exerted distributional impacts on households by age
and education (income). We hope that our work lays an empirical and theoretical founda-
tion for designing optimal LTV policy to achieve a desirable distributional outcome across
households of dierent ages and incomes.
                  AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                         37

                 Table 1. Summary statistics for mortgage origination data

                                                      2011Q1-2014Q3      2014Q4-2016Q3      2011Q1-2018Q2
                                                      Mean         SD    Mean         SD    Mean       SD

Panel A: Summary statistics for borrowers purchasing the primary house
Age                                                   34.50     9.02     34.68     8.81     34.50     8.98
Fraction of borrowers with college degree and above    0.47     0.50      0.59     0.49      0.56     0.50
House size (square meters)                            103.22   35.75     105.38    35.42    105.46    35.59
House value (thousands of RMB)                        698.79   863.61    879.75   1129.47   845.14   1063.90
Mortgage Loan (thousands of RMB)                      438.25   565.76    566.59   741.31    538.72   684.17
Monthly mortgage payment (RMB)                        3347.46 4795.01 3800.44 4600.51 3685.97 4596.21
Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio                              0.63     0.11      0.65     0.12      0.64     0.12
Mortgage rate (percent)                                6.55     0.63      5.14     0.83      5.62     1.03
Mortgage debt to (annual) income ratio                 4.00     1.71      4.19     1.89      4.19     1.86
Number of borrowers                                      1,212,014          919,998            3,011,765

Panel B: Summary statistics for borrowers purchasing a secondary house
Age                                                   38.60     7.69     39.37     7.73     38.81     7.80
Fraction of borrowers with college degree and above    0.62     0.49      0.72     0.45      0.71     0.45
House size (square meters)                            116.99   52.32     119.09    53.28    117.04    51.53
House value (thousands of RMB)                        1158.61 1511.99 1426.21 1873.07 1372.35 1672.66
Mortgage loan (thousands of RMB)                      436.90   615.26    849.03   1179.92   721.13   931.30
Monthly mortgage payment (RMB)                        4046.10 5311.81 5826.17 7817.19 5174.01 6263.09
Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio                              0.38     0.07      0.59     0.13      0.53     0.15
Mortgage rate (percent)                                7.40     0.37      5.20     0.77      5.77     1.13
Mortgage debt to (annual) income Ratio                 2.52     1.49      3.39     1.82      3.12     1.83
Number of borrowers                                       66,962             80,339            259,024
Notes : Descriptive statistics for the variables used in this paper. The sample contains all new
mortgage loans advanced by the bank for purchasing new residential properties, covering 70 cities
that correspond to the city sample used by NBS for constructing its 70-city house price index.
Source : The Bank Loan Data.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 38

                       Table 2. Summary statistics for the CHFS Data

                                                       2013             2015             2017
                                                   Mean       SD    Mean       SD    Mean        SD

 Age                                               50.34   14.98    52.15   14.93    54.41   14.94
 Consumption (thousands of RMB)                    50.62   51.19    55.40   57.63    54.28   53.30
 Incomes (thousands of RMB)                        75.29   94.85    81.27   103.63   98.82   112.84
 Outstanding mortgage debt (thousands of RMB)      24.59   212.10   30.86   197.95   41.08   221.65
 Net wealth (thousands of RMB)                     765.47 1223.51 984.67 1500.15 1226.68 1870.10
 Share of housing assets in net wealth (percent)   80.38   47.81    79.24   43.50    76.22   44.17
 Homeownership (percent)                           86.02   34.68    89.26   30.97    88.09   32.39
 Number of observations                                19,181          25,607           27,245
Notes : Descriptive statistics for the variables used in this paper. The two variables, outstanding
mortgage debt and the ratio of mortgage debt to income, include households without mortgage.
This inclusion is necessary for accounting for both extensive and intensive margins in our
regression analysis (Table 8), which includes households with and without mortgage. In addition
to our mortgage sample, the CHFS dataset includes households who paid their mortgage debts in
full.
Source : The CHFS.
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY               39

         Table 3. Mortgage share (percent) across age-education groups in 2013

                               (a) Share of loan amount: all houses

                                 High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                      11.77                         25.60
          30  Age < 50                     26.29                         29.48
             Age     50                     4.38                         2.48

                          (b) Share of loan amount: primary houses

                                 High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                      12.31                         26.55
          30  Age < 50                     26.50                         27.90
             Age     50                     4.40                         2.34

                          (c) Share of origination numbers: all houses

                                 High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                      13.41                         22.73
          30  Age < 50                     33.04                         23.78
             Age     50                     5.02                         2.02

                      (d) Share of origination numbers: primary houses

                                 High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                      14.00                         23.59
          30  Age < 50                     33.24                         22.25
             Age     50                     5.03                         1.88

Source : The Bank Loan Data.
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                  40

         Table 4. Percentage change in mortgage share between 2013 and 2015

                (a) Change in loan amount between 2013 and 2015: all houses

                               High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                   -4.13                      -2.58
          30  Age < 50                  -6.45                      13.32
             Age     50                 -1.11                       0.95

              (b) Chang in loan amount between 2013 and 2015: primary houses

                               High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                   -3.79                      -1.17
          30  Age < 50                  -6.26                      11.78
             Age     50                 -1.19                       0.64

            (c) Change in origination numbers between 2013 and 2015: all houses

                               High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                   -2.66                      -0.09
          30  Age < 50                  -5.45                       8.07
             Age     50                 -0.52                       0.65

          (d) Change in origination numbers between 2013 and 2015: primary houses

                               High school and below College and above

             Age < 30                   -2.46                       0.52
          30  Age < 50                  -5.22                       7.26
             Age     50                 -0.57                       0.46
Source : The Bank Loan Data.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                     41

                                   Table 5. Household consumption

             (a) Average growth rate of household consumption and income (percent)

                                    2013-2015          2015-2017              Dierence

           Consumption                 4.05                 3.15                -0.90*
                 Income                6.72                 10.84               4.11***

             (b) Growth rate of household consumption and income by age (percent)

                                   Consumption                                    Income

                     2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence 2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence
    Age < 30              5.01         6.21          1.20            10.74         13.51         2.77
 30  Age < 50             4.75         2.67       -2.08***           9.15          11.55        2.40**
    Age     50            3.19         3.29          0.10            3.70          10.11        6.41***

(c) Changes in growth rates of household consumption and income by age and education (percent)

                                   Consumption                                   Income

                     Low education        High education           Low education         High education
    Age < 30                2.83                0.08                   6.15                   0.48
 30  Age < 50              -1.40              -3.59***                 1.19                 5.15***
    Age     50             -0.11                1.35                  6.21***               7.76***

Notes : Growth rates are annualized. Changes in growth rates reported in panel C are dierences
in growth rates between 2015-2017 and 2013-2015. The symbol * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** the 0.05 significance level, *** the 0.01 significance level.
Source : The CHFS.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                   42

                          Table 6. Household consumption: homeowners

             (a) Average growth rate of household consumption and income (percent)

                                    2013-2015           2015-2017             Dierence

           Consumption                3.88                  2.65                -1.23**
                 Income               6.15                  10.49               4.33***

             (b) Growth rate of household consumption and income by age (percent)

                                   Consumption                                    Income

                     2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence 2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence
    Age < 30              3.97         2.95         -1.02            9.84          11.45        1.61
 30  Age < 50             4.68         2.06       -2.62***           8.62          11.00       2.37**
    Age     50            3.05         3.07          0.02            3.24          10.05      6.81***

(c) Changes in growth rates of household consumption and income by age and education (percent)

                                   Consumption                                   Income

                     Low education        High education           Low education      High education
    Age < 30               -1.07                -0.96                  7.13                 -2.33
 30  Age < 50             -2.16**             -3.61***                 1.05                5.25***
    Age     50             -0.19                1.20                  6.67***              7.73***

Notes : Growth rates are annualized. Changes in growth rates reported in panel C are dierences
in growth rates between 2015-2017 and 2013-2015. The symbol * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** the 0.05 significance level, *** the 0.01 significance level.
Source : The CHFS.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                   43

                            Table 7. Household consumption: renters

             (a) Average growth rate of household consumption and income (percent)

                                     2013-2015           2015-2017            Dierence

           Consumption                 5.24                 8.56               3.32**
                 Income                10.76                14.60              3.83*

             (b) Growth rate of household consumption and income by age (percent)

                                    Consumption                                 Income

                     2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence 2013-2015 2015-2017 Dierence
    Age < 30              7.37         16.14        8.76**           12.80         19.79       6.99
 30  Age < 50             5.29          9.68        4.39*            13.42         17.82       4.39
    Age     50            4.35          5.93         1.58            7.37          10.84       3.46

(c) Changes in growth rates of household consumption and income by age and education (percent)

                                    Consumption                                 Income

                     Low education        High education           Low education       High education
    Age < 30              14.18**                5.52                  3.25                10.05
 30  Age < 50              6.07**                -2.26                 3.96                 5.68
    Age     50              1.45                 3.50                  3.06                 8.05

Notes : Growth rates are annualized. Changes in growth rates reported in panel C are dierences
in growth rates between 2015-2017 and 2013-2015. The symbol * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** the 0.05 significance level, *** the 0.01 significance level.
Source : The CHFS.
             AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                           44

            Table 8. Eects of mortgage debt on consumption growth

 Consumption growth rate                              (1)                    (2)

 Mortgage debt dummy                               -2.66***
 Ratio of mortgage debt to income                                         -0.27**
 Income growth rate                                0.13***                0.18***

 Controls                                              Y                     Y
 City/time fixed eects                                 Y                     Y
 N                                                  28457                   2739
Notes : Results of regressions of mortgage debt on consumption growth. Control
variables for both regressions include age, age squared (controlling for nonlinearity),
education dummies, and family size growth rate. The symbol * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** the 0.05 significance level, *** the 0.01 significance level.
Source : The CHFS.
                  AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 45

                              Table 9. Model parameter values

                Parameter                  Interpretation                        Value

              Demographics
                   J ret                  Retirement age                           19
                    J                      Length of life                          29
                                  Share of high ability households                 0.4
                Preference
                   1/                Elasticity of substitution                   1.25
                                           Risk aversion                          2.00
                                          Discount factor                         0.96
                     L            Housing preference in low state                 0.20
                     H            Housing preference in high state                0.30
                    lh              Probability from    L   to   H                 0.4
                    !              Utility discount from renting                   0.5
                    '               Strength of bequest motive                     75
               Endowments
                    "j                   Life-cycle profile            He, Ning and Zhu (2017)
                                        Income correlation           Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018)
                                       Std of income shocks          Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018)
                    H                    High labor ability                  Wang (2012)
                                         Replacement rate                          0.4
                 Housing
                    H                   Owner housing grid              {0.7, 1.6, 2.5, 3.4, 5.75}
                    e
                    H                   Renter housing grid                 {0.25, 0.7, 1.6}
                    ^
                    h                    2nd house cuto                            3.4
                    h              Housing sale transaction cost                  0.03
                     h               Housing depreciation rate                    0.02
                                   Rent company operation cost                   0.015
                /(1 )                Housing supply elasticity                     9.0
                   ¯
                   L                     Land endowment                          0.007
          Financial instruments
                    rb                     Interest rate                          0.03
                    rm                    Mortgage rate                          0.049
                    m                mortgage origination cost                    0.02
                LTV policy
                     1                 MDR for first houses                        0.7
                     2              MDR for secondary houses                       0.4

Notes : A period in the model corresponds to two years. All values for which the time period is
relevant are annualized.
                  AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                46

                       Table 10. Targeted moments in the calibration

                                    Moments                                         Data Model

                          Overall homeownership rate                                0.86     0.86
                      Homeownership rate under age 30                               0.66     0.69
         Share of mortgage origination amount for secondary houses                  0.05     0.03
         Share of mortgage origination number for secondary houses                  0.05     0.04
                  Homeownership rate for secondary houses                           0.15     0.06
                       Aggregate wealth-to-income ratio                             10.21    8.54
              Ratio of outstanding mortgage amount to income                        3.09     3.12
            Ratio of owner income to renter income under age 30                     2.80     3.10
                  Ratio of purchased house value to income                          7.30     8.11
 Ratio of net worth of households with age 75 to that of those with age 55          0.82     0.81
     Share of mortgage origination number for middle-aged households                0.58     0.57
          Share of mortgage origination number for old households                   0.06     0.07
          Ratio of net housing wealth to net worth: 10th percentile                 0.61     0.68
              Ratio of net housing wealth to net worth: median                      0.93     0.95
          Ratio of net housing wealth to net worth: 90th percentile                 1.00     1.00

Notes : We construct housing wealth as the sum of the values of both primary and secondary
houses. We construct net worth (total net wealth) as the sum of housing wealth and net financial
wealth. Net financial wealth is defined as financial assets (bank accounts, cash, bonds, stocks,
mutual funds, other financial assets, private business wealth, and private cars), minus financial
liabilities (mortgages on primary and secondary houses, other debts for houses, debts for cars,
education, and private business, and other financial debts). Net housing wealth is measured as
housing wealth, minus outstanding mortgage debts and other debts for houses. The data
moments for the share of mortgage origination amount for secondary houses, the share of
mortgage origination number for secondary houses, and the share of mortgage origination number
for middle-aged and old households are calculated from the Bank Loan Data; the ratio of the
house value to income is calculated from E-House China; and other data moments are calculated
from the CHFS.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                               47

                Table 11. Cross-sectional moments: the model predictions

                                   Moments                                     Data Model

                          Gini coe cient: net worth                             0.61    0.46
                       Gini coe cient: housing wealth                           0.56    0.50
                 Share of net worth for the bottom quintile                     0.01    0.03
                  Share of net worth for the middle quintile                    0.10    0.15
                    Share of net worth for the top quintile                     0.64    0.51
   Ratio of homeowners' housing wealth to their incomes: 10 percentile          1.78    4.46
      Ratio of homeowners' housing wealth to their incomes: median              8.18    9.04
   Ratio of homeowners' housing wealth to their incomes: 90 percentile 40.19           15.13

Notes : See the notes in Table 10 for the definitions of housing wealth and net worth. The data
moments are calculated from the CHFS.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                               48

       Table 12. Benchmark policy experiment: an increase in the maximum LTV
       ratio for secondary houses

             (a) Aggregate impacts on the house price and key mortgage variables
                                  (Annualized growth rate %)

                                                                    Model Data

                                  House price                        3.97      5.94
                        Mortgage origination amount                  91.19     91.78
                        Mortgage origination number                  30.65     46.51
               Mortgage origination amount (primary houses)          53.08     78.98
               Mortgage origination number (primary houses)          19.07     42.21

                     (b) Changes in mortgage shares by age-income groups

                                          Mortgage share change (%)
                              Origination amount              Origination number

                          Low income High income Low income High income
             Young        -4.27 (-4.13)    1.56 (-2.58)   -8.69 (-2.66)     2.63 (-0.09)
          Middle-aged -6.39 (-6.45) 11.73 (13.32) -1.54 (-5.45)              8.79 (8.07)
               Old        -0.41 (-1.11)    -2.22 (0.95)   -0.27 (-0.52)     -0.92 (0.65)

           (c) Changes in mortgage shares for primary houses by age-income groups

                                          Mortgage share change (%)
                             Origination amount              Origination number

                         Low income High income Low income High income
             Young       -3.06 (-3.79) -1.06 (-1.17) -8.21 (-2.46)        2.00 (0.52)
         Middle-aged -1.69 (-6.26) 8.03 (11.78)           1.00 (-5.22)    5.82 (7.26)
              Old        -0.37 (-1.19)    -1.84 (0.64)    -0.16 (-0.57)   -0.45 (0.46)
Notes : Values in parentheses in Tables (B) and (C) are actual data across age-education groups
in Table 4, which correspond to age-income groups in the model.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                          49

       Table 13. Contributions (%) from the increase of households who trade up
       their existing homes

         (a) Contributions to the increase in aggregate mortgage and housing demands

                         Origination amount Origination number Housing demands

     Primary houses              49.58                  91.90                  54.24

                             (b) Contributions by age-income groups

                     Origination amount       Origination number        Housing demands

                   Low income High income Low income High income Low income High income
        Young         7.95       12.16        7.49        19.83        8.02        12.14
     Middle-aged     27.96       51.94        30.55       42.14        27.92       51.92
         Old          0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00         0.00

Notes : Contributions across age-income groups in table (B) sum up to 100 for each variable.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                             50

       Table 14. The eects (%) of increasing the maximum LTV ratio for sec-
       ondary houses on the mortgage market: a counterfactual exercise with the
       100% capital gains tax rate

                                                       Counterfactual Benchmark Data
                                                            (1)             (2)         (3)

                       House price                         1.53             3.97        5.94
                   Origination amount                     25.56            91.19       91.78
                   Origination number                      -0.13           30.65       46.51
         Origination amount (primary houses)               3.66            53.08       78.98
         Origination number (primary houses)               -6.97           19.07       42.21
Notes : Values reported in the table are annualized percentage changes of respective variables.



       Table 15. A relaxation of LTV policy for secondary houses: its eects on
       the mortgage market for primary houses among households who trade up their
       existing homes

(a) Dierence (%) between the counterfactual exercise with the 100% capital gains tax rate and
the (benchmark) model

                         Origination amount Origination number Housing demands

      Primary houses              -85.47                  -84.10                   -84.86

                             (b) Contributions (%) by age-income groups

                     Origination amount        Origination number          Housing demands

                   Low income High income Low income High income Low income Hight income
        Young         6.87         14.22       6.14          23.57        6.91          14.30
     Middle-aged     32.39         46.52       35.96         34.32      32.57           46.22
         Old         -0.00         -0.00       -0.00         -0.00        -0.00         -0.00
Notes : Contributions across age-income groups in table (B) sum up to 100 for each variable.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                 51

      Table 16. Welfare eects (%) of a change in the MDR for secondary houses
      in the (benchmark) model

                                       (a) By age and homeownership

                                            All households Renters Homeowners

                                 All              -0.56             -4.40         0.24
                               Young              -1.95             -4.18         0.18
                            Middle-aged           0.21              -3.24         0.42
                                 Old              -0.67             -5.05         0.08


                              (b) Across age-income groups of households

                               All households                   Renters              Homeowners

                           Low income High income Low income High income Low income High income
               Young         -2.89        -0.52       -4.71               -2.69   -0.17      0.49
             Middle-aged      0.08        0.42        -3.42               -2.49    0.37      0.50
                Old          -1.19        0.11        -5.31               -1.23    0.03      0.15

Notes : MDR stands for the "minimum downpayment ratio" required by LTV policy.

      Table 17. Welfare eects (%) of a change in the MDR for secondary houses
      in the model with the house price held constant

                                       (a) By age and homeownership

                                            All households Renters Homeowners

                                 All              0.08              -0.00         0.09
                               Young              0.07              -0.00         0.14
                            Middle-aged           0.17              -0.00         0.18
                                 Old              0.00               0.00         0.00


                              (b) Across age-income groups of households

                               All households                   Renters              Homeowners

                           Low income High income Low income High income Low income High income
               Young         -0.00        0.18        -0.00               -0.00   -0.00      0.26
             Middle-aged      0.01        0.40        -0.00               -0.00    0.01      0.41
                Old          -0.00        0.01           0.00             0.00    -0.00      0.01



Notes : MDR stands for the "minimum downpayment ratio" required by LTV policy.
                                                                                        AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          52



                                                                                                                    Figure 1. Time series of aggregate variables

                                                       Average loan-to-value ratio                                                                                                                                                                      Total mortgage across time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                             .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mortgage origination number (thousand)
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mortgage origination amount (billion)
                           .6
       Loan-to-value ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
               .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                    2011q1

                                                             2011q3

                                                                      2012q1

                                                                               2012q3

                                                                                         2013q1

                                                                                                  2013q3

                                                                                                           2014q1

                                                                                                                    2014q3

                                                                                                                             2015q1

                                                                                                                                      2015q3

                                                                                                                                               2016q1

                                                                                                                                                        2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                 2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                          2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                   2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2014q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2018q1
                                                                                        Primary house                                 Secondary houses                                                                                                                                Mortgage origination amount                                                                 Mortgage origination number




                                                                                         House price
                                                                                                                                                                                            Real consumption per capita (log)
                             15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .6
         Housing price growth rate (year-to-year)
                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Real consumption per capita (log)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                  0           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
       -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                    2011q1

                                                             2011q3

                                                                      2012q1

                                                                               2012q3

                                                                                         2013q1

                                                                                                  2013q3

                                                                                                           2014q1

                                                                                                                    2014q3

                                                                                                                             2015q1

                                                                                                                                      2015q3

                                                                                                                                               2016q1

                                                                                                                                                        2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                 2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                          2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                   2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2012q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2013q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2014q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2018q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2018q3
Notes : The four panels are organized as follows. The top left panel: the LTV ratios for primary
and secondary houses across time; the top right panel: the mortgage origination amount and
number; the bottom left panel: the year-to-year growth rate of the real house price; and the
bottom right panel: the logarithm of real consumption per capita (the value in 2011Q1
normalized to one). For a given city, the real house price is the house price divided by the GDP
deflator. We aggregate city-level real house prices to obtain the national average real house price
using each city's population in 2011 as a weight.
Sources : The Bank Loan Data, the NBS, and China's macroeconomy time series on the website of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
                                                                       AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                                                                                                                                                       53



                                                                                           Figure 2. Loan-to-value ratio at origination

                                  Loan-to-value ratio: primary house                                                                                                                                Loan-to-value ratio: secondary houses
            .65




                                                                                                                                                                                       .65
 Loan-to-value ratio




                                                                                                                                                                            Loan-to-value ratio
                .55




                                                                                                                                                                                           .55
 .45




                                                                                                                                                                            .45
            .35




                                                                                                                                                                                       .35
                         20                                             30                                             40                                              50                           20                                            30                                            40                                              50
                                                                                            Age                                                                                                                                                                      Age

                                                                       2011                          2013                              2015                                                                                                      2011                         2013                              2015



Notes : The left panel plots the average LTV ratios for primary homes in 2011, 2013 and 2015
across ages. The right panel plots the average LTV ratios for secondary houses in 2011, 2013 and
2015 across ages. The average LTV ratio is computed for each of five-year age bins (e.g., 23-27
and 28-32).
Source : The Bank Loan Data.


                                                                                           Figure 3. Distribution of loan-to-value ratios

                                                                 Primary home                                                                                                                                                           Secondary houses
            .9




                                                                                                                                                                                       .9
            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                       .8
                    .7




                                                                                                                                                                                               .7
  Loan-to-value ratio




                                                                                                                                                                             Loan-to-value ratio
             .6




                                                                                                                                                                                        .6
       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
 .4




                                                                                                                                                                            .4
            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                       .3
            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                         2011q1

                                   2011q3

                                            2012q1

                                                     2012q3

                                                              2013q1

                                                                         2013q3

                                                                                  2014q1

                                                                                            2014q3

                                                                                                     2015q1

                                                                                                              2015q3

                                                                                                                         2016q1

                                                                                                                                  2016q3

                                                                                                                                           2017q1

                                                                                                                                                     2017q3

                                                                                                                                                              2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2013q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2014q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2015q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2016q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2018q1




                                                        p90                            p75                             p50                          p25                                                                           p90                            p75                            p50                          p25


Notes : The first vertical dashed line in each panel marks the time when LTV policy was relaxed.
The second vertical dashed line in each panel marks the time when LTV policy was tightened.
The most significant change in LTV policy was applied to secondary houses.
Source : The Bank Loan Data.
                                                                                          AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                                                                                                                                                               54



                                                                                                               Figure 4. Mortgage debt and house value

                                                               Loan amount at origination                                                                                                                                                                        Origination number
                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             160
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mortgage origination number (thousand)
 Mortgage origination amount (billion)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     140
                           80




                                                                                                                                                                                                             120
                 60




                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
      40




                                                                                                                                                                                     60     80
                      20
                                             2011q1

                                                      2011q3

                                                               2012q1

                                                                        2012q3

                                                                                 2013q1

                                                                                           2013q3

                                                                                                    2014q1

                                                                                                             2014q3

                                                                                                                      2015q1

                                                                                                                               2015q3

                                                                                                                                        2016q1

                                                                                                                                                 2016q3

                                                                                                                                                          2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                   2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                            2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2011q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2012q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2014q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2015q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2016q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2018q1
                                                                                      All Houses                               Primary house                                                                                                                                All Houses                               Primary house




                                                                                           DTI ratio                                                                                                                                                                            HVTI ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                           7
                               4.5
 Mortgage-debt-to-income ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                     House-value-to-income ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                               6.5
            4               3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                      2011q1

                                                      2011q3

                                                               2012q1

                                                                        2012q3

                                                                                 2013q1

                                                                                           2013q3

                                                                                                    2014q1

                                                                                                             2014q3

                                                                                                                      2015q1

                                                                                                                               2015q3

                                                                                                                                        2016q1

                                                                                                                                                 2016q3

                                                                                                                                                          2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                   2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                            2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2011q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2012q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2012q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2014q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2014q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2015q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2015q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2016q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2016q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2017q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2017q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2018q1
                                                                                          All Houses                             Primary house                                                                                                                                  All Houses                             Primary house



Notes : DTI stands for debt to income (debt in this paper is mortgage debt) and HVTI stands for
house value to income. Top left panel: the amount of mortgage loans at origination for all houses
and primary houses across time. Top right panel: the number of mortgage originations for all
houses and primary houses across time. Bottom left panel: the average DTI ratio at origination
for all houses and primary houses across time. Bottom right panel: the average HVTI ratio for all
houses and primary houses across time. The first vertical dashed line in each panel marks the
time when LTV policy was relaxed. The second vertical dashed line in each panel marks the time
when LTV policy was tightened.
Source : The Bank Loan Data.
                                                             AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                  55



                                                                         Figure 5. Mortgage loans across age groups

                                                             Loan amount                                                                                   Number of originations
                                             .25




                                                                                                                                              .25
                                                                                                   Mortgage origination number share (Percent)
 Mortgage origination amount share (Percent)
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                     .2
                         .15




                                                                                                                           .15
                 .1




                                                                                                                   .1
       .05




                                                                                                         .05
                          0




                                                                                                                           0
                                                   20   30          40            50    60    70                                                    20     30          40            50    60    70
                                                                         Age                                                                                                Age

                                                             2011              2013    2015                                                                     2011              2013    2015




                                                               DTI ratio                                                                                 Mortgage participation rate
                                                                                                                           .4
                          1
 Mortgage-debt-to-income ratio




                                                                                                   Mortgage participation rate
                        .8




                                                                                                                            .3
                 .6




                                                                                                              .2
         .4




                                                                                                   .1
 .2                       0




                                                                                                                           0




                                                   20   30          40            50    60    70                                                    20     30          40            50    60    70
                                                                         Age                                                                                                Age

                                                             2011              2013    2015                                                                     2011              2013    2015



Notes : DTI stands for debt to income. Top left panel: the share of loan amount for each age
group in the total loan amount at origination in 2011, 2013 and 2015. Top right panel: the share
of origination numbers for each age group in 2011, 2013 and 2015. Bottom left panel: the average
DTI ratio for each age group in 2011, 2013 and 2015. Bottom right panel: the average share of
households with positive mortgage debts in all households across age groups in 2011, 2013 and
2015.
Sources : The Bank Loan Data and the CHFS.
                                              AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                      56



                                                      Figure 6. Average house value: primary homes

                                     Households with low education                                                    Households with high education
                1200




                                                                                                 1200
   House value (thousand RMB)




                                                                                    House value (thousand RMB)
                         1000




                                                                                                          1000
               800




                                                                                                800
    600




                                                                                     600
                400




                                                                                                 400
                                20       30          40            50   60     70                                20        30          40            50   60     70
                                                          Age                                                                               Age

                                              2011              2013    2015                                                    2011              2013    2015



Notes : The house value for each household in a certain year is deflated by the monthly NBS index
of house price of the city in which the household resided during the month of that year when the
mortgage was originated.
Sources : The Bank Loan Data and the NBS.
                                          AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                              57



                    Figure 7. LTV distribution at origination for primary houses: model versus data

                         Young households with low education                                             Young households with high education
                    100                                                                                 100

                                Data                                                                                Data
                    90                                                                                  90
                                Model                                                                               Model
                    80                                                                                  80


                    70                                                                                  70
  Share (percent)




                                                                                      Share (percent)
                    60                                                                                  60


                    50                                                                                  50


                    40                                                                                  40


                    30                                                                                  30


                    20                                                                                  20


                    10                                                                                  10


                     0                                                                                   0
                          0      0.1    0.2      0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7                           0      0.1    0.2      0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7
                                              Loan-to-value ratio                                                                 Loan-to-value ratio


                              Middle-aged households with low                                                     Middle-aged households with high
                              education                                                                           education
                    100                                                                                 100

                                Data                                                                                Data
                    90                                                                                  90
                                Model                                                                               Model
                    80                                                                                  80


                    70                                                                                  70
  Share (percent)




                                                                                      Share (percent)




                    60                                                                                  60


                    50                                                                                  50


                    40                                                                                  40


                    30                                                                                  30


                    20                                                                                  20


                    10                                                                                  10


                     0                                                                                   0
                          0      0.1    0.2      0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7                           0      0.1    0.2      0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7
                                              Loan-to-value ratio                                                                 Loan-to-value ratio
Notes : The top panels display the LTV distribution at origination for young households; the
bottom panels display the LTV distribution at origination for middle-aged households. The
empirical LTV distributions are based on the 2013 data from the Bank Loan Data.
                                       AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                   58



                                                      Figure 8. Life-cycle profile of wealth

                          Net worth: low income (education)                                            Net worth: high income (education)
                    3                                                                            3

                             Data                                                                         Data
                             Model                                                                        Model
                   2.5                                                                          2.5




                    2                                                                            2
  Net worth




                                                                               Net worth
                   1.5                                                                          1.5




                    1                                                                            1




                   0.5                                                                          0.5




                    0                                                                            0
                     20     25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70                      20     25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70
                                                Age                                                                          Age



                   Housing wealth: low income (education)                                       Housing wealth: high income (education)
                    3                                                                            3

                             Data                                                                         Data
                             Model                                                                        Model
                   2.5                                                                          2.5




                    2                                                                            2
  Housing wealth




                                                                               Housing wealth




                   1.5                                                                          1.5




                    1                                                                            1




                   0.5                                                                          0.5




                    0                                                                            0
                     20     25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70                      20     25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70
                                                Age                                                                          Age
Notes : See the notes in Table 10 for the definitions of housing wealth and net worth. The top
panels display net worth (normalized by the average net worth) for low-income and high-income
groups. The bottom panels display housing wealth (normalized by the average housing wealth)
for low-income and high-income groups. The empirical profiles are based on the 2013 survey data.
Education in the survey data is used as a proxy for income in the data.
Source : The CHFS.
                                                                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                                    59



                                                           Figure 9. A relaxation of LTV policy for secondary houses: long-run impacts
                                                           on consumption and debt burden

                                                             Non-housing consumption of middle-                                                                                Debt-to-income ratio for middle-aged
                                                             aged households with high incomes                                                                                 households with high incomes
                                                  2                                                                                                                  1.3


                                                  1                                                                                                                 1.25




                                                                                                          Debt-to-income ratio (normalized by steady state level)
   Percentage deviation from steady state level




                                                  0                                                                                                                  1.2



                                                  -1                                                                                                                1.15



                                                  -2                                                                                                                 1.1



                                                  -3                                                                                                                1.05



                                                  -4                                                                                                                  1



                                                  -5                                                                                                                0.95



                                                  -6                                                                                                                 0.9
                                                       0        2         4            6         8   10                                                                    0       2         4            6      8    10
                                                                              Period                                                                                                             Period

Notes : The debt-to-income ratio is the ratio of the average outstanding mortgage debt to the
average income for middle-aged households with high incomes.
                                             AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                  60



                              Figure 10. Distribution of LTV ratios at origination for primary houses in
                              the steady state: counterfactual versus benchmark economies

                              Young households with low incomes                                                   Young households with high incomes
                    100                                                                                     100

                                 Benchmark                                                                              Benchmark
                    90                                                                                      90
                                 Counterfactual                                                                         Counterfactual
                    80                                                                                      80


                    70                                                                                      70
  Share (percent)




                                                                                          Share (percent)
                    60                                                                                      60


                    50                                                                                      50


                    40                                                                                      40


                    30                                                                                      30


                    20                                                                                      20


                    10                                                                                      10


                     0                                                                                       0
                          0       0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7                           0      0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7
                                                  Loan-to-value ratio                                                                    Loan-to-value ratio


                              Middle-aged households with low                                                         Middle-aged households with high
                              incomes                                                                                 incomes
                    100                                                                                     100

                                 Benchmark                                                                              Benchmark
                    90                                                                                      90
                                 Counterfactual                                                                         Counterfactual
                    80                                                                                      80


                    70                                                                                      70
  Share (percent)




                                                                                          Share (percent)




                    60                                                                                      60


                    50                                                                                      50


                    40                                                                                      40


                    30                                                                                      30


                    20                                                                                      20


                    10                                                                                      10


                     0                                                                                       0
                          0       0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7                           0      0.1      0.2       0.3       0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7
                                                  Loan-to-value ratio                                                                    Loan-to-value ratio
Notes : The benchmark economy is our model with a stochastic regime for utility of housing
services. The counterfactual economy turns o this stochastic regime while keeping all other parts
of the model intact.
                                                                                      AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     61



                                                                      Figure 11. Dierence between high and low exposure groups of cities

                                                                Mortgage share in total origina-                                                                                                                           Mortgage share in total origina-
                                                                tion amount for primary houses                                                                                                                             tion number for primary houses




                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                              Difference in mortgage origination number share
     Difference in mortgage origination amount share
                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                 5




                                                                                                                                                                             0
   -5              0




                                                                                                                                                            -5
                                                       2013q1


                                                                  2013q3


                                                                           2014q1


                                                                                    2014q3


                                                                                             2015q1


                                                                                                      2015q3


                                                                                                               2016q1


                                                                                                                        2016q3


                                                                                                                                 2017q1


                                                                                                                                          2017q3


                                                                                                                                                   2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2013q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2014q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2014q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2015q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2015q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2016q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2017q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2017q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2018q1
                                                                Mortgage origination amount                                                                                                                                Mortgage origination number
                                                                for primary houses                                                                                                                                         for primary houses
                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                            Difference in mortgage origination number
   Difference in mortgage origination amount
                            1         1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
         0        .5




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                   -.5
                             2013q1


                                                                  2013q3


                                                                           2014q1


                                                                                    2014q3


                                                                                             2015q1


                                                                                                      2015q3


                                                                                                               2016q1


                                                                                                                        2016q3


                                                                                                                                 2017q1


                                                                                                                                          2017q3


                                                                                                                                                   2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2013q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2014q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2014q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2015q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2015q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2016q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2016q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2017q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2017q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2018q1


                                                                                        House price                                                                                                                                                        Consumption
                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                       .5
   Difference in housing price growth




                                                                                                                                                            Difference in total consumption
                            5




                                                                                                                                                                  -.5               0
           0                 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                       2013q1


                                                                  2013q3


                                                                           2014q1


                                                                                    2014q3


                                                                                             2015q1


                                                                                                      2015q3


                                                                                                               2016q1


                                                                                                                        2016q3


                                                                                                                                 2017q1


                                                                                                                                          2017q3


                                                                                                                                                   2018q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013q2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014q2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015q2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2015q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2016q2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2017q2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2017q4




Notes : The NBS's 70 cities are divided into two groups, one with a high exposure to housing
speculations and the other with a low exposure. The mortgage share in each group of cities is for
middle-aged households with high education. The mortgage origination amount and number in
each group of cities are normalized by their respective 2011 levels. Total consumption in each
group is normalized by its 2013 level.
Sources : The Bank Loan Data, the NBS, and China UnionPay.
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                    62

                                       References

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, "Loan originations and
  defaults in the mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 2016, 29 (7), 1635­1670.
          ,        , and         , "Dynamics of housing debt in the recent boom and great
  recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2018, 32 (1), 265­311.
Albanesi, Stefania, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Jaromir Nosal, "Credit growth and
  the financial crisis: A new narrative," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2017.
Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra, "Regional het-
  erogeneity and the refinancing channel of monetary policy," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2018, 134 (1), 109­183.
Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra, "House
  prices and consumer spending," The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 85 (3), 1502­1542.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "Understanding Booms
  and Busts in Housing Markets," The Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (4), 1088­
  1147.
Chen, Kaiji and Yi Wen, "The great housing boom of China," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (2), 73­114.
Chen, Ting, Laura Liu, Wei Xiong, and Li-An Zhou, "Real estate boom and misal-
  location of capital in China," Working Paper, 2017.
Corbae, Dean and Erwan Quintin, "Leverage and the foreclosure crisis," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2015, 123 (1), 1­65.
Eichenbaum, Martin, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong, "State-dependent eects of
  monetary policy: the refinancing channel," Working Paper, 2019.
Fang, Hanming and Jin Feng, "The Chinese Pension System," Working Paper, 2018.
          , Quanlin Gu, Wei Xiong, and Li-An Zhou, "Demystifying the Chinese housing
  boom," NBER macroeconomics annual, 2016, 30 (1), 105­166.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, "The macroe-
  conomic eects of housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk sharing in general
  equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (1), 140­223.
Foote, Christopher L, Lara Loewenstein, and Paul S Willen, "Cross-sectional pat-
  terns of mortgage debt during the housing boom: evidence and implications," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.
Gan, Li, Zhichao Yin, Nan Jia, Shu Xu, Shuang Ma, and Lu Zheng, Data You
                 AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                     63

  Need to Know About China: Research Report of China Household Finance Survey 2012,
  Springer, 2014.
Gao, Zhenyu, Michael Sockin, and Xiong Wei, "Economic Consequences of Housing
  Speculation," The Review of Financial Studies, 2020, forthcoming.
Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and Jos´
                                                         e-V´
                                                            ictor R´
                                                                   ios-Rull,
  "Intergenerational redistribution in the great recession," Working Paper, 2011.
Greenwald, Daniel, "The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,"
  Working Paper, 2016.
          and Guren Adam, "Do credit conditions move house prices?," Working Paper,
  2019.
Gu, Quanlin, Jia He, and Wenlan Qian, "Housing Booms and Shirking," Working
  Paper, 2018.
Guren, Adam M, Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and J´
                                                  on Steinsson, "Housing
  wealth eects: The long view," Working Paper, 2018.
Han, Bing, Lu Han, and Guozhong Zhu, "Housing price and fundamentals in a transi-
  tion economy: The case of the Beijing market," International Economic Review, 2018, 59
  (3), 1653­1677.
He, Hui, Lei Ning, and Dongming Zhu, "The Impact of Rapid Aging and Pension
  Reform on Savings and the Labor Supply: The Case of China," Working Paper, 2017.
Imrohoro glu, Ay¸ se and Kai Zhao, "The Chinese saving rate: Long-term care risks,
  family insurance, and demographics," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 96, 33­52.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante, "The housing boom and
  bust: Model meets evidence," Working Paper, 2020, 128 (9), 3285­3345.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Alexander Michaelides, and Kalin Nikolov, "Winners and
  losers in housing markets," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43 (2-3), 255­
  296.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, "The housing market (s)
  of San Diego," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1371­1407.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, "The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence
  from the US mortgage default crisis," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4),
  1449­1496.
          and         , "House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the US household
  leverage crisis," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 2132­56.
          , Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, "Household balance sheets, consumption, and
  the economic slump," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1687­1726.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, "Housing, consumption and
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                    64

  asset pricing," Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 83 (3), 531­569.
Sommer, Kamila and Paul Sullivan, "Implications of US tax policy for house prices,
  rents, and homeownership," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 241­74.
Wang, Le, "Economic transition and college premium in urban China," China Economic
  Review, 2012, 23 (2), 238­252.
Wei, Shang-Jin, Xiaobo Zhang, and Yin Liu, "Home ownership as status competition:
  Some theory and evidence," Journal of Development Economics, 2017, 127, 169­186.
Wong, Arlene, "Population aging and the transmission of monetary policy to consump-
  tion," Working Paper, 2016.
Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng, "Evaluating conditions in major
  Chinese housing markets," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2012, 42 (3), 531­543.
Xie, Yu and Yongai Jin, "Household wealth in China," Chinese sociological review, 2015,
  47 (3), 203­229.
Zhao, Bo, "Rational housing bubble," Economic Theory, 2015, 60 (1), 141­201.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                        65

                                Appendix A. Household problem

  We now describe a household's problem in recursive forms. Each period, a household's
idiosyncratic state vector        = (b, m, h, y ). Denote µ( ) as the measure of households across
individual states and the aggregate states vector as  = ( , µ) . We solve the problem
of a household in two steps. First, the household chooses the intermediate housing status
as described above. Conditional on its housing status, it then chooses the size of housing
to either rent or purchase, together with the choice of consumption and saving in financial
assets.
  At the beginning of each period, a household without a house solves the following problem
by choosing between renting or buying a house.


                              VjN (b, y ; ) = max{Vjr (b, y ; ), Vjb (b, y ; )}
  where VjN , Vjr , and Vjb denotes the value functions for a household without a house, value
function of the renter and value function of the homebuyer, respectively.
  In the case of changing their housing position, the household needs to sell the house first.47
Accordingly, it solves the following problem:

                    VjH (b, m, h, y ; ) = max{Vjp (b, m, h, y ; ), Vjs (b, m, h, y ; )}

  where VjH , VjH , and Vjs , denote the value functions for a household with a house, value
function of keeping the house and value function of selling the house, respectively. If a
household chooses to sell the house, it needs to pay all the outstanding mortgage debt
associated with the sold house. Accordingly, the financial wealth after selling the house is

                               bn = b + (1       h    h ) ph h   (1 + rm )m      j                       (A.1)

  After the household sells the house, it can then choose whether to rent or buy a new house
by solving the following problem:

                         Vjs (b, m, h, y ; ) = max{Vjsr (bn , y ; ), Vjsb (bn , y ; )}

subject to (A.1). Vjsr is the value function for a household who sells its house and chooses
to rent and Vjsb is the function for a household who sells its house and chooses to buy a new
house.
  Now we switch to the choice of housing size. Since a household dies after age J , we first
describe the problem of a household with age j < J . For a renter, it solves the following
problem.
  47For   simplicity, we assume that once a household decides to sell the house, it sells all housing stock.
                   AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                   66



                                                                    0 0    0
                    Vjr (b, y ; ) = max u(c, s; ) + Ey0 , 0 [VjN
                                                               +1 (b , y ;  )|y, ]
                                               ~0}
                                        {c,b0 ,h

  subject to
                                                      ~ 0 + qb b 0  b + y
                                           s.t. c + h h
                                                        b0         0
                                                             ~ 0, h
                                                        s = !h         e
                                                                  ~0 2 H

                                                        µ0 =             µ ( µ;
                                                                                     0
                                                                                         , )

  A homebuyer solves the following utility maximization problem
                                                                               0   0   0 0    0
               Vjb (b, y ; ) =      max            u(c, s; ) + Ey0 , 0 [VjH
                                                                          +1 (b , m , h , y ;  )|y, ]
                                 {c,b0 ,m0 ,h0 }

  subject to

                      s.t. c + ph h0 + qb b0 + m · 1{m0 >0} + j  b + y + m0
                             b0        0, m0                0
                             s = h 0 , h0 2 H 1
                             m0            m (h
                                                   0
                                                       ) ph h 0
                             µ0 =         µ ( µ;
                                                        0
                                                            , )

  A homeowner who chooses to keep its house and pay mortgage solves the following prob-
lem:
           Vjp (b, m, h, y ; ) = max
                                  0
                                     u(c, s; ) + Ey0 , 0 [Vjh    0   0   0 0    0
                                                            +1 (b , m , h , y ;  )|y, ]
                                        {c,b , }

  subject to

                                   s.t. c +                 h ph h   +  + qb b 0  b + y
                                             b0             0
                                                          ^ }, h0 = h
                                             s = min{h0 , h
                                                                          rm (1 + rm )J +1 j
                                                            m                                m
                                                                         (1 + rm )J +1 j 1
                                             m0 = (1 + rm )m                              
                                             µ0 =               µ ( µ;
                                                                           0
                                                                               , )

  Similar to a renter's problem, a household who sells its house and chooses to rent solves
                                                                      0 0    0
                   Vjsr (bn , y ; ) = max u(c, s; ) + Ey0 , 0 [Vjn
                                                                 +1 (b , y ;  )|y, ]
                                                 ~0}
                                          {c,b0 ,h
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                        67

  subject to

                                                    ~ 0 + qb b 0  b n + y
                                         s.t. c + h h
                                                    b0             0
                                                         ~ 0, h
                                                    s = !h         e
                                                              ~0 2 H

                                                    µ0 =               µ ( µ;
                                                                                0
                                                                                    , )

  Finally, similar to the homebuyer's problem, a household who sells its house and chooses
to buy a new house solves

                                                                                0   0   0 0    0
             Vjsb (bn , y ; ) =        max          u(c, s; ) + Ey0 , 0 [Vjh
                                                                           +1 (b , m , h , y ;  )|y, ]
                                  {c,b0 ,m0 ,h0 }

  subject to

                         s.t. c + ph h0 + qb b0 + m · 1{m0 >0}  bn + y + m0
                                  b0     0, m0                 0
                                  s = h 0 , h0 2 H
                                  m0          m (h
                                                      0
                                                          ) ph h 0
                                  µ0 =       µ ( µ;
                                                           0
                                                               , )


                                         Appendix B. Equilibrium
             H                              N
  Denote         = (b, m, h, y ) and            = (b, y ) as the idiosyncratic state vectors for homeowners
and non-homeowners, respectively. Also, let µH      N
                                             j and µj be the measure of these two types of
households at age j. A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of household value functions
{VjN   N
           ;  , VjH     H
                            ;  , Vjr        N
                                                ;  , Vjb                 H
                                                                             ;  , Vjp
                                                                        ;  }, household de-H
                                                                                               ;  , Vjs   H

                                                                                   ~ 0 (H
cision rules, aggregate functions for construction labor Nh (), rental units stock H    ~ ; ),
homebuyers' housing stock H 0 (H ; ), housing investment Ih (), rental price h (), house
price ph (), and a law of motion for the aggregate states:
   (1) Households optimize with value functions and associated decision rules;
   (2) Construction sector firms maximize profits with associated labor demand and housing
       investment functions {Nh , Ih };
   (3) The labor market clears at the wage rate w = ;
   (4) The rental market clears at price h ;
   (5) The housing market clears at price ph ;

                                       ~ 0 + H 0 = (1
                                       H                                   h )(H
                                                                                    ~ + H ) + Ih
                        AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                      68

      (6) The aggregate law of motion is induced by the exogenous stochastic processes and
          all the decision rules, and it is consistent with individual behavior.

                                Appendix C. Numerical Computation

     This section outlines the steps taken to solve the model numerically. First, we provide the
computation strategy for the rental company and households' problems. Next, we describe
how to calculate the stationary equilibria. Finally, we end with a solution algorithm for
transitions.
     First, given house price and current state , one can solve the rental company's problem
and compute the rental price h from the optimality condition of the rental company, which
is
                                             1    h
                                  h () =            E  0 [ p h ( 0 ) | ] .
                                               + ph ()
                                             1 + rb
The household value and policy functions are solved via backward induction starting with
the final period of life. We discretize the idiosyncratic state                     by fixing grids on liquid
assets B (20 points), mortgages M (30 points), house sizes H (5 points), and income Y
(2  3 points). Households choose liquid assets and house sizes on the grids of B and H
respectively. Household mortgage choice when purchasing a house is restricted to be on M.
However, when households repay the mortgage, the next period mortgage balance can be
exactly M, or follow the amortization schedule, which is computed via linear interpolation
between grid points.
     Second, stationary equilibria are calculated for a given policy regime and constant house
price. The following algorithm is used to find the market clearing house price48:
       1. Make an initial guess of the market clearing house price p
                                                                   ~h .
       2. Given p
                ~h , solve the rental price h from the rental company's problem. Then solve
          backward for the households' value and policy functions. Given households' choices,
          solve forward for the distribution of households over individual states.
       3. Calculate the aggregate housing demand and housing investment in the stationary
          equilibria. With housing investment, solve the implied house price p
                                                                             ¯h from the first-
          order condition for the real estate developer.
       4. Compare p
                  ~h and p
                         ¯h . If not the same, replace p
                                                       ~h by a weighted average of p
                                                                                   ~h and p
                                                                                          ¯h ,
          and return to step 2.
     48Since   there is potential housing preference state switching and high preference state is an absorbing one,
the stationary equilibrium in the high housing preference state is solved first by searching for the market
clearing house price following the same algorithm. In this case, there is no state switching in the future, so
the house price will always stay the same.
                    AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                             69

     Third, for a given path of policies, we define the vector of equilibrium house prices as ph,t .
Recall that µt captures the distribution of households over individual states. The algorithm
for calculating the transition paths proceeds as follows. First, guess the approximate length
of the transition phase, T . If the transition can be achieved in a smaller number of periods,
the last transition periods will be similar to the new steady state. After solving for the
stationary equilibria before and after the policy change, we know the starting distribution
µ0 , the end house price ph,T , and households' value functions VT . The algorithm then iterates
over the following steps:
       1. Guess a sequence of house price vector p
                                                 ~h,t for t = 1, . . . , T   1.
       2. Given p
                ~h,t , solve the rental price h,t from the rental company's problem. Then
          solve backward for the households' value and policy functions at each time t. Given
          households' choices, solve forward for the distribution of households over individual
          states across time.
       3. Calculate the aggregate housing demand and housing investment for each time t.
          With housing investment, solve the implied house price p
                                                                 ¯h,t from the first-order con-
          dition for the real estate developer.
       4. Compare p
                  ~h,t and p
                           ¯h,t . If not the same, replace p
                                                           ~h,t by a weighted average of p
                                                                                         ~h,t and
          p
          ¯h,t , and return to step 2.

                       Appendix D. Alternative mortgage policies

     This section explores the implications of two alternative policies: a reduction of the MDR
for primary houses and a reduction of the interest rate. Since both policies were used in
China during its mortgage boom period 2014Q4-2016Q3, the purpose is to use our model as
an identification tool to quantify the eects on the mortgage market of these policies relative
to those of LTV policy for secondary houses.
     In the first alternative experiment, we change the MDR for primary houses by increasing
 1    from 0.7 to 0.8 for one period during which all households expect that such a policy
change would last forever. After one period,           1   returns to its initial steady state level.
This experiment replicates the practical change in LTV policy for primary houses during
2014Q4-2016Q3. When stimulating the transitional dynamics, we keep all other parameters
unchanged.
     Table D.1a reports the distributional impacts of this alternative policy across age-income
groups of households. There are two notable dierences from our benchmark results. First,
the share of young high income households in the total mortgage amount increases by 4.41%
and is the highest among all age-income groups, while the share declines or stays the same in
the data as well as in our benchmark model. The reason for this counterfactual dierence is
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         70

straightforward: young high income households are the group that is constrained for housing
services. An increase in the maximum LTV ratio for primary houses relaxes this borrowing
constraint and increases their leverage against the house value. This standard channel for a
change in the maximum LTV ratio to have an impact on housing demands, however, cannot
explain our empirical findings for the Chinese mortgage market documented in Section III.
  Second, non-housing consumption of middle-aged households with high incomes increases
in this counterfactual policy experiment on impact, while it falls in our benchmark model. An
increase in the maximum LTV ratio for primary houses relaxes the borrowing constraint of
middle-aged households with high income for housing services and non-housing consumption.
By contrast, an increase in the maximum LTV ratio for secondary houses does not allow
existing homeowners to increase their leverages when they trade up their primary houses.
Consequently, these households must reduce their consumption as in the data and shown in
our benchmark model.
  In the second alternative experiment, we reduce the deposit rate by 1.5% for one period
(the mortgage rate is also reduced proportionately). This policy change replicates the loos-
ening of monetary policy since 2014Q4 when the People's Bank of China (PBC) lowers the
deposit rate in the banking system. Following this alternative policy change, an increase of
the share of middle-aged high income households in the total mortgage amount is substan-
tially smaller than that in the benchmark model (cf. Tables D.1b and 12b), and non-housing
consumption of these households does not decline but rather increases over time because a
lower interest rate reduces the price of current consumption relative to future consumption.
  In summary, changes in these two alternative policies have a positive aggregate impact
on housing demands but exert distributional impacts on mortgage demands and consump-
tion over age-income groups of households that are at odds with our empirical findings. A
reduction in the MDR for secondary houses, therefore, is the main factor in explaining the
mortgage boom during 2014Q4-2016Q3 in China, as shown in our benchmark model.
                     AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                                  71

               Table D.1. Eects of two alternative policies on the mortgage market

                                            (a) Increasing    1


                                          Change (%) of the mortgage share
                                  Origination amount               Origination number

                              Low income High income Low income High income
                  Young           0.02             4.41             -0.59            0.78
               Middle-aged        -4.31            3.65             -1.57            3.68
                   Old            -0.56            -3.21            -0.29            -2.01

                                      (b) Reducing the interest rate

                                          Change (%) of the mortgage share
                                  Origination amount               Origination number

                              Low income High income Low income High income
                  Young           -1.35            -1.21            -6.28            0.44
               Middle-aged        0.06             2.25             0.32             4.90
                   Old            0.39             -0.14            0.27             0.34

Notes :    1   is the MDR for primary houses.

               Appendix E. Estimation of mortgage share against exposure

  Since our housing speculation exposure measure might be related to other city-level charac-
teristics, we regress the mortgage share changes by the middle-aged high-educated households
in a city against the city's speculative exposure measure.

      M ortgageShare1
                    c          M ortgageShare0
                                             c = +             EXPc +        controlsc + "c          (E.1)

We estimate equation (E.1) first using the eight quarters during which the LTV limits were
relaxed (2014Q4-2016Q3). The left side variable represents the average mortgage share of the
middle-aged high educated households during this period in city c (M ortgageSharec1 ) rela-
tive to the average mortgage share during the year 2013 in the same city (M ortgageSharec0 ).49
EXPc , the housing speculation exposure measure, is city c's fraction of mortgage by sec-
ondary homes in its total mortgage in 2013 divided by the standard deviation of the same
variable. We then estimate equation (E.1) for the period of 2016Q4-2018Q2, again using the
  49We    also run similar regressions with the dierence between the average mortgage shares during 2014Q4-
2016Q3 and that during 2013Q4-2014Q3 as the left side variable. The results are quantitatively very similar.
                AGGREGATE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF LTV POLICY                         72

       Table E.1. The Eect of Housing Policy on Middle-aged High-educated
       Mortgage Share Change

                               Mortgage Amount                Mortgage Number
                          Coe cient    S.E.    P Value Coe cient     S.E.    P Value

        2014Q4-2016Q3        2.529     0.952    0.010        2.111   0.909    0.024
        2016Q4-2018Q2       -0.294     1.117    0.793     -0.548     1.058    0.606

average mortgage share of the middle-aged high educated households during these quarters
relative to that during the year 2013. The control variables include, for each city, the pop-
ulation growth rate between 2011 and 2013, per capita income growth between 2011 and
2013, log of population in 2013 and log of income in 2013.
  Table E.1 presents the estimated coe cients on the housing speculation exposure variable,
along with the standard errors. For both mortgage amount and mortgage numbers, the esti-
mate coe cients for exposure are significantly positive during the policy period (first row),
suggesting that upon relaxation of LTV limits, the mortgage share of middle-aged high edu-
cated households increased faster for cities with higher exposure. The estimated coe cients
for 2014Q4-2016Q3 imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in the speculation exposure
leads to a 2.53% (2.11%) increase in mortgage amount (number) share of the middle-aged
high-educated households relative to the average level in 2013. However, the estimates for
the post-policy period (second row) are insignificant for both mortgage amount and number
shares of the middle-aged high educated households. Our results suggest that an important
channel for the relaxation of LTV limits to influence the mortgage demand of middle-aged
high-educated households is via their housing speculation.
