                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                         TWISTING THE DEMAND CURVE:
                   DIGITALIZATION AND THE OLDER WORKFORCE

                                         Erling Barth
                                       James C. Davis
                                     Richard B. Freeman
                                     Kristina McElheran

                                     Working Paper 28094
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28094


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020


This paper was presented at the October 2019 Cornell ILR Conference on "Models of Linked
Employer-Employee Data" celebrating Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis's 1999 AKM
decomposition model, and at the Stanford SIEPR "Working Longer and Retirement" conference,
also held in October 2019. Thanks to Nicole Fortin and Paul Oyer for comments. Any views
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure
Avoidance Officers have reviewed this information product for unauthorized disclosure of
confidential information and have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this
release. This research was performed at a Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC
Project Number 1571. (CBDRB-FY20-P1571-R8608). This research uses data from the Census
Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported
by the following National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and
ITR-0427889; we have received funding from the National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854;
The Norwegian Research Council Grant #280307, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, Grant
B-2017-9943-OWRR, the National Science Foundation Grant 1928616 FW-HTF-P (AIRL), and
grants from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Canadian Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Erling Barth, James C. Davis, Richard B. Freeman, and Kristina McElheran. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Twisting the Demand Curve: Digitalization and the Older Workforce
Erling Barth, James C. Davis, Richard B. Freeman, and Kristina McElheran
NBER Working Paper No. 28094
November 2020
JEL No. J0,J01,J11,J2,O0,O32,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses U.S. Census Bureau panel data that link firm software investment to worker
earnings. We regress the log of earnings of workers by age group on the software investment by
their employing firm. To unpack the potential causal factors for differential software effects by
age group we extend the AKM framework by including job-spell fixed effects that allow for a
correlation between the worker-firm match and age and by including time-varying firm effects
that allow for a correlation between wage-enhancing productivity shocks and software
investments. Within job-spell, software capital raises earnings at a rate that declines post age 50
to about zero after age 65. By contrast, the effects of non-IT equipment investment on earnings
increase for workers post age 50. The difference between the software and non-IT equipment
effects suggests that our results are attributable to the technology rather than to age-related
bargaining power. Our data further show that software capital increases the earnings of high-
wage workers relative to low-wage workers and the earnings in high-wage firms relative to low-
wage firms, and may thus widen earnings inequality within and across firms.

Erling Barth                                            Richard B. Freeman
Institute for Social Research                           NBER
P.O. Box 3233 Elisenberg                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
0208 Oslo                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
Norway                                                  and NBER
and NBER                                                freeman@nber.org
erling.barth@samfunnsforskning.no
                                                        Kristina McElheran
James C. Davis                                          University of Toronto
Boston Federal Statistical Research Data Center         105 St. George Street
National Bureau of Economic Research                    Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
1050 Massachusetts Ave.                                 k.mcelheran@utoronto.ca
Cambridge, MA 02138
james.c.davis@census.gov
1. Introduction
        From 1980 to 2019, spending on business software in the United States increased from
5% to 33% of spending on equipment, reflecting a far-reaching shift in investment from
machines run largely by humans to digital tools. Figure 1 shows that while investments in
equipment capital doubled from 1998 to 2017, investment in software capital quadrupled. The
digital nature of software allows it to spread more rapidly than physical capital, while the
movement of information and communication technology (ICT) to the cloud has increased the
speed with which firms can access the latest software. 2 The COVID-19 crisis is likely to
further accelerate these trends as firms seek more ways for humans to interact digitally rather
than in close physical contact.
        What workers do in this increasingly digital economy depends more and more on the
software with which they work. The vast majority of white-collar workers use software
regularly on their jobs and an increasing number of blue-collar workers do as well.
Improvements in software, some generated by advances in AI in recent years, go beyond
automating routine business activities to increasingly allow software programs to perform
non-routine cognitive work.3 U.S. Department of Labor data on software shows huge growth
in the number of categories of software "necessary" for different jobs. 4
        How do workers in different age groups fare as production becomes more digital? Will
digitalization of work be more complementary with older or prime workers or younger aged
workers? On the one side, young workers are more likely to have programming skills but
lack the "wisdom of experience". On the other side, as programs become increasingly
simplified, the skills of older workers may be more valuable. To answer the question, this
paper explores the relationship between business investments in software and the earnings of
workers of different age groups. We utilize firm and worker data collected by the U.S. Census
Bureau and made available for research in the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers. The
link between firm and worker allows us to study the labor market implications of the
burgeoning software investment within and across firms. Our focus is on differential effects
within firms of software investments on the earnings of workers of different ages who may be
more or less complementary to new technology. We also explore exit patterns within firms,
comparing the impacts of firm spending on software the impacts of firm spending on
traditional equipment.


2
  See Jin and McElheran (2017) and Byrne and Corrado (2017).
3
  See e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), Autor (2015), Dillender and Forsythe (2019), and Webb (2020).
4
  Hu and Freeman (2020).


3
         There are two competing views of how software might affect workers of different
ages. The first is that because younger persons are more familiar with new software than
older workers through programming and computer science courses in school and growing up
with the latest smart phone or game playing programs, they should complement new software
so that software spending will twist the demand curve for labor in favor of younger workers,
raising their wages and/or employment relative to that of older workers.
        The second view highlights that recent generations of software, with simplified user
interfaces and smarter back-end technology, reduce the specialized knowledge required to run
and interpret its output. 5 In that case, the main beneficiaries of software spending could be
older workers, whose other experience-based knowledge can complement the software. For
example, early users of statistical software packages benefited from knowledge of cutting-
edge programming and statistics to develop the best analyses but today's programming
modules, and machine learning algorithms perform those technical tasks so that the job for
workers is more to assess and communicate the meaning of results for the business, which
prime age or older workers presumably can do better than younger workers.
         Most work on skill-biased technical change has focused on differences between
workers in blue-collar versus white-collar occupations, or on workers who differ in years of
schooling, finding that computer use and ICT spending benefits skilled workers more than
less-skilled workers.6 A few studies use European data to examine the impact of new
technologies on workers of differing ages, with mixed results. 7 Gaining a clear view of
potential age- and skill-biased outcomes at a time of rapid digitalization will illuminate the
widening earnings inequality worldwide.
        Our paper assesses the relative impact of software on workers by age, with a novel
panel of employer-employee linked data from the U.S. for 2002 to 2014. It links data for firm
software and equipment investments from the Census Annual Capital Expenditure Survey


5
  Some evidence for this is found in the higher diffusion of touchscreens compared to a wide range of advanced
business technologies across the U.S. in recent years (Zolas et al. 2020).
6
  See e.g. Katz and Murphy 1992; Autor, Katz and Krueger 1998; Goldin and Katz 2009.
7
  In Norway, Schøne (2009) finds age bias related to computer use in cross-sectional comparisons, but not in
changes over time. Hægeland, Rønningen and Salvanes (2007) find that only the oldest male workers (above 60)
retire early in response to "extraordinary" changes in process technologies. In Germany, Battisti et al. (2020) and
Beckmann (2007) find evidence of age-biased technological change that may be somewhat dampened with
training. In France, ICT investment has been found to be age biased (Aubert et al. 2006), and may
disproportionately affect lower-skilled older workers (Behaghel and Greenan 2010, Behaghel et al. 2014).
Recent work using Dutch micro data also shows negative impacts for older workers due to automation (Bessen et
al. 2019). In contrast, a U.S.-based study using CPS data on computer use in the 80s and 90s (Weinberg 2004),
finds that computers complemented experienced workers who only completed high school; among college
graduates, computers complemented younger workers.


4
(ACES) with data on individual workers in each firm from the annual Longitudinal
Employment and Household Dynamics (LEHD) database. We use this detailed panel to
analyze the impact of firm investments in software on the earnings of workers by age and on
the exit/retirement behavior of older workers. By analyzing firm spending on software rather
than on the computer usage prevalent in previous studies, we highlight the importance of
modern applications that build on the waves of computer hardware and infrastructure
diffusion in prior studies. 8
        Our analysis extends the Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) AKM model that uses
detailed fixed effects to sweep out the impact of invariant characteristics of firms and
individuals to allow us to better identify the relationship between software and worker
earnings. We first augment the AKM model by including job-spell fixed effects, as in Barth,
Davis and Freeman (2018), to control for the particular match between a worker and a firm.
This may be especially important for identifying mechanisms related to worker age, as match
quality may change over the career of a worker. Next, we add time-varying firm effects, per
Lachowska, Mas, Raffaele and Woodbury (2020) and Engbom and Moser (2020), to address
the possibility that time-varying productivity shocks may be correlated with software
investments, 9 which would bias estimates that assumed firm fixed effects. This allows us to
identify differences in the impacts of time-varying firm-specific variables, such as software
investments, on different types of workers, such as age groups, within firms.
        The AKM framework is also central in our analyzing the extent to which software
investments tend to widen wage dispersion within firms. We leverage it to estimate individual
fixed effects for the entire labor market, which we then interact with observed software
investments. In this way, we unpack whether software represents a typical skill-biased
technical change or adds to a "polarization" of jobs within firms, whereby workers in the top
and the bottom of the occupational earnings distribution gain at the expense of the middle. 10


8
  Studies on PC use and labor market outcomes include Krueger (1993), Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003),
Schøne (2009), Autor and Dorn (2013), and Hershbein and Kahn (2018), among others. Forman, Goldfarb and
Greenstein (2012) document wage inequality related to internet use. Studies of the labor market impacts of
broadband is the focus of Akermann, Gaarder and Mogstad (2015) and Poliquin (2020). Complex software is
implicated in increased demand for non-routine cognitive workers in U.K. small businesses (Gaggl and Wright
2017) and reduced wage polarization within Chilean firms (Almeida, Fernandes and Viollaz 2020). A few recent
studies of how ICT affects the skill content of jobs include measures of modern software (Dillender and Forsythe
2019; Atalay et al. 2018; Webb 2020).
9
  For instance, complementarities between ICT investments and unobserved changes in organizational design and
management practices, observed in several studies (see e.g. Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw 2007, Bresnahan,
Brynjolfsson, and Hitt 2002, Brynjolfsson and McElheran 2019, Battisti et al. 2020), may have direct effects on
productivity and correlate with software investments.
10
   See e.g. Autor, et al (2003), Autor and Dorn (2013), Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenan 2014, and Harrigan,
Reshef and Toubal (2016).


5
Similarly, we use the AKM decomposition to estimate worker and firm fixed effects that
allow us to estimate the extent to which software investments increase earnings more in high-
wage firms, than in low-wage firms and for high wage compared to low wage workers. 11


2. Data
The primary independent variable in our analysis is software capital calculated using standard
perpetual inventory methods taken relative to workers in the firm. Beginning in 2002, the
Census Bureau's Annual Capital Expenditure Survey (ACES) ­ a nationally representative
annual survey of 50,000 firms 12 that collects firm expenditures on new and used structures
and equipment chargeable to asset accounts for which depreciation or amortization accounts
are ordinarily maintained ­ has asked respondents to report capital expenditures for computer
software developed or acquired as either prepackaged or vendor-customized for internal use.
Capitalized computer software expenditures consist of the cost of materials and services
directly related to the development or acquisition of software; payroll and payroll- related
costs for employees directly associated with software development; and interest costs incurred
while developing the software. 13 The survey covers all firms with at least 500 paid employees
with certainty and randomly selected smaller firms. The sample of firms that we use comes
primarily from the certainty sample because our measures of software capital stock are
derived from expenditures using standard perpetual inventory methods, 14 which rules out
most randomly selected smaller firms since they appear in the data set irregularly.
         The ACES data asks firms about spending on software that firms capitalize as
investment, which makes it comparable to other capital expenditures. This excludes software
spending that is deductible as an expense of production or intermediate purchase and thus
falls short of the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) estimate for private fixed
investment based on sales of software reported by producing firms. 15


11
   See e.g. Card, Heining and Kline 2013; Barth et al. 2016; Card et al. 2018; Song et al. 2019, and Cornwell,
Shmutte, and Scur (2019) for recent evidence on rising earnings inequality within and between firms as well as
potential causes.
12
   ACES was expanded from 45 to 50 thousand employer firms in 2016. The survey also includes data for 15 to
30 thousand non-employer firms per year that are not used in this study.
13
   Capitalized computer software is defined by the criteria in Statement of Position 98-1, Accounting for the Costs
of Computer Software Developed or Obtained for Internal Use, issued by American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants.
14
   As initial conditions for the entry year, the industry average shares of software investments of total investments
were combined with data on the initial gross value of assets. To accommodate for the shorter history and higher
growth of software investments, the initial levels of software capital shares were set to .5 of the share of
investments associated with software in each industry in the initial year.
15
   St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank FRED series B985RC1A027NBEA. As most software spending is expensed,
the capital data covers only about one-third of national investment in software. Appendix A describes a Bureau


6
        This distinction matters because expensed software typically represents routine
production costs similar to materials purchases (e.g., word processing and automated payroll
applications). In contrast, large custom software investments and capitalized purchased
software are likely to represent firm investments in innovation (e.g. Bessen and Righi 2020).
A useful example is the custom logistics software system built and maintained by Walmart.
These lumpy ICT investments ­ and the significant "co-invention" of the organizational
design and production processes that typically accompanies them (Bresnahan and Greenstein
1996, McElheran 2015) ­ are linked to significant productivity gains and shifts in skilled
labor and wages at the firm level. 16
        Our data links information on capitalized software investment, capital equipment
investment, firm employment, and sales to workers in the annual Longitudinal Employer-
Household Dynamics (LEHD) Employment History Files (EHF) data from 2002 to 2014 that
follow individual workers in each firm (Abowd, Haltiwanger and Lane 2004; Abowd et al.
2009; Vilhuber 2018). The EHF is derived from firm reports to state unemployment insurance
agencies for all employed workers. The LEHD EHF data contain the earnings of workers. We
use annualized earnings for a worker's main job, defined as the longest job across quarters
with the highest earnings. 17 Worker age comes from the LEHD Individual Characteristics File
(ICF), which obtains this from Social Security Number (SSN) applications to the Social
Security Administration (SSA). The ICF imputes the education of workers using reported
education from the 2000 decennial census. We construct shares of workers with different
levels of education at the firm level from the imputed ICF values. 18 In 2012, 14% of workers
in our sample have less than high school education, 26% have high school degrees, 31% have
some college or trade school, and 29% have a college degree. Our LEHD data cover 22 states


of Economic Analysis investigation of the issue. We have chosen to include only capitalized software
investments in our analysis, and leave the treatment of expensed items, available in the Information &
Communication Technology Survey (ICTS) for the years when it was conducted, to future exploration. Note that
the capital data capture a key shift in the nature of ICT investment in recent decades from computer hardware or
pre-packaged software towards firm-specific software.
16
   Recent work on automation and labor market outcomes emphasizes the importance of refined ICT measures to
avoid confounding technologies that automate different types of tasks (e.g., Acemoglu and Restrepo 2019,
Dillender and Forsythe 2019, Almeida et al. 2020). From 2002 on, ACES data has divided capitalized computer
software into prepackaged, vendor-customized and internally-developed (including payroll) sub-categories.
Estimating all of the equations in this paper using a software measure constructed as the sum of the first two sub-
categories of prepackaged and vendor-customized, gave results consistent with those based on the ACES
measure of total capitalized computer software. Given that firms are unlikely to change their internal accounting
practices from year to year, the ACES measure of capitalized software should capture changes in software
investment over time, particularly large-scale software investments that may impact outcomes for workers.
17
   Jobs with earnings less than half the federal minimum wage in 2002 are excluded.
18
   This version of imputed education is reasonable for estimating the education distribution of workers at the firm
but raises measurement error problems when if used for individual- level earnings specifications.


7
and the District of Columbia, representing half of the U.S. workforce in 2012, and appears
representative of the country as a whole. 19
        We group the 11.6 million workers in our samples by five-year age groups (20-24, 25-
29, 30-34, etc.). Each age group represents around 12% of the distribution of workers, except
for the three older groups, whose shares decline as workers exit the labor force. Workers aged
55-59 represent 9%, 60-64 year-old workers are 6%, and aged 65+ workers are 3% of the
sample, respectively.
        We work with two samples: (1) the full LEHD data for 23 states, which we use to run
an AKM decomposition to obtain quintiles of the individual and firm fixed effects for all
workers and firms in those states; and (2) an analysis sample, which contains all workers in
the 23 states working in firms in the ACES sample. Appendix B compares the two samples.
        If firms with differing software-capital-to-worker ratios hire workers in the same labor
market, then the distribution of worker attributes among the firms should be informative about
complementarities between software and worker attributes. 20 Accordingly, we examined the
composition of the work forces of firms with differing amounts of software capital per worker
and found three striking patterns.
        1) Large differences in the age composition of workers across firms with differing
software per worker. This is shown in Figure 2 in terms of the age group for firms in the
bottom quintile (Q1), median quintile (Q3), and top quintile (Q5) of software capital per
worker.21 Workers aged 20-29 are over-represented in the bottom quintile of software
intensity, suggesting that their labor skills make them more suitable employees for firms that
use less software. Workers in the 35-49 age group are over-represented in the top quintile of
software intensity firms, suggesting the opposite ­ that they have skills that complement
software. The share of workers in the aged 50-64 age group declines steeply from the top
quintile to the bottom quintile, and the oldest group, 65+, has the lowest representation in the
most software-intensive firms.


19
   The 23 approved states are AR, AZ, CA, CO, DC, DE, IA, IL, IN, KS, MD, ME, MT, ND, NE, NM, NV, OK,
PA, TN, TX, VA and WA. Average earnings for the workers in covered states is 2.7% higher than for the 28
uncovered states. Employment of workers 45 and older in the covered states is also half the total. We calculated
the 0.506 employment share of these states nationally, 0.501 older worker share, and worker average earnings
from the public use LEHD Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) V4.6.0 downloaded 5/24/2020.
20
   In fact, Brynjolfsson and Milgrom (2013) test for complementarities based on whether production inputs are
adopted together across firms with similar production functions (e.g.,).
21
   Note that there may be a lot of individual and firm demographics behind the age composition as well, see e.g.
Autor and Dorn (2009) who argue that "occupations will `get old' as their employment declines -- that is, the
mean age of an occupation's workforce will rise, "because older workers are less likely to leave declining
occupations, and younger workers will be hired into growing occupations." The same argument may apply to
firms, distorting effects related to skill complementarity in production unless estimated carefully.


8
        The finding that workers in the 35-49 age group appear more complementary with
software than younger and older workers is consistent with related work in France (Aubert,
Caroli and Roger 2006), Germany (Beckmann 2007) and Norway (Schøne 2009).
        2) Software-intensive firms have more employees and proportionately more educated
workers and higher labor productivity than others
         Table 1 shows average firm characteristics in 2012 by quintile of software intensity
across firms. The first line displays a large dispersion across firms in the logged software
capital per worker. Looking at the distribution of employment, we see that the more software-
intensive firms are larger. 22 Software-intensive firms also have more equipment per worker,
are older, and are more likely to have multiple establishments. The employment shares by
education groups show that firms with the greatest software intensity employ proportionately
more college-educated workers and fewer workers who have not completed high school. 23
        The last line in Table 1 shows that average revenue per worker in the top quintile of
software intensity is more than 30 times that in the bottom quintile of software intensity.
        3) Software-intensive firms employ workers with high individual fixed effects in
earnings and are themselves high-wage in terms of their firm fixed effects on earnings
        This result comes from the panel aspects of our data, which allows us to estimate the
AKM decomposition of labor earnings into worker-fixed effects and firm-fixed effects,
controlling for age and year effects, as detailed in the methodology section. Panel A of Figure
3 displays the results in terms of the average worker fixed effect.
        There is a strong positive correlation between the individual fixed effects from the
earnings regression and firm software intensity, indicating that software-intensive firms
disproportionately employ workers with attributes associated with higher earnings. The figure
also displays the average predicted value of the individual fixed effect, generated using
gender, education, and age-cohort as time invariant covariates and the residual unobserved
individual fixed effect. The positive slope between the individual fixed effects and software
intensity is due mainly to the unobserved part of workers' time-invariant characteristics.
         Panel B displays the result of the analogous calculation for firms. The slope linking
software intensity to the average firm fixed effect is steeper than the slope in Panel A, with a
gap between the bottom and the top quintile of more than 0.5 log points. Both the observed



22
  See Tambe and Hitt (2012), McElheran (2015) for evidence showing similar patterns.
23
   This is consistent with the relationship between ICT adoption and skilled labor found in prior work where skill
is measured in terms of formal education (e.g. Bresnahan et al. 2002).


9
part of the firm fixed effects (predicted using average firm and establishment employment,
firm age, and industry) and the unobserved part are positively related to software intensity.
         Several mechanisms might explain these observations: the effects of productivity-
enhancing software capital on demand for labor at different ages, selectivity of high software
investments from high wage firms, and selectivity of high wage workers into firms, all of
which may vary by the age of workers. To assess the impact of each mechanism we augment
the AKM model using the framework given next.


3. Framework
         Software capital can affect younger and older persons differently in three ways.
         First is through differences in the knowledge and skills of particular cohorts of
workers. Cohort effects evoke Johansen's (1959) "putty-clay" framework for physical capital.
When persons invest in human capital, they embody the technology/knowledge at that time
but tend to fall behind advances, which younger generations learn directly. To the extent that
software technologies change more rapidly than physical equipment, a rising share of
software in capital will twist demand for labor toward younger persons due to cohort effects. 24
         Second through aging. Aging changes the comparative advantage of workers to
undertake different tasks. Biological processes give the young an advantage in physical
strength, dexterity, and a short reaction time, while older persons may gain an advantage in
careful deliberations, collaboration, and the ability to combine information with experience. 25
The tasks workers do most productively are thus likely to change, as is the fit of their skills
with different types of firm investment. Firm investments in labor-saving physical equipment
such as robots are likely to twist demand against the young. 26 But, as noted in the
introduction, there are competing views of how software investments affect the productivity
of labor of differing age.
         Third is through the incentive to invest in knowledge that keeps pace. Older workers
may have more to gain from training to keep pace with new software packages because their
knowledge is of older vintage, but their greater distance from the technological frontier may
require higher investments in training. Most important, the shorter time remaining until

24
   Work on skill obsolescence dates back to Rosen (1975). Chari and Hopenhayn (1991) argue that new
technologies require vintage-specific skills, so any increase in the rate of technological change increases returns
for more-recent vintages and flattens the age-earnings profile.
25
   For instance, Paccagnella (2016) provides evidence that individuals replace declining standardized
proficiencies with other, more difficult-to measure, skills based on experience as they age.
26
   Recent work indicates that this is more difficult in contexts of rapid technological change and has been shifting
returns to experience in the U.S. in recent years (e.g., Deming and Noray, forthcoming).


10
retirement skews the investment decision to favor training the young (e.g., Friedberg 2003,
Behaghel and Greenan 2010).
       We analyze these issues in the framework of firms optimizing their use of labor in a
standard production function model. Consider the simple production function (ignoring
subscripts for firm j and time t):
                                         = K  S   

where Y is revenue,  is total factor productivity, K is capital (without software, but including
computer hardware capital), S is a measure of software capital, and  is efficiency units of
labor. Assuming that workers of different age groups are perfect substitutes, but with
potentially different productivities, efficiency units of labor is given by =
(   ), where g is the productivity of each age group, g.
       To investigate the extent to which software capital affects the relative productivity of
each type of labor, g, we assume that:  =  + 
                                               + 
                                                  , where g is an age-specific
productivity term, s=S/L and k=K/L are capital intensities, and 
                                                                 , =s,k, represents the
relative impact of software and equipment capital intensities on age group g. The marginal
productivity of labor of age g is given by:

                                  1- +  +  
                        (+ + -1)
             =    =  k s                 
                                 
Software capital per worker affects the productivity of labor of type g in two ways. First it
affects the average productivity of efficiency units of labor. In addition, it affects the relative
productivity of each age group of workers.  >0 suggests complementarity between the two
types of capital, while the effect of software on the efficiency units of labor differs between
                           
groups, and is given by  +  which may take any sign. A similar argument applies to
equipment capital. We discuss issues of normalization in the empirical implementation below.


Wage Determination
We allow for firm-specific wage determination, and consider a simple monopsony model (see
Manning, 2002; Card, Cardoso, Heining and Kline 2018). Let wg be the wage of age group g
                                                                              
in the firm. The labor supply facing each firm is given by Lg(wg), where           > 0.   Let  > 0
                                                                              

be the elasticity of labor supply facing the firm. Profits are given by:

                            () = ,  ,  () -    ( )



11
where w is the vector of wages. Profit maximization w.r.t wg gives:
                                               Y  +  +  
(1)                     =              =         
                                                      
                              1+                

Where m= is the "monopsony discount" of wages on marginal productivity. The assumption
that age groups are perfect substitutes implies that the marginal productivity of each group is
                                                               Y 
independent of its relative size, and we note that the term      
                                                                    is firm specific and common
                                                                

for all age groups within the firm.


4. Empirical Implementation
The age-specific wage in firm j at t,  , is given by equation (1). Let the wage of individual
i (of age group g), in firm j at time t, be given by  =  + +  .  =    +  is
an individual fixed component, including observables, Zi, such as gender and education, and
an unobserved fixed effect,  . X is a vector of time-varying individual characteristics, ij a
match specific component between the individual and firm.
       We represent the monopsony discount of group g in firm j at t by the decomposition
 =  + , where  is age specific ( determined by factors such as the relative size of each
age group in the labor market) and  is firm specific (determined by factors such as the
firm's position in the wage distribution across firms in the labor market). Adding an error
term, u, we obtain:
                          Y   
                        + ++ + + +    +   +                         
       (2)      =    
                                            .
                                 




Identification Within Job-Spell
We first estimate a log wage regression on the observed time-varying covariates, including
dummies for age groups, the interaction terms between age groups and the two measures of
capital (S and K), log of employment, year dummies, and a job-spell fixed effect:
       (3)      =   +  +  +   +  
                                   + (  + 
                                           ) +
( +  +  - 1) +  +  +  + 
The job-spell fixed effect,  =  +  +  , incorporates the AKM specification, with a
worker fixed effect,  , a firm fixed effect, j, and a match fixed effect, ij, related to the




12
specific match between firm and worker.27 We discuss the parameters absorbed by the job
fixed effects below.
        For each age group, g, we obtain the estimate for  
                                                            = (  + 
                                                                    ), which incorporates
the effect of capital on the labor productivity of the firm, as well as the group-specific
parameter. Even if we cannot identify the capital-specific parameters separately from the
group-specific parameters, we can identify the difference between the group-specific
parameters by taking the difference between the estimates for different age groups. Since the
firm specific term is constant across age groups, it drops out of the difference:  
                                                                                    -  
                                                                                        =
   
 -  .


Adding Time-Varying Firm Effects
We may write log wages given by (2) as:
                                  
(4)      =   +  +  +  +  +  +   +   +  where we add
a year specific time-varying firm effect that absorbs time-varying firm-specific factors:
(5)       =  +  +    +    + ( +  +  - 1) +
(1 -  ) -  

which includes both the unobserved productivity and monopsony discount, and the observable
time-varying firm-level covariates.
        In the job-spell fixed effect equation (3), firm-specific shocks to  and 
(deviations from their job-spell-specific means that are not captured by the common year
effect  ) are included in the error term, e. To the extent that such shocks are correlated with
investments in software or equipment, they will bias the within job-spell estimates. A similar
concern arises with regard to the unobserved time-varying efficiency units of labor,  .

Adding time-varying firm effects removes such biases.
        In equation (4), both   and  +  are observable time-varying individual
variables (as also g may vary over time within individual in the panel). The component
    
  +   varies between groups within the firm over time, and may be estimated
using interaction terms between age group and capital intensities. Estimating equation (4)
with time-varying firm effects effectively controls for both observable and unobservable wage
shocks that affect wages of every worker in the firm in any year. In particular, the time-


  may easily be decomposed into its three parts by defining the match effect as orthogonal to the individual
27

and firm effects (but not necessarily to the other covariates of the model) and appropriate normalizations.



13
varying firm effect includes two unobserved time-varying firm-specific terms:  and  that
represent temporal variation in the monopsony discount of the firm (i.e. market power or
bargaining power in the labor market) and potential temporal variation in the unobserved
productivity of the firm, respectively.
        The interpretation and identification of the time-varying firm effects and the job-spell
fixed effects require normalization. Excluding a reference year (t=0), i.e. the first year a firm
appears in the panel, from the  vector in the estimation, the job-spell fixed effects will
absorb the worker fixed effect, the firm fixed effect for the reference year, and the job-spell
fixed effect:  =  + 0 +  . The estimated time-varying firm effects will then be
defined in terms of the difference from the reference year:  =  - 0 .
        The last terms, 
                          for =S,K, represent the impact of software and equipment
capital of age group g, in addition to the overall effect absorbed by  . Again, we are not able
to separately identify the overall impact and the group-specific impact of capital without some
normalization. We thus normalize the overall efficiency of the firm to that of a base age
group, Lg=0, and exclude the interaction with the base group in the estimation of equation (4).
               
The parameters 0 of equation (4) should then be interpreted as a relative effect for age
group g compared to the base age group. 28


5. Results
Software Earnings Premiums by Age
        Figure 4 shows the estimated elasticity of individual earnings with respect to software
capital per worker, estimated for each age group in models that also control flexibly for
equipment capital by age group.29 The figure clearly shows a hump-shaped relationship by
age. High-wage industries are more software intensive, and within industries, high-wage firms
are more software intensive. This is visible in the figure by the downward shifts as additional
fixed effects are added to the model.
        The idea behind the AKM model is to control for systematic selection of both firms
and workers. For instance, high-wage workers may be more likely to work in high-wage
firms, and high-wage workers may be more likely to work in software-intensive firms,
conditional on the firm wage premium. Notably, this selection may also be systematically

28
   The parameters 0 
                      ( =k,s) are incorporated into   of the time-varying firm effect, and 0 + 0 is added into
the constant term of the equation.
29
   The models also include indicators for age groups interacted with gender, and controls for year, education, firm
and establishment size (employment), and firm age and firm age squared.


14
different by age group, as workers sort into different firms over their careers. Adding
dummies for both individuals and firms effectively controls for such selection.
        Our next step is to see how the estimated elasticities respond to the inclusion of such
controls. We go one step further and add job-spell fixed effects: indicators for the specific job-
spell of one particular worker in a particular firm, which comprise the individual fixed effect,
the firm fixed effect, and any match-specific fixed effect.
        The hump shape is retained when we estimate the elasticity of earnings with respect to
software capital per worker within job-spell. The first column of Table 2 reports the estimated
elasticity by age group. The model includes the same covariates as in Figure 4 (adjusted to
accommodate for collinearity with the fixed effects, e.g. by dropping indicators for education
and the linear term for firm age). Only the oldest workers (65+) have lower earnings in years
with higher software intensity. The largest earnings premiums associated with software capital
per worker accrue to workers in the 30-49 age range, with the highest elasticity for workers
between 35 and 39 years of age. Controlling for individual and match specific fixed effects in
addition to the firm fixed effect in Table 2 has a positive impact on the estimated coefficients
among the young (particularly below 30 years of age), and a negative impact on the
coefficients for older workers (from 40 years onwards), compared to the previous results from
Figure 4.


Bargaining Power or Differential Productivity Impact?
        The different effects estimated by age group suggests that software is complementary
to workers in the 30-49 age group, enhancing their productivity; but older workers appear to
gain less and even lose out when the use of software goes up. Is there another plausible
hypothesis for this? One alternative explanation could be that the productivity gains accrue to
all, but only workers in the middle of the age distribution are able to turn these productivity
gains into higher wages because they have greater bargaining power. The young may be
easily replaceable by other youth of similar qualifications, and the old may lack credible
alternatives outside of the firm.
        Comparing the age profiles of equipment capital to that of software capital provides a
way to explore this explanation for the hump shaped relation between software and earnings
by age. 30 Equipment capital, like software capital, should improve revenue per worker, so that
if differential bargaining power was the cause for the hump shape, we should find a similar

30
  We have experimented with measures of equipment capital excluding computer investments, and our main
results appear not to be sensitive to this change.


15
shape for the relation between earnings by age and equipment capital. Column 2 in Table 2
reports the profile for equipment capital per worker. Instead of the hump shape these data
show an almost linearly increasing elasticity of earnings with respect to equipment capital by
age group. It starts out with a negative elasticity for the young, and only workers above 45
years of age seem to gain from higher equipment capital, ending at almost 2 percent for the
oldest. These different patterns suggest that the strong decline in software elasticities by age
after 45, is not due to any general age-related bargaining power.
         Adding log sales per worker into the equation interacted with age groups provides
another test of a differential bargaining power by age group explanation for the software
result. Table 3 reports the results from such a regression model with job-spell fixed effects,
but with an added interaction term for log sales per worker. Conditional on the two capital
measures and log employment (both at the firm and establishment level), the coefficients for
log sales per worker shows lower coefficients for the young and the old but with negligible
elasticities. The coefficients and patterns of earnings premiums by age for the two capital
measures hardly change from those in Table 2. It appears that differential bargaining power by
age group does not contribute much to our estimated pattern.


High-Wage Workers and High-Wage Firms: Polarization or Skill Biased Tech Change
         To explore the extent to which investments in software capital benefit workers higher
or lower in the earnings distribution, we first use an AKM decomposition on the entire LEHD
sample, 31 and place each worker in quintiles of the distribution across individuals overall and
in quintiles of the distribution across firms 32 in our ACES sample. Following the AKM
terminology we refer to workers in the top (bottom) quintile among individual fixed effects as
high-wage (low-wage) workers, and to workers in firms in the top (bottom) quintile of the
firm fixed effects as workers in high-wage (low-wage) firms.
         Moving to our ACES sample, we estimate the log earnings equation including
software and equipment capital per worker, interacted with age groups as before, and add
interactions between the capital measures and quintiles of worker and firm fixed effects. The
results, displayed in Figure 5, 33 show that the elasticity of earnings with respect to software is

31
   This means all jobs in our sample of LEHD states are included, and not only those that are participants in the
ACES sample. The AKM decomposition is done after estimating a step one regression with job-spell fixed
effects, conditional on year fixed effects and age squared, and then a step two, regressing the job-spell fixed
effects on a dummy for each age measured at year 2000.
32
   The quintiles of both workers and firms fixed effects are calculated over all observations of workers in the
ACES sample of our LEHD states (approximately 161 million observations)
33
   Regression results available on request.


16
strongly increasing in the workers' rank in the distributions of both the individual and firm
fixed effects. The left panel shows the pattern across quintiles of individual fixed effects. The
lines are drawn for workers in the middle of the firm distribution: high-wage workers in
median firms display an elasticity of 3 percent, whereas low-wage workers in median firms
display an elasticity of 0.7 percent. The right panel shows the pattern across quintiles of firm
fixed effects. The pattern is similar: workers in high-wage firms display a much larger
elasticity than do workers in low-wage firms, suggesting that software investments are more
productive in high-productivity firms.
          Since the lines in each panel are drawn for median values (3rd quintile) in the other
panel, and the model is additive linear, the effects may be added together using the difference
from the median value from the other panel. For instance, high-wage workers in high-wage
firms display an elasticity of approximately 5 percent (0.03 + (0.032-0.012) = 0.05), while
low-wage workers in low-wage firms have an elasticity of approximately zero (0.007 +
(0.005-0.012) = 0).
          The estimated individual and firm effects may be decomposed into an observed and an
unobserved part. We estimate the fixed effect for individuals as a function of individual fixed
characteristics, such as the level of education and gender, and retain the residual. The patterns
for the quintiles of residual fixed effects are similar to the ones for the total fixed effects.
Thus, the pattern displayed in Figure 3 mainly arises from different elasticities for workers in
different quintiles in the distribution of the unobserved fixed effects. We similarly estimate
firm fixed effects as an observed part, due to industry, and an unobserved part. The pattern for
the quintiles of the residual fixed effects are similar, but attenuated compared to the pattern
displayed for the total fixed effects. The pattern in Figure 5 thus largely arises from
differences between quintiles in the distribution of the unobserved firm fixed effects.
          The pattern for equipment capital is quite the opposite. The first three quintiles of the
distributions across both individuals and firms display positive coefficients while the others
do not.
          The difference suggests that increased software share of investment is likely to raise
earnings inequality: high-wage workers in high-wage firms gain the most, whereas low-wage
workers in low-wage firms gain the least. As this pattern is conditional on the age profile of
the elasticity, we need to take the age-earnings profile into account when we consider the full
effects of software on inequality, but the substantial effect on high wage workers in high wage
firms tells most of the story.



17
Time-Varying Firm Effects
           A potential worry with the AKM model with firm fixed effects is possible correlations
between shocks in the error term and changes in software capital. One conceivable scenario
could be that the firm chooses increased software investments when it experiences a positive
shock in sales. This would be an endogenous response, possibly leading to a positive bias in
the estimated impact of software investments. If such shocks are correlated with the age
profile of the firm and its workers, for instance because they are more common in expanding
firms with a younger workforce, then the estimated age profiles could be biased as well.
           Another, related, concern is that much prior research points to the complementarities
between ICT investment and changes in organizational design and management practices (e.g.
Bartel et al. 2007, Bresnahan et al. 2002, Brynjolfsson and McElheran 2019, Battisti et al.
2020). Our data has no information on these shifts nor on possible changes in complementary
organizational capital (e.g., Saunders and Brynjolfsson 2016). This omission could lead us to
overestimate the productivity gains ­ and associated wage increases ­ associated with ICT
investment. Time-varying firm controls should absorb such effects.
           As outlined in the methodology section, we control for such firm-specific shocks, and
all other time- and firm-specific confounding factors, by adding a time varying firm effect to
the model. 34 We use the 25-49 years old as a reference group, and the coefficients obtained in
step 1 measure the difference between the elasticity of the particular age group and the
elasticity of the 25-49 years old. We find that the youngest workers (20-24 years old) have a
return to software capital which is .0056 lower than that of the reference group. We compare
this difference to the difference between the coefficients for the youngest group and the 25-49
years old in the fixed job-spell model, reported in Table 2. Using the average estimate for 25-
49 years old in the job-spell fixed effect model (0.0185), the difference is almost four times
larger: -0.0018 -- 0.0185 = -0.0203 compared to -0.0056 here. For older workers, on the other
hand, the differences from the 25-49 group are practically the same as in the job-spell model.
           The results for equipment capital are much less pronounced than in the job-spell
model. The return for the young is very similar to that of the reference group, and the increase
in the return for 50+ is much more modest that what we found in Table 2.
           We set the level of the elasticities for the reference group as outlined in the
methodology section by estimating the relationship between the firm-year effects estimated in
step 1 and the log of the two capital measures, using firm-year as the unit of observation.


34
     See Engbom and Moser (2020) and Lachowska et al (2020) on the identification of time- varying firm effects.


18
While the relative impact of capital intensity on different age groups within the firm,
estimated in step 1, uses time-varying firm effects, the second step is conducted with firm
fixed effects only. This means that the effect for the reference group, which determines the
level of the elasticities is identified with standard AKM fixed effects assumptions. 35 The last
two columns of Table 4 show the results. The reported coefficients represent the elasticities
for the reference age group (25-49 of age). The elasticities of 0.0293 and -0.0001 for software
and equipment respectively compare with the averages 36 of 0.0185 and -0.0031 in the job-
spell model from Table 2. The step 2 models include firm fixed effects and thus effectively
include controls for both individual and match effects, from step 1, and firm fixed effects
from step 2. For equipment capital, including time-varying firm effects changed the results
also for older workers. The average coefficient for the reference group in the fixed job-spell
model from Table 2 is -.0031. Compared to the job-spell model, the age profile of the
elasticity of equipment capital flattens out as firm year effects are included.
        Figure 6 compares the implied elasticities from step 1 and step 2 (Job+Firm_yr) to the
estimated elasticities from the job-spell model (Job FE). The difference in overall level arises
from the difference in the estimated step 2 coefficients to the average effects estimated for the
groups between 25 and 49 years of age. The pattern for the young and for the old arises from
adding the coefficients in step 1. For software, the pattern for the young differs between the
models, with a smaller decline in the firm-year model whereas the pattern for the old is much
the same, with a steady decline from 50 years of age. For equipment, when estimated with
firm-year effects, the earnings elasticity is small, and the age pattern less pronounced.
        The changing pattern between specifications for 20-24 year olds suggests a difference
in the bias from the fixed firm effect assumption between age groups. Such differences could
arise from heterogeneity in terms of the correlation between productivity shocks and software
investments across firms with different age profiles. Most likely, there is an over-
representation of young workers in certain segments of firms, per Figure 2, which shows them
primarily in low-software intensity firms. Many are likely to be students in non-career jobs in
low-skill firms, younger firms, and in low-wage firms. It may be that in these segments of the
labor market, the correlation between productivity shocks and software investments is more
negative, inducing a negative bias for the young in the job-spell specification.




35
 IV- or other methods in the step 2 regression, estimated at the firm-year level, could address this concern.
36
 Calculated from the averages of the coefficients for software and equipment for age groups 25-29, 30-34, 35-
39, 40-44, and 45-49 in Table 2.


19
Checking the Age Pattern in Exit Behavior
        Having established that older workers gain less in earnings than workers in the middle
of the age distribution from investments in software but gain more from investments in
equipment, we examine next the relation between the two forms of investment and workers
leaving their firm. If the two forms of investment have different effects on demand, we would
expect to see the exit behavior show the same relation. If software investment reduces
relative demand for older workers while equipment investment raises relative demand for
them, they should be more likely to leave firms with big software investments and stay with
firms with big equipment investments.
        In 2012, 21% of workers 45 and over exit their job, with one-third taking a new job at
another ACES firm within the 23 covered states. We treat the other 2/3rd as leaving the labor
force. 37 As exit is defined as exit from the ACES sample from the LEHD states, it is not a
clean measure of retirement from the labor force. Similarly, as our measure of job-to-job
moves is limited to mobility to another firm within the ACES sample, it is not a clean
measure of job-to-job moves. 38 While we cannot rule out bias arising from leakages out of
the sample in interpreting that exit as firm to firm or as firm to retirement/exit from labor
force, we fully measured the exits from the firms in the sample, which is enough to establish a
different response to software investments than to equipment investments.
        In the exit analysis we estimate a linear probability mobility of exit in the subsequent
period, conditional on the two forms of capital per worker interacted with age. Figure 7
shows a negative upward-sloping impact on exits for all age groups, approaching zero for the
65+ group for software. This pattern is consistent with the earnings gains that workers of
different ages obtain from software investments. Software investment tends to reduce exit, but
the magnitude of the effect diminishes with worker age. Job-to-job moves within the sample
states are positively impacted, also with an upward slope. One interpretation is that workers
become more attractive to other firms as software capital goes up, 39 and that older workers
take the options more often because they are not as generously rewarded from software



37
   The LEHD ICF national indicator of individuals' employment in any state can be used to separate exits into
those leaving the labor force versus those taking a new job. See Hahn, Hyatt, Janicki and Tibbets (2017) and
Hyatt, McEntarfer, Ueda and Zhang (2018) for details on using the LEHD data for job-to-job transitions.
38
   In the next version of this paper, exit and job-to-job mobility will be defined relative to employment in any
firm in any state. Because of the temporary closure of the RDC in connection with the Covid-19 virus, we have
not been able to undertake this exercise for the current version of this paper.
39
   This would be consistent with findings in Agrawal and Tambe (2016), which leverages linked employer-
employee data to provide evidence that IT investment associated with private equity acquisitions creates
transferable IT-related human capital.


20
capital in their current firms. 40 The pattern for equipment is opposite, in line with the
opposing patterns in earnings.


6. Conclusion and Discussion
        Combining data on software investments by firms with unemployment insurance
records on the age and earnings of workers, and using an AKM decomposition framework to
deal with econometric problems due to the potential impact of unobservable productivity on
firms investment in software and of unobservable individual characteristics of workers in
software intensive firms, we find that investments in software capital twist the demand curve
for labor toward workers 25-49 compared to older and younger workers. Specifically,
        1) Firm investments in software capital raise the earnings of workers aged 25-49 by an
elasticity of about 3 percent, but the earnings premium declines almost linearly from 50 years
of age through age 65 to essentially nothing for those 65 and older.
        2) Higher software capital is also associated with lower exits among workers, but
again with less impact on older workers. The share of employment of older workers does not
vary much among firms with differing investments in software while high investors in
software hire relatively fewer 20-24 year old workers.
        As best we can tell, the smaller gains for older workers from working with more
software capital is because their skills are less complementary to software technologies than
younger workers.
        3) The biggest beneficiaries of software investments among workers inside a firm are
those with high unobserved (fixed effects) earnings characteristics, whose wages are raised
more by software investments than other workers' wages.
        4) The biggest beneficiaries of software investments among workers across firms are
those in firms with high unobserved or observed time invariant (fixed effects) earnings
characteristics.
        Our analysis augments the AKM framework in two directions that may be useful in
other studies of worker-firm panel data. First, we added a match-specific term to the earnings
equation, by estimating the effects of software on earnings within job-spell. This effectively
removes a potential correlation between the match effects and age, which is important if


40
  The differential results for the oldest workers may be related to prior findings focused on training and firm-
specific human capital. Bartel et al. (2007) and Battisti et al. (2020) report complementarities between ICT and
on-the-job training. Workers in the top age group in our data may not have the runway to invest in sufficient
training or learning-by-doing with new software prior to retirement (Friedberg 2003), and prefer to stay where
firm-specific human capital is most valuable (e.g., Violante 2002).


21
workers' match improves over time in the labor market. Second, we added time-varying firm
fixed effects to the model. This allows us to estimate the relative impact of software on older
workers, relative to younger workers, with full control for time-varying productivity shocks or
changes to the bargaining power of workers.
       Overall, by raising earnings most for high-wage workers in the middle of the age
distribution within firms, and most for workers in high-wage firms, software investments tend
to increase earnings inequality. It is a form of skill-biased technical change that operates both
within and across firms.




22
REFERENCES

Abowd, J. M., J. Haltiwanger and J. Lane (2004). Integrated longitudinal employer-employee
  data for the United States. American Economic Review 94(2), 224­29.

Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz and D. N. Margolis (1999). High wage workers and high wage
  firms. Econometrica 67, 251­333.

Abowd, J. M., B. Stephens, L. Vilhuber, F. Andersson, K. L. McKinney, M. Roemer and S.
  Woodcock (2009). The LEHD infrastructure files and the creation of the quarterly
  workforce indicators. In T. Dunne, J. B. Jensen and M. J. Roberts (Eds.), Producer
  Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, 149­230. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
  Press.

Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: implications for
  employment and earnings. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor
  Economics Volume IV, 1043­1171. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2019) Automation and new tasks: How technology displaces
  and reinstates labor. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 33(2): 3-30.

Agrawal, A. and P. Tambe (2016). Private equity and workers' career paths: the role of
  technological change. Review of Financial Studies 29, 2455­89.

Ahituv, A. and J. Zeira (2011). Technical progress and early retirement. Economic Journal
  121, 171­93.

Akerman, A., I. Gaarder and M. Mogstad (2015). The skill complementarity of broadband
  internet. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1781­824.

Almeida, R. K., A. M. Fernandes and M. Viollaz (2020). Software adoption, employment
  composition, and the skill content of occupations in Chilean firms. Journal of Development
  Studies 56, 169­85.

Atalay, E., P. Phongthiengtham, S. Sotelo and D. Tannenbaum (2018). New technologies and
  the labor market. Journal of Monetary Economics 97, 48­67.

Aubert, P., E. Caroli and M. Roger (2006). New technologies, organisation and age: Firm-
  level evidence. Economic Journal 116, F73­F93.

Autor, D. H. (2015). Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace
automation. Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 3­30.

Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2009). This job is "getting old": Measuring changes in job
  opportunities using occupational age structure American Economic Review 99(2), 45-51.

Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
  the U.S. labor market. American Economic Review 103(5), 1553­97.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz and M. S. Kearney (2008). Trends in U.S. wage inequality: revising


23
     the revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 300­23.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz and A. B. Krueger (1998). Computing inequality: have computers
  changed the labor market? Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1169­213.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy and R. J. Murnane (2003). The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1279­333.

Bartel, A. P., C. Ichniowski and K. L. Shaw (2007). How does information technology really
  affect productivity? Plant-level comparisons of product innovation, process improvement
  and worker skills. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1721­1758.

Bartel, A. P. and N. Sicherman (1993). Technological change and retirement decisions of older
  workers, Journal of Labor Economics 11, 162­83.

Barth E., J.C. Davis and R. Freeman (2018). Augmenting the human capital earnings equation
  with measures of where people work, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol 36(S1): S71-S97.

Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis and R. Freeman (2016). It's where you work: increases in
  the dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the United States
  Journal of Labor Economics 34, S67­S97.

Battisti, M., C. Dustmann and U. Shonberg (2020). Technological and organizational change
  and the careers of workers. Working Paper, University of Glasgow.

Beckmann, M. (2007). Age-biased technological and organizational change: firm-level
  evidence and management implications. Discussion Paper 05/07,
  Wirtschaftswissenschaftliches Zentrum, University of Basel.

Behaghel, L., E. Caroli and M. Roger (2014). Age-biased technical and organizational change,
  training and employment prospects of older workers. Economica 81, 368­89.

Behaghel, L., and N. Greenan (2010). Training and age-biased technical change. Annals of
  Economics and Statistics 99/100, 317­42.

Bessen, J.E., M. Goos, A. Salomons, and W. van den Berge (2019) Automatic Reaction: What
  Happens to Workers at Firms that Automate? Boston Univ. School of Law, Law and
  Economics Research Paper No. 19-2 (2019). Available at
  https://scholarship.law.bu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1585&context=faculty_scholars
  hip.

Bessen, J. E. and C. Righi (2020) Information Technology and Firm Employment. Boston
  Univ. School of Law, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 19-6 (2019). Available at
  SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3371016 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3371016 .

Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2012). Americans Do
  IT Better: US Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle. American
  Economic Review 102(1): 167-201.

Bresnahan, Tim and Shane Greenstein (1996), Technical Progress and


24
     Co-Invention in Computing and in the Use of Computers. Brookings Papers on
     Economics Activity: Microeconomics, 1-78.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt (1996). Paradox Lost? Firm-level Evidence on the Returns
  to Information Systems Spending. Management
  Science 42(4): 541-558.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt (2003). Computing Productivity: Firm-level Evidence.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4): 793-808.

Bresnahan, T. F., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. M. Hitt (2002). Information technology, workplace
  organization, and the demand for skilled labor: firm-level evidence. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 117, 339­76.

Byrne, D. and C. Corrado (2017). ICT services and their prices: what do they tell us about
  productivity and technology? Working Paper, Finance and Economics Discussion Series
  2017-015, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.

Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014). The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
  Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.

Brynjolfsson, E. and K. McElheran (2019). Data in action: data-driven decision making and
  predictive analytics in U.S. manufacturing. Working Paper 3422397, University of Toronto.

Brynjolfsson, E. and P. Milgrom P (2013) Complementarity in organizations. The Handbook
   of Organizational Economics. 11-55.

Card, D., A.R. Cardoso, J. Heining and P. Kline (2018). Firms and labor market inequality:
   Evidence and some theory Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1): S13-S70.

Card, D., J. Heining and P. Kline (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of West
   German wage inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128: 967­1015.

Chari, V. V. and H. Hopenhayn, H. (1991) Vintage human capital, growth, and the diffusion of
   new technology, Journal of political Economy 99(6), 1142­1165.

Cornwell, C., I.M. Shmutte, and D. Scur (2019). "Building a Productive Workforce: The Role
  of Structured Management Practices," CEP Discussion Papers dp1644, Centre for
  Economic Performance, LSE.

Deming, D.J. and K.L. Noray. (forthcoming) Earnings dynamics, changing job skills, and
  STEM careers. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Dillender, M. and E. Forsythe (2019). Computerization of white collar jobs. Working Paper
   19-310, W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Engbom, N. and C. Moser (2020). Firm pay dynamics. Working Paper 3531250, SSRN.

Forman, C., A. Goldfarb and S. Greenstein (2012). The internet and local wages: a puzzle.
  American Economic Review 102(1), 556­75.


25
Friedberg, L. (2003). The impact of technological change on older workers: evidence from
   data on computer use. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56, 511­29.

Gaggl, Paul, and Greg C. Wright (2017). A Short-Run View of What Computers
  Do: Evidence from a UK Tax Incentive. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 9 (3): 262-94.

Goldin, C. D. and L. F. Katz (2009). The Race between Education and Technology.
  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Grimm, B. T., B. R. Moulton and D. B. Wasshausen (2005). Information-processing
  equipment and software in the national accounts. In C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger and D.
  Sichel (Eds.), Measuring Capital in the New Economy, 363­402. Chicago, IL: University
  of Chicago Press.

Hægeland, T., D. Rønningen and K. G. Salvanes (2007). Adapt or withdraw? Evidence on
  technological changes and early retirement using matched worker-firm data. Discussion
  Paper 509, Research Department, Statistics Norway.

Hahn, J., H. Hyatt, H. P. Janicki and S. Tibbets (2017). Job-to-job flows and earnings growth.
  American Economic Review 107(5), 358­63.

Harrigan, J, Reshef A and Toubal F (2016) The march of the techies: Technology, trade, and
  job polarization in france, 1994-2007. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper.

Hershbein, B. and L. B. Kahn (2018). Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological
  change? Evidence from vacancy postings. American Economic Review 108(7), 1737­72.

Hu, X. and R. B. Freeman (2020). Software usage by occupation. Unpublished.

Hyatt, H., E. McEntarfer, K. Ueda and A. Zhang (2018). Interstate migration and employer-to-
  employer transitions in the U.S.: new evidence from administrative records data.
  Demography 55, 2161­80.

Jin, W. and K. McElheran (2017). Economies before scale: learning, survival and performance
   of young plants in the age of cloud computing. Working Paper 3112901, SSRN.

Johansen, L. (1959) Substitution versus fixed production coefficients in the theory of
   economic growth: a synthesis. Econometrica 27, 157­76.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and
  demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 35­78.

Krueger, A. B. (1993). How computers have changed the wage structure: evidence from
  microdata, 1984­1989. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 33­60.

Lachowska M., A. Mas, D. S. Raffaele and S. A. Woodbury (2020). Do firm effects drift?
  Working Paper 26653, National Bureau of Economic Research.


26
Manning, Alan (2003) Monopsony in Motion, Princeton University Press

McElheran, K. (2015). Do market leaders lead in business process innovation? The case(s) of
  e-business adoption. Management Science 61, 1197­216.

Michaels, G., A. Natraj, and J. Van Reenen (2014). Has ICT polarized skill demand? Evidence
  from eleven countries over twenty-five years. Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 60­
  77.

Moylan, C. E. (2001). Estimation of software in the U.S. national income and product
  accounts: new developments. Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of
  Commerce.

Paccagnella, M. (2016) "Age, Ageing and Skills: Results from the Survey of Adult Skills",
   OECD Education Working Papers, No. 132, OECD Publishing, Paris.
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jm0q1n38lvc-en

Poliquin, C. W. (2020). The wage and inequality impacts of broadband internet. Working
  Paper, University of California, Los Angeles.

Rosen, S. (1975) Measuring the obsolescence of knowledge, Education, income, and human
       behavior, NBER, pp. 199­232.

Reed, K. (2015). Capitalization of software development costs, Memorandum 201549024,
  Office of Chief Counsel, Internal Revenue Service.

Saunders, A. and E. Brynjolfsson (2016). Valuing IT-related intangible assets. MIS Quarterly
  40, 83­110.

Schøne, P. (2009). New technologies, new work practices, and the age structure of the
  workers: correlates or causality? Journal of Population Economics 22, 803­26.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. von Wachter (2019). Firming Up
  Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1): 1-50.

Syverson, C. (2011) What determines productivity? Journal of Economic Literature 49, 326­
  65.

Tambe, P. and L. M. Hitt (2012). The productivity of information technology investments:
  new evidence from IT labor data. Information Systems Research 23, 599­617.

Van Reenen, John (1996). The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages
  and Innovation in a Panel of UK Companies. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  111(1): 195-226.

Vilhuber, L. (2018). LEHD infrastructure S2014 files in the FSRDC. Working Paper CES-
   WP-18-27, Census Center for Economic Studies.

Violante, G. L. (2002). Technological acceleration, skill transferability, and the rise in residual


27
     inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 297­338.

Webb, M. (2020). The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market. Working Paper,
  Stanford University.

Weinberg, B. A. (2004). Experience and technology adoption, Discussion Paper 1051,
  Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.

Zolas, N., Z. Kroff, E. Brynjolfsson, K. McElheran, D. Beede, C. Buffington, N. Goldschlag,
   L. Foster, and E. Dinlersoz (2020). Advanced technology adoption and use by U.S. firms:
   Evidence from the Annual Business Survey. Mimeo, Center for Economic Studies, U.S.
   Census Bureau.




28
Figure 1. Investments in Software and Equipment




Source: St Louis Fed, Fred, software is BEA Account Code: B985RC, equipment is BEA
Y033RC




29
Figure 2. Employment Share by Age Group. By Quintiles of Software Intensity.


        .14
        .12
        .1
        .08
        .06
        .04




              20-24   25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44 45-49   50-54   55-59   60-64   65+
                                                   Age
                                               Q1            Q3
                                               Q5


Note: Average employment share across firms by quintile of software capital per workers. Q1
is the first quintile, Q3 the median quintile, and Q5 the top quintile. Employment weighted
quintiles. Cross sectional data, 23 LEHD states in 2012.




30
Figure 3. Average Worker and Firm Fixed Effects by Quintile of Software per Worker




                                                                  .5
                .5




                                                                  .4
                .4




                                                                  .3
                .3




                                                                  .2
                .2




                                                                  .1
                .1




                                                                  0
                0




                                                                  -.1
                -.1




                      Q1    Q2           Q3        Q4       Q5          Q1    Q2           Q3        Q4       Q5
                           Quintile Software per Workers                     Quintile Software per Workers

                           Worker FE               Worker FE Xb               Firm FE                 Firm FE Xb
                           Worker FE res                                      Firm FE res




Note: Average worker and firm fixed effects across firms by quintile of software per worker.
Q1 is the first quintile, Q3 the median quintile, and Q5 the top quintile. Employment weighted
quintiles. Worker and firm fixed effects are first estimated from an AKM decomposition on the
whole labor market of the LEHD states, controlling for worker age, age squared, and years of
observation. Next, "Worker (Firm) FE res" is the residual, and "Worker (Firm) FE Xb" the
predicted value, of the worker (firm) fixed effects regressed on time invariant covariates such
as education, gender, and cohort (industry, average firm and establishment size, and firm age),
see section 5 below.




31
Figure 4. Software Elasticity of Earnings by Age Group. FE: Region + Industry + Firm
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.05




         20-24   25-29   30-34   35-39    40-44 45-49   50-54   55-59   60-64   65+
                                            Age group

                                         Region         Industry
                                         Firm


Note: Dependent variable: Log Earnings. The figure shows the coefficients for log software
capital per worker interacted with ten age groups. The models control flexibly also for
equipment capital by age group, and include controls for age group×gender, year dummies,
three dummies for level of education, log firm employment, log establishment employment,
firm age, and firm age squared. Region, industry, and firm fixed effects are added successively.




32
Figure 5. Earnings Elasticities by Quintiles of Individual and Firm Fixed Effects.
     .03




                                                      .03
     .02




                                                      .02
     .01




                                                      .01
     0




                                                      0
     -.01




                                                      -.01
     -.02




                                                      -.02




            Q1   Q2          Q3          Q4      Q5          Q1   Q2          Q3        Q4      Q5
                   Quintile Individual FE                              Quintile Firm FE

                 Software                Equipment                Software              Equipment




Note: The figure shows the elasticity of earnings with respect to the two types of capital,
estimated by quintiles of individual (left panel) and firm (right panel) fixed effects. The firm
and individual fixed effects displayed along the x-axis are estimated on all workers in the
economy (LEHD states), but the quintiles are calculated on our ACES sample. The model also
allows for separate age effects, and includes the same covariates as in Figure 4 above. Estimated
with job-spell fixed effects. The effects are calculated for a worker between 35 and 39 years of
age, and placed in quintile 3 (median) of the other panel (i.e. the elasticity for high-wage
workers is calculated for a worker in a median firm).




33
Figure 6. Elasticities estimated with and without time-varying firm effects.

                                                 Software
     .03
     .02




                                                                                             Job FE
     .01




                                                                                             Job+Firm_yr
     0
     -.01




                 20-24   25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44 45-49   50-54   55-59   60-64   65+
                                                   Age group


                                                 Equipment
     .02
     .01




                                                                                             Job FE
     0




                                                                                             Job+Firm_yr
     -.02 -.01




                 20-24   25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44 45-49   50-54   55-59   60-64   65+
                                                   Age group




Note: Dependent variable: ln Earnings. The Job FE models show coefficients from Table 2,
estimated with job-spell fixed effects. The Job+Firm_yr models show coefficients from step 1
and step 2 of Table 4, where time-varying firm effects are added in a step 1.




34
Figure 7. Exit and job-to-job mobility patterns for older workers (45+). Estimated coefficients
for sofware and equipment by age.



                                Exit                                     Job-to-Job Move
     .03




                                                        .03
     .02




                                                        .02
     .01




                                                        .01
     0




                                                        0
     -.01




                                                        -.01




            45-49   50-54     55-59     60-64     65+          45-49   50-54     55-59     60-64     65+
                            Age group                                          Age group
                     Software             Equipment                     Software             Equipment




Note: The figure shows the estimated coefficients by age for software capital per worker and
equipment capital per worker in regressions of exit and job-to-job mobility. Dependent
variables: Exit is measured as the last year an individual is observed in our ACES sample (set
to missing the last year of our panel). Job-to-Job Move is measured as the last year an individual
is observed in a firm, conditional on being employed in our ACES sample next year (set to
missing the last year of our panel). The analysis includes individuals older than 44 years of age
only. The linear probability models include job-spell fixed effects, age groups interacted with
gender, log firm and establishment employment, firm age squared, and year dummies.




35
Table 1. Firm Characteristics by Quintile of Software Intensity
                                    All        Q1        Q2        Q3       Q4       Q5
 Log Software/Worker                1.35      0.01      0.32      1.01     1.89      3.5
 Log Equipment/Worker               3.38      0.54      2.66      3.87     4.47     5.36
 Log Firm employment                6.40      5.90      6.44      6.33     6.55     6.77
 Firm Age                          27.22     20.73      26.54     28.95    30.00    29.89
 Multi-unit Firm                    0.70      0.50      0.68      0.69     0.77     0.84
 Log Sales/Worker                   4.72      2.57      4.34      5.08     5.50     6.10
 Less than high school              0.14      0.20      0.16      0.15     0.12     0.09
 High School                        0.26      0.28      0.27      0.27     0.25     0.22
 Some College                       0.31      0.30      0.31      0.32     0.32     0.30
 College education                  0.29      0.22      0.26      0.27     0.31     0.39


Note: The quintiles of software capital per worker are calculated over observations of firms
(education shares over workers). Cross sectional data, 23 LEHD states in 2012.




36
Table 2. Earnings Elasticities by Age. Dependent variable: log Earnings, Job-spell FE
                                          Elasticity of Earnings with respect to
                                   Software Intensity                 Equipment Intensity
 20-24                                   -0.0018                           -0.0143***
                                        (0.0027)                            (0.0017)
 25-29                                 0.0118***                           -0.0078***
                                        (0.0022)                            (0.0015)
 30-34                                 0.0199***                           -0.0063***
                                        (0.0018)                            (0.0014)
 35-39                                 0.0221***                           -0.0040**
                                        (0.0016)                            (0.0014)
 40-44                                 0.0210***                             -0.0007
                                        (0.0015)                            (0.0012)
 45-49                                 0.0179***                             0.0031*
                                        (0.0014)                            (0.0012)
 50-55                                 0.0143***                           0.0075***
                                        (0.0014)                            (0.0013)
 55-59                                 0.0088***                           0.0123***
                                        (0.0014)                            (0.0015)
 60-65                                   0.0034*                           0.0153***
                                        (0.0016)                            (0.0017)
 65 +                                  -0.0067***                          0.0186***
                                        (0.0019)                            (0.0020)
 Job-spell effects                                         Yes
 Adj. R squared                                           0.862
 N                                                      1.61e+08
Note: Estimated elasticities of earnings (standard errors) with respect to software and equipment
capital per worker for each age group, both estimated from the same model with job-spell fixed
effects. All capital variables are measured per worker in logs. The model also includes controls
for age group×gender, year dummies, log firm employment, log establishment employment,
and firm age squared. Standard errors clustered by firm-year.




37
Table 3. Earnings Elasticities by Age. Dependent variable: log Earnings
                                     Elasticity of earnings with respect to
                          Sales per worker          Software intensity Equipment intensity
 20-24                       -0.0012***                  -0.0009              -0.0139***
                              (0.0003)                   (0.0027)              (0.0017)
 25-29                       0.0009***                 0.0121***              -0.0084***
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0022)              (0.0015)
 30-34                       0.0017***                 0.0199***              -0.0072***
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0018)              (0.0015)
 35-39                       0.0018***                 0.0221***              -0.0049***
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0016)              (0.0014)
 40-44                       0.0019***                 0.0210***               -0.0016
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0015)              (0.0012)
 45-49                       0.0017***                 0.0179***               0.0024*
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0014)              (0.0012)
 50-55                       0.0016***                 0.0142***              0.0069***
                              (0.0002)                   (0.0014)              (0.0013)
 55-59                       0.0013***                 0.0088***              0.0119***
                              (0.0003)                   (0.0014)              (0.0015)
 60-65                       0.0012***                   0.0033*              0.0151***
                              (0.0003)                   (0.0016)              (0.0017)
 65 +                          0.0003                  -0.0066***             0.0188***
                              (0.0004)                   (0.0019)              (0.0020)
 Job-spell effects                                    Yes
 R squared                                           0.862
 N                                                 1.61e+08
Note: The table shows estimated earnings elasticities by age group, estimated from the same
model with job-spell fixed effects. All variables measured per worker in logs. The model also
includes controls for age group×gender, year dummies, log firm employment, log establishment
employment, and firm age squared. Standard errors clustered by firm-year.




38
Table 4. Earnings elasticities from different job-spell FE models.
                                   Step 1                                   Step 2
Unit of obs.                Individuals x year                            Firm x year
Dep. Var.                        Ln Earnings                Firm-year fixed effects from step 1
Fixed eff.                   Job + Firm-year                                 Firm
Elasticity with
respect to        Software intensity Equipment intensity    Software int.       Equipment int.
20-24                -0.0056***             0.0019***
                      (0.0002)                (0.0001)
25-49                                                        0.0293***               -0.0001
                                                               (0.0009)              (0.0007)
50-55                -0.0056***             0.0026***
                      (0.0001)                (0.0001)
55-59                -0.0106***             0.0039***
                      (0.0001)                (0.0001)
60-65                -0.0154***             0.0031***
                      (0.0002)                (0.0002)


65 +                  -0.0239***               0.0032***
                        (0.0002)                (0.0002)
R squared                           0.857                                   0.560
N                                  1.32e+08                               2.10e+05
Note: Step 1 model: Unit of observations: Individuals. Dependent variable: ln Earnings. The
model also includes controls for age group X gender, job-spell fixed effects and year specific
firm effects. Step 2 model: Unit of observation: Firms. Dependent variable: Firm X year fixed
effects from step 1. The model also includes year dummies, log firm employment, log
establishment employment, firm age squared, and firm fixed effects.




39
 Appendix A: Relation between ACES capital investment in software and total software
                                    spending

        There is a striking difference between aggregate ACES national totals for capitalized
software investment and all software investment reported in the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) for private fixed investment.41 The NIPA data show about three times the
spending as the ACES data. Part of the aggregate difference is that NIPA includes investment
by government and farms that are excluded by ACES, which surveys non-farm private firms.
From the BEA 2012 benchmark input-output tables, this is approximately 6% of software
expenditures. In addition, another 21% is accounted for by software exports. But most of the
difference between the two series occurs because firms report most software expenditures as
direct purchase of intermediate inputs rather than as capitalized investment. The ACES
Information & Communication Technology Survey (ICTS), available for some years and now
discontinued, asked respondents for expensed software expenditures. ICTS noncapitalized
software reporting accounts for 25-35% of the NIPA figures depending on the year. Thus, in
summary for 2013, ACES capitalized software expenditures represent 32% of the NIPA
figures, ICTS noncapitalized software 28%, and from the BEA input-output tables, exports
approximately another 21%, and agriculture and government approximately 6%. There
remains a difference of 14%, potentially due to the differences in measurement approaches as
discussed below. Another potential difference could be related to the treatment of software as
an intermediate material input. An example of this would be when a computer laptop vendor
bundles the operating system as part of the hardware product sold. The operating system is
purchased from a software supplier and embedded into the hardware product for resale. These
material inputs would not be reported by firms in the ACES nor ICTS survey.
        Grimm, Moulton and Wasshausen (2005) and Moylan (2001) describe the way the
ACES and NIPA differ in the sources of their estimate. ACES is a "demand-side" survey of
firms' capital expenditures. 42 NIPA uses a commodity-flow "supply-side" approach that trace
commodities from their domestic production and imports to their final purchase. A software
producing firm would report all of its sales as software without distinguishing between
purchases that a customer might capitalize and those that it would expense. Because IRS
regulations allow firms to treat smaller expenditures that could be capitalized as expenses,
many choose to expense them. According to Grimm et al (2005) "Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) regulations allow for low-value items (under $17,500 for 1998) that fit the criteria for
capital investment to be expensed. It is possible that much software falls into this category
and that ACES respondents follow IRS guidelines when determining what is a capital
investment" ... (suggesting) "that capital expenditures for software are significantly
understated in the ACES estimates." Moylan notes that "For software expenditures to be
capitalized, firms must view these expenditures as significant and they must have a useful life
of more than one year. Annual site licenses are expensed, but multi-year licenses should be
capitalized. Firms decide for themselves what is maintenance and what is a major
improvement that requires capitalization." In 2015 the IRS issued a Chief Counsel Advice
(CCA) related to the tax treatment of software development costs (Reed, 2015). This
summarized that software purchase and customization are capitalized, and internal software
development costs are deductible as current expenses. In this CCA guidance however, IRS
also cautioned that some taxpayers were improperly expensing all software costs.
        Another difference between ACES and NIPA data is how they treat internally
developed software. Since 2002, ACES breaks out a category of internally-developed
capitalized computer software, but there is substantial non-response for this item. This is
41
     St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank FRED series B985RC1A027NBEA.
42
     BEA uses ACES data to allocate by industry its total investment and investment by type of asset estimates.


40
consistent with Moylan's (2001) summary that "almost no own-account software is
capitalized, while some prepackaged and custom software are capitalized. Firms not in the
business of producing software for commercial sale view own-account expenditures as an
expense." and "Although in theory, prepackaged software purchases with a useful life of at
least one year should be capitalized, most are treated as an expense. For example, a Fortune
500 firm said that its policy was to expense all single software purchases of $250 or less, as
well as all site licenses or combined purchases that are less than $10,000." Grimm et al (2005)
and Moylan (2001) conclude that the software investments firms elect not to capitalize on
their books can explain a substantial proportion of the differences between the NIPA and
ACES estimates.

                                         Appendix B:

       There are some differences between the full LEHD data for 23 states used to run an
AKM decomposition for all workers and firms in those states and our analysis sample that
includes all workers in the 23 LEHD states with jobs in firms in the ACES sample. In the
analysis sample we have 11.6 million workers in 2012 employed in approximately 16,000
ACES firms that represent a 20% share of all LEHD workers in our 23 covered states. Our
sample of ACES firms are older ­ 27 years in business on average ­ and 70% are multi-
location firms in 2012; average headcount is 600 employees per firm.
       Linked to our samples, in 2012 the average worker's employer had $112,000 in sales
per worker, $29,400/worker in capital equipment (excluding software), and $3,800 in
software capital stock per worker.




41
