                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SOCIAL POSITION AND FAIRNESS VIEWS

                                    Kristoffer B. Hvidberg
                                        Claus Kreiner
                                     Stefanie Stantcheva

                                     Working Paper 28099
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28099


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Beatrice Ferrario, Leonardo D'Amico, Ida Maria Hartmann and Isabel Skak Olufsen
for excellent research assistance. We are also grateful for comments at seminars and by
particpants in the Deaton workshop on Attitudes Towards Inequality in October 2020. We thank
Ingvild Almås, Richard Blundell, Ernst Fehr, Andreas Peichl, and Bertil Tunggoden for feedback
and suggestions. The activities of CEBI are financed by the Danish National Research
Foundation. The use of the data for this project complies with Danish legislation
(persondataforordningen, forordning 2016/679 om persondatabeskyttelse.) and has been approved
by the The Danish Data Protection Agency (file number 514-0018/2018-2000 at University of
Copenhagen). The project includes a randomized information treatment and was preregistered in
the AER RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0003923). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kristoffer B. Hvidberg, Claus Kreiner, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Position and Fairness Views
Kristoffer B. Hvidberg, Claus Kreiner, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 28099
November 2020
JEL No. D1,D63,D8,H20,H31

                                          ABSTRACT

How well do people know their social position relative to others in society and how does their
position shape their views on the fairness of unequal outcomes? We provide new answers to these
long-standing questions by combining survey-elicited perceptions on income positions and
fairness views for a large, representative sample of prime-age people in Denmark with
administrative data on their actual income positions, income histories, life events, and reference
groups. This enables us to compare the income and perceived income positions reported by the
respondents (in the survey) to the actual numbers (obtained from their tax returns) and to study
social positions relative to many reference groups. These groups are others from the same cohort,
co-workers in the same firm or sector, former schoolmates, neighbors or people living in the same
municipality, or people with same education levels. We also show how changes in social position
affect fairness views by exploiting the past changes in social positions of respondents, quasi-
experimental real-life events (unemployment, health shocks, or promotions) that shift social
positions, as well as randomized information treatments that show people their actual social
positions. Our three main findings are: First, people underestimate the degree of inequality by
believing that others are closer to themselves than they really are, yet misperceptions are not that
large. Second, fairness views on inequality covary strongly -- and more than political views --
with the current social positions of individuals. Multiple pieces of evidence point to a causal
relationship. Third, people view inequality within their education group and within co-workers to
be most unfair, but in these same dimensions people underestimate the degree of inequality most
and lower-income people strongly overestimate their own positions.

Kristoffer B. Hvidberg                           Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen and CEBI                Littauer Center 232
Øster Farimagsgade 5                             Harvard University
DK-1353 Copenhagen K                             Cambridge, MA 02138
Denmark                                          and NBER
kristoffer.balle.hvidberg@econ.ku.dk             sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu

Claus Kreiner
Department of Economics
University of Copenhagen and CEBI
Øster Farimagsgade 5
Building 35
DK-1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
ctk@econ.ku.dk
1       Introduction
People's relative positions in society can affect their views on a range of issues. A long stand-
ing literature on social status, economic decision-making, and subjective well-being shows that
people care about their social position, consumption and income relative to others (Duesenberry,
1949; Easterlin, 1974, 1995; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004). In theory, relative income and in-
come positions are also important for fairness considerations and redistribution policy (Boskin and
Sheshinski, 1978; Meltzer and Richard, 1981; B´  enabou and Ok, 2001; Alesina and Angeletos, 2005).
But how well do people actually know the income of peers in their social circles or reference groups
and their own position relative to these peers? How do they view (un)fairness of inequality within
different types of reference groups? Are they better or less informed about inequality and social
position where it matters the most? And to what extent do their views on fairness of inequality
depend on their own social position?
     To answer these questions, we leverage a unique data combination, linking survey data on
perceptions of social position and fairness views of a large, representative sample of prime-age
people in Denmark to detailed administrative data on their true income positions, income histories,
life events, and income distributions of several of their "reference" groups. These many distinct
reference groups ­ in which we ask people to rank themselves ­ include people from the same cohort
and of the same sex, living in the same municipality, having the same education level, or working
in the same sector ("large reference groups"), as well as neighbors, co-workers in the same firm,
family members, and former schoolmates ("small reference groups").
     This link of survey and administrative data enables us to verify the correspondence between
respondents' reported income (in the survey) and actual income (on their tax returns) and how well
people rank themselves in these various reference groups. It also allows us to study the relationship
between social position and fairness views and how changes in social position over the life course and
changes due to shocks (unemployment, hospitalization, disability, or promotions) affect views on
inequality, fairness, and policy. We also show how a randomized treatment informing individuals'
of their true positions within reference groups shape these views. Our unique combination of
subjective and objective information on individuals and our methodology have several advantages
that we describe in our comparison to earlier work in Section 1.1.
     Our results can be grouped into three main sets of findings. First, we show that respondents
systematically believe the income levels of others are closer to their own income level than they
really are, but, nevertheless, misperceptions are generally not large. Lower-income respondents tend
to underestimate both the median income level and the 95th percentile level of their cohort, while
higher-income respondents tend to overestimate these levels. Yet, at most income positions in the
distribution, the average perception is within 5% of the actual median and within 10% of the actual
95th percentile.1 The most striking misperception is that people at the very top of the distribution
(above the 95th percentile) overestimate the 95th percentile by 50%. Thus, respondents who are
themselves in the top of the distribution tend to believe that some other people in the cohort have
much higher income than they actually have.
     The literature normally focuses on the perception of the respondent's own position, but this
may exaggerate how inaccurate people are. Consistent with the systematic misperceptions of the
distribution, we find that lower-income respondents believe they are higher up in the distribu-
tion than they really are, while higher-income respondents believe they are ranked lower. These
    1
    Around one half of all respondents correctly perceive the median income level in their cohort within a 10% error
band, which is a high level of awareness when compared to 70% reporting their own income correctly within the same
tolerance band.


                                                         1
systematic misperceptions of own position seem large at first glance, but they are in fact mainly
due to a mean-reversion error pattern when asking about positions (which are bounded between
1 and 100). Indeed, people in the top of the distribution cannot overestimate their rank, while
people in the bottom cannot underestimate it. This implies that perceived rank positions are not
uniformly distributed like actual rank positions. By ranking the respondents by their perceived
positions, thereby creating a uniform rank distribution of perceptions and removing the mechanical
mean-reversion, we demonstrate that perceived and actual ranking line up almost perfectly. Put
differently, people who are ranked lowest also perceive to be ranked lowest. We also find that
respondents with higher levels of education, conditional on actual income position, are generally
more knowledgeable about the distribution (i.e., its P50 and P95) and their own position within
the distribution.
    Second, fairness views on inequality strongly depend on the current social positions of individ-
uals, with multiple pieces of evidence pointing to a causal relationship. Fairness views are more
strongly correlated with current social positions than with historical social positions going back in
time. By contrast, political attitudes are more strongly correlated with respondents' past social
positions and even with the social position of their parents when they were growing up. The per-
ceived role of effort versus luck for inequality is most strongly correlated with current position, but
also somewhat with past positions.
    Our quasi-experimental evidence looks at the effects of negative shocks (unemployment spells,
hospitalization episodes, or disability) and positive shocks (promotions at work), conditional on
a detailed array of individual-level controls, starting social position, and pre-existing (i.e., past)
political views. It shows that the perceived fairness of inequality significantly declines with negative
income shocks and increases with positive income shocks.2
    In our experimental part, the information treatment informs half of the sample about their
actual social position before eliciting their fairness views on inequality. The results show that those
who overestimated their position change their fairness views and the effects of the information
treatment is of the same magnitude as the original correlation, but of opposite sign. Thus, when
we move people's perceived position by correcting their misperceptions, their fairness views move
as well. In line with the overall correlation patterns, political views do not react much to the
information treatment and do not react to most of the real-life shocks, while the perceptions on
the role of effort vs luck respond more than political attitudes, but less so than fairness views.
    Third, people view inequality within peers working in the same sector or with same education
level as more unfair than inequality among peers of the same age, or same sex, or living in the same
municipality. Yet, it is exactly for these reference groups that respondents generally underestimate
the degree of inequality most and within which lower-income people strongly overestimate their
own positions. More precisely, for all reference groups, respondents perceive quite accurately the
median income level, but they systematically underestimate percentile 95 of their co-workers and
of people with same education level. Lower-ranked individuals overestimate their social position, in
particular within their education group and within their sector. For example, people at percentile 20
within co-workers perceive on average they are well above percentile 40, while people at percentile
20 within their municipality believe they are around percentile 30. This pattern also holds if we
look at smaller groups, namely co-workers within firms instead of within sector and if we look at
neighbors instead of people living in the same municipality.
    In contrast to this major difference in fairness views across the reference groups, the differences
   2
     Although this additional analysis is only meant to be suggestive, if we view these shocks as shifters of today's
social position and use them as instruments, we find that the effects of social position on fairness views are of the
same magnitude as the raw correlation between fairness and social position.


                                                         2
are less pronounced in perceptions on the role of effort versus luck for inequality within reference
groups.
    We also show that respondents perceive their social positions relative to former schoolmates
surprisingly well; perceive their positions relative to siblings very well, but far from perfect; and
have very little idea about the former social positions of their parents when they were in their
prime-age. Finally, the conclusion that people tend to believe others are closer to themselves than
they really are also applies when people make perceptions about positions within the different
reference groups.
    To sum up, on average, individuals seem well-aware of their social positions, and the positions
are important for their fairness views on inequality. Moving up the social ladder makes people
more tolerant of inequality, while moving down makes them less tolerant of inequality. By contrast,
political views seem more stable. Respondents perceive inequality to be most unfair among people
with same education level and working in the same sector. These are also the reference groups in
which lower-income people overestimate their position the most and within which respondents in
general underestimate inequality most.

1.1   Related Literature
One of our key contributions is to elicit and compare peoples' perceptions of social positions across a
large set of reference groups that vary by domain, size and proximity and to show the relationship to
fairness views of inequality within the reference groups. Related to our results on perceived position
within co-workers in the same firm, recent papers have analyzed the impacts on satisfaction and
effort of within-firm or within-employer wage differences (Card et al., 2012; Cullen and Perez-
Truglia, 2018a,b; Baker et al., 2019).
    Our second contribution is made possible by the unique combination of evidence using in-
formation on individual income histories back in time, randomized information treatments, and
quasi-experimental shocks to social positions to establish the link between social position and fair-
ness views. Key to our results is that we link survey information on peoples' perceptions and
attitudes with their real-life outcomes from administrative records. A few recent studies have com-
bined subjective information from surveys with objective information from administrative records
(Alm° as et al., 2017; Kreiner et al., 2019; Andersen and Leth-Petersen, 2020; Epper et al., 2020).
Karadja et al. (2017) also merge survey data and administrative data to check the reported income
of respondents against actual income. We are able to go further by using the administrative data
to obtain information on income histories, life events and reference groups of the respondents so as
to be able to draw a more precise picture of what drives views on fairness.
    We are able to relate fairness views to the detailed past individual economic histories, going back
up to 20 years, and to the experiences of specific shocks ­ both positive and negative. Related to
the role of past history, Roth and Wohlfart (2018) and Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) have looked
at the implications of living or growing up in different environments on taste for redistribution.
    Our information experiment suggests that the strong correlation between misperceptions of
social position and fairness reflects a causal relationship. Kuziemko et al. (2015) show respondents
information on the actual distribution of income in the U.S. and where they rank based on self-
reported income in the survey, but are unable to study how it relates to misperceptions. Cruces et al.
(2013) find that those who overestimate their position tend to demand higher levels of redistribution
when informed about their true position. Conversely, Karadja et al. (2017) show that those who
underestimated their position demand less redistribution. Fehr et al. (2019) provide information
about position in both the national and international distribution and find that only demand for


                                                  3
national redistribution decreases with national relative income. Perez-Truglia (2020) studies a
natural experiment in Norway that made tax records easily accessible online and thus incomes
visible to everyone. He finds that the transparency about income substantially increased the gap
in happiness and life satisfaction between higher and lower income individuals, which is consistent
with our findings that those who realize they are ranked lower perceive inequality as more unfair.
    In contrast to most of the existing literature on people's perceived ranking, we find that people
are well informed about social positions and we are able to show this for many different reference
groups. Using face-to-face interviews in Argentina, Cruces et al. (2013) find a mean-reversion
pattern, similar to the one presented in this paper, with a significant share of poorer households
placing themselves higher up in the income distribution while richer households underestimate
their rank. Using mail surveys in Sweden, Karadja et al. (2017) find that a majority of surveyed
individuals misperceive their position in the income distribution and believe that they are poorer,
relative to others, than they actually are. Fehr et al. (2019) find that German respondents are
misinformed about their positions in both the global (i.e., worldwide) income distribution and in
the national income distribution.
    We believe the high accuracy of perceptions we detect is due to a number of methodological
advances: We use a well-defined concept of income, by asking respondents in the survey about
income as it appears on their last tax return and their corresponding perceptions about income
positions. This allows us to distinguish misperceptions of social position from misreporting or
misperception of own income. To make the elicitation procedure as precise as possible, we use
video instructions with illustration of people on income ladders to explain the task and the concept
of income positions, and a corresponding graphical interface where respondents report percentile
levels (median, "P50", and 95th percentile, "P95"), and their own positions in the distribution. By
eliciting peoples' perceptions of the income distribution (median and 95th percentile), we disentan-
gle possible perceptions along those dimensions from misperceptions of one's position. We focus on
people's position relative to peers of their cohort, which neutralizes large differences due to life cycle
effects. This is arguably a better measure of social position and more relevant for fairness concerns
than thinking about position relative to people of all ages at a given point in calendar time.3 Our
sample is an order of magnitude larger than existing studies, which implies that we can provide
very precise evidence. Finally, but equally important, we demonstrate how large misperceptions
arise when asking people about their own social position because of a mean-reversion error pattern
in the elicitation and use a simple method to filter out this type of systematic errors.
    Our paper is also related to empirical work documenting that people care about relative income
and that their social positions shapes their well-being (Easterlin, 2001; Easterlin et al., 2010; Clark
and Oswald, 1996). Luttmer (2005) shows that holding own income constant, self-reported happi-
ness declines as one's neighbors' income increases. Ferrer-i Carbonell (2005) finds that one's income
relative to that of a reference group is a determinant of happiness and well-being as important as
own income using a large German panel.4 Kuziemko et al. (2014) highlight the role for "last-place
aversion," a particular form of relative position concerns whereby individuals particularly fear being
ranked last. Charit´ e et al. (2015) point out the importance of reference points, while we highlight
   3
     This is important since income varies a lot over the life cycle. If we look at the overall income distribution, not
by cohort, then small changes in the definition of the relevant reference/age group (adults, working population, total
population including youth and retirees) have large effects on the percentiles of the distributions wherein people are
asked to rank themselves.
   4
     In the General Social Survey, McBride (2001) show that relative income effects matter in individual subjective
well-being assessments, but less so at lower income levels. This echoes the findings in the US of Dynan and Ravina
(2007) who show that relative concerns become an issue only after an individual has attained a certain rank in the
income distribution.


                                                           4
the need to consider specific reference groups. Fisman et al. (2020) show that people care about
inequality in a non-linear way relative to their own position, putting weight both on their nearest
neighbors and on the top of the distribution.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our survey, the administrative
data, and our sample. Section 3 analyzes respondents' perceptions and misperceptions about the
distributions of income and their own position in various reference groups. Section 4 studies the
relationship between perceived social position and fairness views. Section 5 offers some concluding
remarks.



2        Data Collection, Survey Design and Administrative Data
2.1        Survey Sample and Link to Administrative Data
Target Sample: Assisted by Statistics Denmark, we conducted a large-scale survey in February
and March 2019 where we sent out survey invitations to a random sample of 50,100 Danish-
born respondents with birth years from 1969 to 1973. Statistics Denmark randomly selected a
representative sample from the five cohorts aged 45 to 49 at the time of the survey. At this age,
people are well into their careers, no longer enrolled in formal education, but still quite far away
from retirement. A large share of their lifetime permanent income is likely already realized. We
excluded immigrants because we ask people about histories, schoolmates, and parental positions
which are only available for Danish-born respondents.
Survey Method: Our survey method is original and leverages an official channel of communica-
tion of the Danish public authorities with citizens. The invitations were sent out through the secure
website "Digital Post," normally used to receive and read mail from public authorities. Typical
communications through this mailbox are from public institutions, such as the tax or health author-
ities, but also from private companies, for instance salary statements from employers or account
statements from banks. 91.3% of the Danish population who are more than 15 years old are regis-
tered users of "Digital Post".5 The use of this official channel of communication, together with the
University of Copenhagen's stamp likely increased the credibility of our survey and experiment,
and of the information provided to respondents, which sets this setting apart from lower-stakes
survey environments.
    To incentivize respondents, they were told that those who completed the full survey would be
enrolled in a lottery for 100 gift cards with a value of 1,000 DKK (US$ 150) each to be used in
more than 150 chains of stores in Denmark. The average time for completion of the survey was
33 minutes with a median time of 25 minutes (the full distribution of time spent on the survey
can be seen in Appendix Figure A-1). Responses were linked by Statistics Denmark to the register
data using social security number, which ensures a unique match. The relatively high incentives
combined with the use of the official Digital Post channel are perhaps the reason we are able to
sample extensively from the top of the Danish income distribution, a group that is typically very
hard to reach with standard survey methods.
Testing for Selection into the Survey and Attrition: In our unique setting, thanks to the
register data, we can analyze selection into the survey since we know all the same characteristics of
those respondents who chose not to participate and who were sent an invitation, as well as those
    5
        https://digst.dk/it-loesninger/digital-post/om-loesningen/tal-og-statistik-om-digital-post/


                                                             5
          Table 1: Summary Statistics: Sample Compared to Population
                                        Analysis      Started        Full population              Full
                                        sample        survey       (excl. immigrants)          population
                                          (1)           (2)                 (3)                   (4)
    Demographics
     Male                                  0.51          0.47                0.51                   0.50
     Age                                   47.0          47.0                47.0                   47.0
     Married                               0.63          0.61                0.57                   0.58
     Immigrant                             0.00          0.00                0.00                   0.13
     Descendant                            0.00          0.00                0.01                   0.00

    Income Position
      Income position                      64.2          59.6                53.3                   50.5
      Bottom 50%                           0.29          0.36                0.46                   0.50
      Middle 40%                           0.54          0.50                0.43                   0.40
      Top 10%                              0.17          0.14                0.11                   0.10

    Education
     Primary education                     0.08          0.10                0.16                   0.17
     Upper secondary edu.                  0.06          0.06                0.05                   0.06
     Vocational education                  0.31          0.34                0.39                   0.38
     Short cycle higher edu.               0.09          0.08                0.07                   0.07
     Bachelor programs                     0.27          0.26                0.20                   0.20
     Masters programs                      0.19          0.17                0.13                   0.13

    Socio Economic Status
     Self-employed                         0.04          0.04                0.06                   0.06
     Employee                              0.90          0.87                0.80                   0.77
     Unemployed                            0.01          0.02                0.02                   0.02
     Not in work force                     0.05          0.07                0.12                   0.14
     Private Sector                        0.66          0.66                0.66                   0.66

    Regions
     Copenhagen                            0.31          0.30                0.30                   0.32
     Sealand                               0.16          0.16                0.16                   0.15
     Southern Denmark                      0.21          0.21                0.21                   0.21
     Middle Jutland                        0.23          0.23                0.23                   0.22
     North Jutland                         0.09          0.09                0.10                   0.10

    Parents' Income
     Mother's income position              53.1          52.1                50.5                   50.2
     Father's income position              53.3          52.4                50.8                   50.5
    Observations                           9415         13686               339231                 389863

Notes: Full Population is the full Danish population born between 1969 and 1973. Full population (excl. immigrants )
is the population our contact sample was drawn from. This sample was provided by Statistics Denmark and is the
full population excluding immigrants. Started survey are the respondents who started the survey. Analysis sample
are respondents who completed the survey and are used in the analysis. All variables are indicator variables, except
for the income positions.

                                                         6
who were not sent an invitation. Table 1 shows summary statistics for our sample of people who
received an invitation and completed the survey (column 1), and compares it to the characteristics
of those who received an invitation to participate and started the survey, regardless of whether
they completed it or not (column 2), the characteristics of the full Danish-born population in these
cohorts, excluding non-Danish born people (column 3) and the full population in these cohorts,
including immigrants (column 4). Our invitee group ­ people who received an invitation to partici-
pate, regardless of whether they did start the survey or not ­ is almost perfectly identical to the full
Danish-born population excluding immigrants (column 3) in these cohorts, as should be the case
given that they were randomly drawn from this group by Statistics Denmark (not shown here). The
final analysis sample of respondents who completed the survey on average has somewhat higher
income and education levels than the full target population in column 3, but is representative in
terms of region of residence, age, and gender. Compared to other surveys, the top of the income
distribution is very well-represented. People from the top five percent of the income distribution
make up almost 8% of our analysis sample. For more detail on this, Figure A-2 shows the share of
responses coming from each income percentile of the population.
     Out of the 50,100 people invited from the population 13,686 clicked on the personal link in
the invitation (column 2) and 10,089 completed the survey. After dropping respondents for whom
reported birth year or sex do not match the register data (19), who spent less than ten minutes
answering the survey (50), who reported monthly income instead of yearly or did not report their
income in entire thousand DKK (343), had zero or negative income according to the register data
or missing background register data (61) or who skipped one of our key questions (201), we have
9,415 respondents in total (column 1). The hit rate, i.e., the share of those invited to click on the
survey is reasonably high when contacting a representative sample of new potential respondents
that have never expressed a particular interest in taking surveys, and in contrast to online surveys
that contact panels of respondents who have already signed up for participating in surveys.6
     A completion rate of 74% (=10,089/13,686) may seem low at first sight, but it has a natural
explanation. Our invitees are not people who have signed up to survey panels in order to take
surveys as is the case in other settings. As explained above, potential respondents receive an
invitation through the official Digital Post, which probably leads many to click on the survey link
to figure out what this is about. Once people realize it is a research survey they are not obliged
to answer and they have to report personal information some of them drop out. In regular survey
settings where respondents have signed up to receive survey links, those not interested do not even
click on the link to start with as there is no element of surprise for them. In our case this will
appear as attrition, while in other settings, we will never get to see who did not click on the survey
link to start with.
     Table A-1 highlights which characteristics predict the drop out rate and at which point re-
spondents drop out. Conditional on not being incluced in in the analysis sample, 20% dropout
at the consent page or are screened out and 33% occur where respondents report their income.
78% of dropouts occur before the treatment with only 4% dropping out after the treatment. This
means that attrition is not selectively driven by the treatment, as confirmed by the insignificant
coefficient on treatment status. Men, non-married, higher-income and more educated respondents
are less likely to drop out of the analysis.
  6
   For comparison, a recent study in Denmark invited people by ordinary mail and obtained a response rate of 13%
(Epper et al., 2020).




                                                       7
2.2    Survey Outline
The survey consists of eight blocks of questions and is available in full in Appendix A-2.1.
    The Consent block, asks for consent to use the responses of the respondent in accordance with
the General Data Protection Regulation of the European Union.
    The Background & Political Views block contains questions on birth year, gender, educational
level and sector of employment, which are later used to inform respondents about their positions
relative to other people in the same large reference groups (see Table 2 for a definition of each ref-
erence group). We also ask about voting behavior and attitudes about economic policy in two ways:

   "Which party did you vote for in the last general election (in 2015)? [10 parties; Other; Did
not vote; Do not wish to answer]"

  "How would you describe your attitude towards economic policy? [Very left-wing; Left-wing;
Moderate; Right-wing; Very right-wing]"

    The Income block asks about the income of the respondent in 2017 and includes wage in-
come, self-employment income and taxable income transfers and benefits (see a screenshot of the
exact formulation in Figure A-3). We ask separately about salary and fees, net income from self-
employment, and unemployment benefits, pension benefits (disability) and other public transfers.
The sum of the components appears on the screen. The breakdown of total income into smaller
parts is done to help people report the correct income and to highlight that self-employment income
and public transfers are included in total income. Respondents are informed that it is important
to report the income correctly and that they can see the amounts on their annual tax statement
(available online). We ask about income as it appears on the tax statement to base the analysis
on a well-defined income concept where we know the true income from the register data. To avoid
making the survey too complicated and time consuming, we exclude capital income, deductions
and tax payments.7 With a few exceptions, salaries, fees, UI benefits, pension benefits and public
transfers are all third-party reported to the tax agency and prepopulated on the tax return, while
self-employment income is self-reported. Tax evasion is in general low in Denmark and close to nil
on third-party reported income components (Kleven et al., 2011).
    The Perceptions block, elicits people's perceptions about the median (hereafter, P50), the 95th
percentile (hereafter, P95) and their own position in the distribution of each of the five large
reference groups. The block starts with a video that uses a ladder and 100 stick people to explain
the different positions in the income distribution. It states, for instance, that the P50 is the income
level for which 50% have a lower income and 50% have a higher income. The full script for and link
to the video is in Appendix A-2.2. After this video, we elicit respondents' perception of the P50 and
P95 incomes for their cohort (see figure A-5). We then ask the respondents to use a horizontal slider
to indicate their perceived P50 and P95 income levels for their municipality, education group, gender
group, and sector (see Figure A-6). Respondents are subsequently prompted to place themselves
within each of the five large reference groups using a vertical slider next to the illustrative ladder that
was also used in the explanatory video (see A-7). We also ask respondents about their parents'
   7
    The average (median) of our narrow income concept relative to total income, as calculated by Statistics Denmark,
across individuals in our sample is 96.0% (98.5%). Total income includes capital income, but not imputed value of
housing and interest deductions. In Appendix figure A-4, we show that the income positions based on total income
plotted against positions based on narrow income lies almost perfectly on a 45 degree line. That is also the case
if we use the Statistics Denmark measuere of disposable income, which includes imputed value of housing, interest
deductions and tax payments.


                                                         8
                         Table 2: Definition of Reference Groups
 Reference group           Definition

 Large reference groups
    Cohort                 People born the same year

     Gender                People born the same year with the same gender

     Municipality          People born the same year currently living in the same municipality

                           People born the same year with the same level of education:
                           basic school, upper secondary education, vocational education and
     Educational level
                           training, short cycle higher education, bachelor degree and master
                           or PhD degree. We use the Danish DISCED education classification,
                           which follows the international education classification ISCED.

                           People born the same year and working in the same sector:
                           Construction, real estate, business services, finance and insurance,
     Sector of work
                           trade and transport, manufacturing, information and communication,
                           culture, agriculture, public work. We use the Danish Sector Codes DB07,
                           which is a sub-classification of the NACE classifications of the EU.

 Small reference groups
                           People born the same year who went to the same school the
     Schoolmates
                           year they turned 15

                           People working in the same workplace. We define a workplace as a
     Co-workers            single address entity, e.g. for a firm with multiple locations, each
                           location is a separate workplace

                           For people living in an apartment, the neighbors are people from age
     Neighbors             25 to 65 who live in the same stairwell. For people living in a house,
                           the neighbors are people from age 25 to 65 who live on the same road




positions in the income distribution of all the parents of the other people in their cohort and
to compare their own income to that of their sibling(s). For neighbors, co-workers, and former
schoolmates, we first asked the respondent about the perceived number of individuals in these
reference group (denoted by N) and then asked them to report their perceived income position on
a horizontal slider going from 1 to N (see e.g. Figure A-8 for the co-workers question).
    The Treatment block is presented for the treatment group at this point in the survey and for
the control group at the very end of the survey (so that it does not affect any of their answers).
Based on the respondents' earlier answers to the questions in the background and income blocks, we
interactively calculate their true positions in each of the five large reference groups. The treatment
reminds people which position they thought they were in, shows them their actual position and
highlights how much higher or lower they are in the distribution compared to where they thought


                                                  9
they were. Figure 1 shows an English version of the treatment page for two fictitious respondents,
one with a positive misperception of their own position within their cohort, and one with a negative
one. Appendix Table A-2 shows that the treatment and control groups are balanced in terms of
observable respondent characteristics.
    The Outcomes block, asks about views on fairness of inequality within the cohort or within the
(large) reference groups of the respondent, and also about the role of effort versus luck, political
attitudes and a few other outcomes. The main questions are:

    "Do you think that it is fair or unfair on a scale from 1 to 7 that there are differences in income
among people born the same year as you within the following reference groups that you are a part
of yourself ?"

    "Now, think about people born the same year as you within your reference groups (see below).
Indicate on a scale from 1 to 7 for each reference group to what extent you think differences in
income are caused by differences in peoples' efforts in life or caused by differences in luck?"

   "Which party would you vote for if there was a general election today? [11 parties; Other; Do
not wish to answer]"

   The Conclusion block asks respondents how much attention they devoted to the survey and
whether they thought it was left- or right-wing biased. 81% of respondents say they think the
survey is neutral, 14% say the survey is left-wing biased and 5% say it's right-wing biased.

2.3    Response Quality
Figure 2 shows that the reported incomes in the survey match well with the actual incomes on tax
returns. Figure 2a shows the distribution of the difference between reported and actual income.
The average percentage difference is less than 0.5%, more than 25% of the respondents report an
income that deviates less than 1% from their actual income and for 71% of the respondents the
deviation is less than 10%.8 We see a small spike at a reported income 8-9% below actual income.
Respondents are asked to report their income including labour-market contribution,9 which is 8%
of income before taxes. A few respondents seem to report their income excluding the labour-market
contribution. Figure 2b shows that across different levels of actual income both the average reported
income and the median reported income within each bin are very close to the actual income.
    In the block with background questions, we ask about municipality of residence, educational
level and industry sector where they work. In Appendix Table A-3, we see that 98% of the re-
spondents report living in the correct municipality. Respondents are less precise when they report
educational level and sector of work, with 74% and 72% matches between survey response and
register data. For the education level dimension, 93% of the respondents with a bachelor or master
program as their highest level of education according to the registers report the correct level of edu-
cation. Almost half of the respondents who report an incorrect educational level have a vocational
education and training program as their highest level of education. The majority of these respon-
   8
     The correspondence between reported and actual income is even higher than in Karadja et al. (2017). For
example, close to 40% deviate less than 2.5% in our case, which applies to less than 30% of the respondents in their
study (Figure 1). They report that the mean perception of relative position is 16 percentiles away fom its actual
value, which is 6 percentiles in our case.
   9
     Danish gross tax paid by all employees to help finance labour-market expenses



                                                        10
                                Figure 1: Information Treatment
             (a) Negative misperception                           (b) Positive misperception




     Notes : The two panels show screenshots of the cohort treatment information provided to a respondent
     reported being born in 1970 and either had a negative or positive misperception of own position based
     the reported income.




dents report that their highest level of education is either upper secondary school or short cycle
higher education. The explanation for the first group is that many consider upper secondary school
as a higher level than vocational education, but according to the standard education classification
this is not the case.10 For the second group, the majority have an education within Office, commer-
cial and business service, and therefore plausibly think they have a short cycle higher education,
but according to the education classification these are also categorized as vocational educations.
    For the sector dimension, it is more understandable that some respondents have difficulties in
knowing the correct sector. We use a standard classification of sectors and labelling of the sectors
as described in Table 2. For a large, clearly defined sector such as Public administration, education,
health and social work activities, 89% of respondents who work in that sector according to the
register also report working in that sector. For a more vaguely defined sector such as Business
services, only 29% of those who work in the sector according to the registers report working in the
sector whereas for instance 17% report working in the related sector Manufacturing. Furthermore,
as Table A-4 shows, respondents who recently changed jobs are more likely to report the wrong
sector.
    The results we present use the reference groups respondents believe they belong to. In the
appendix, we show that the results are very similar if we instead use their actual reference groups or
  10
     We use the Danish International Standard Classification of Education, which follows the international education
classification ISCED.


                                                        11
                                             Figure 2: Reported and Actual Income
                           (a) Relative difference                                                                                    (b) Correlation




                                                                                                                        1200
                     .3
                                                                                                                                   Average
                                                                                                                                   Median
                     .25




                                                                                           Reported Income (1000 DKK)
                                                                                                                        900
                     .2
           Percent




                                                                                                                        600
                     .15
                     .1




                                                                                                                        300
                     .05




                                                                                                                        0
                     0




                           -50   -40   -30   -20   -10   0   10   20   30   40   50                                            0             300        600         900   1200
                           Difference between reported and actual income in %                                                                 Actual income (1000 DKK)

          Notes : The left panel shows a histogram of the relative difference between reported and actual
          income in %. The bin width is 2 and the plot is truncated at ±50. The right panel shows
          binned scatter plots of the average and median reported income against actual income, both
          in DKK. There is approximately the same number of respondents in each of the 25 bins.




only include respondents who perceive their reference group correctly, reflecting that the differences
are not so big across the groups that are difficult to differentiate.


3     Perceptions and Misperceptions about Social Positions
In this section, we describe people's perceptions and misperceptions about the distribution of income
in their cohort and in various reference groups and about their own position in these distributions.

3.1   Cohort Income Distribution
We start with people's perceptions of the income distribution of their cohort. Our approach of ask-
ing about cohort-level perceptions neutralizes life-cycle effects. This is both practically convenient
and normatively interesting. Indeed, lifecycle patterns are likely to be considered more natural and
harder to form fairness views on (e.g., how fair is it that someone at age 18 is poorer than someone
at age 50?). The people in our cohort are at the peak of their career paths and income trajectories,
with a lot of their permanent income already realized. Figure A-9 and Table A-5 in the Appendix
highlight the pitfalls of asking about the full income distribution without specifying proper age
limits. The median income by cohort varies drastically across different ages or by excluding or in-
cluding some cohorts. The variation is naturally even starker when considering the P95 for different
cohorts. If we also consider how various definitions of "income" are, it becomes clear that typically
seen "misperceptions" by respondents could simply be the result of poorly specified questions com-
bined with the large variability in the reality with some parameters (such as which age groups are
included and how income is defined exactly). Instead, we ask respondents the most precise question
possible so as to ensure they truly understand what they are being asked and so that inaccurate


                                                                                      12
responses can be interpreted as actual misperceptions, rather than misunderstandings or confusion
about the question.

Perception of the cohort income distribution
Figure 3a plots people's misperceptions about the median income level (P50, red curve) and the
percentile 95 income level (P95, blue curve) relative to the actual levels. For the median income
level, prediction errors are symmetric around zero and bell shaped with 45% percent predicting
correctly with a 10% or lower error and 75% being in a 25% error band. For comparison, the
errors when people report their own income (black curve) are such that 70% (90%) percent report
correctly within a 10% (25%) error band. Against this benchmark, people seem reasonably well
aware of the median income level of others in their cohort. There is larger variance of the perceived
P95 level than the P50 level and with a small majority of people underestimating its level.
    Figure 3b plots the perceived median income level against the respondent's own position in
the distribution. It reveals a systematic increasing relationship between the prediction errors and
people's own position: higher-income people tend to over-perceive the median and lower-income
people to under-perceive it. Yet, except for respondents in the very top and the very bottom of the
distribution, the average prediction errors are within 5% of the median value.11 Similarly, there is
a weak positive relationship between the perceived P95 level and the position of the individuals. At
most income levels from the bottom of the distribution up to percentile 95, the average perception
error for the P95 is below 10%. By contrast, those in the very top of the distribution starkly
overestimate the P95 by 50%. In the Appendix, Figure A-10 shows a similar patterns using the
bin medians instead of the bin averages.

Perception of own position within the cohort
Figure 4 shows the correlation between actual rank within the cohort and perceived rank. Figure
4a shows average perceived position by actual position computed in three different ways, based on
either actual income on the tax return this year, reported income in the survey or average income
on the tax return over the last three years. The latter is to reduce the role of potential noise and
large fluctuations in actual position. The relationships are almost identical, with the exception of
the bottom of the distribution where the perceived current position is actually slightly closer to the
current actual position than to the position based on the three-year average.
    Figure 4b depicts three more moments of the perception distribution, by actual position: the
median, the 25th percentile, and the 75th percentile. There is more variation in perceived position
of people in the very bottom of the distribution relative to those at the very top. Unlike many
other surveys, we are able to quite precisely study perception patterns at the top of the income
distribution thanks to the ability to reach a lot of high-income respondents.
    The curves in the first two panels all have a horizontal, inverted S-shape whereby people be-
low the median income level tend to overestimate their position, while people above the median
underestimate their position. To some extent, such a pattern is mechanical because of a simple
mean-reversion type logic: people at the highest position can only weakly underestimate their
position, while people at the lowest position can only weakly overestimate their position. Put
differently, perceived income ranks are not uniformly distributed, unlike actual income ranks (see
Appendix Figure A-11). To filter out this mean-reversion mechanism, we ask: Are those ranked
  11
    Equivalently, in terms of positions, an income level of 350,000 corresponds to a percentile position of 44-45 within
the cohorts and an income level of 400,000 hovers around the 56th-57th position.



                                                          13
Figure 3: Perception of P50 and P95 Incomes Within Cohort by Own Position
 (a) Size of misperceptions                                                                                  (b) P50 misperception                                                                                                               (c) P95 misperception




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1800
                                                                                                                                                               100
           .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                 Average                                                                                                                             Average




                                                                                                       700
                         Level of P50
                         Level of P95




                                                                                                                                                               75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   75
                                                                                                                                                                  Percentage differnce from actual P50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Percentage differnce from actual P95
                         Own income




                                                                                                       600
                                                                      Reported cohort P50 (1000 DKK)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reported cohort P95 (1000 DKK)
           .015




                                                                                                                                                               50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1200
                                                                                                       500




                                                                                                                                                               25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
 Density




                                                                                                       400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          900
           .01




                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                       300




                                                                                                                                                               -25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          600
                                                                                                       200
           .005




                                                                                                                                                               -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                               -75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -75
                                                                                                                                                               -100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -100
           0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                  -100        -50        0          50         100                                           0       20         40        60        80   100                                                                                     0       20         40       60         80   100
                  Pct. difference between reported and actual level                                                        Actual cohort position                                                                                                              Actual cohort position

Notes : The left panel shows the distribution of the percentage difference between the reported and actual level of
P50 and P95 and, for comparison, the percentage difference between the respondent's own income reported in the
survey and the actual income on the tax return. The distributions of reported P50 and P95 have spikes due to
heaping. Therefore, we smooth the graphs using epanechnikov kernels with a bandwidth of 15. The bin scatter
diagram in the middle panel shows the perceived P50 reported in DKK (left scale) and the corresponding prediction
error in percentage (right scale) by position of people in the within-cohort income distribution. The bin scatter in
the right panel similarly shows the perceived P95. Both bin scatter figures have 25 bins and reported P50 and P95
are winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile within each bin.




at position x with respect to actual income also ranked at position x with respect to perceived
position? Figure 4c shows that this is the case with all points lying close to the 45 degree line.
Thus, the systematic misperception of own position almost disappears. While we do this re-ranking
within our sample, recall that our sample is representative of the population, except at the top,
so these patterns can be interpreted as very close to the patterns we would obtain if we re-ranked
within the full population. To summarize, respondents are quite accurate about their own position,
with some inaccuracies arising from an almost mechanical mean-reversion due to the bounds in
position.

Which respondents are best informed about the income distribution and their own
position?
In addition to actual cohort position, what are the characteristics that drive respondents' per-
ceptions and misperceptions? Table 3 regresses measures of accuracy and inaccuracy of perceived
position on respondents' gender, political affiliation, an indicator variable for residing in a large city,
an indicator for working in the private sector (the omitted category is the public sector), employ-
ment status, and education level, also controlling for cohort and actual position fixed effects. The
dependent variable in the first three columns is an indicator variable for whether the respondent
is among the 20% of the sample with the largest misperception of their position; by contrast, in
column 3, the dependent variable is whether the respondent is among the top 20% most accurate
ones.12 The results show that male respondents tend to be more accurate. More educated respon-
    12
    The 20% most inaccurate misperceive their position by more than 22 percentiles, the P50 by more than 33%,
and P95 by more than 66%. The 20% most accurate misperceive their position by less than 5 percentiles, the P50



                                                                                                                                     14
                                                       Figure 4: Perceived Position Within Cohort
                                (a) Average                                                                            (b) Median                                                                                 (c) Re-ranked
                      100




                                                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                                                                  Re-ranked perceived cohort position
                      80




                                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
 Perceived position




                                                                                        Perceived position
                      60




                                                                                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                      40




                                                                                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                      20




                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                   Median
                                     Actual position based on register income
                                                                                                                                                   P25
                                     Actual position based on reported income
                                                                                                                                                   P75
                                     Actual position based on 3 yr. avg. income                                                                                                                                                                       Median
                      0




                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                            0   20       40           60           80             100                              0   20    40        60     80            100                                               0    20       40         60        80       100
                                        Actual position                                                                     Actual position                                                                        Re-ranked actual cohort position

Notes : The left panel shows the average perceived position by actual position in the distribution. Actual position
is either based on the actual income observed on the tax return, the income reported in the survey, or a three-year
average of actual income. The middle panel shows the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile of perceived position by actual
income position computed from the tax data. In the right panel, we re-rank both actual and reported position, such
that they are uniformly distributed from 1 to 100 in our sample, and plot the median within each bin. There are 25
bins in each panel, with approximately the same number of respondents in each bin.




dents (with a bachelor, Master, or PhD) are significantly more likely to be accurate. For example,
individuals with a Master or PhD degree are 10 percentage points more likely to be accurate on
their own position and 15 percentage points less likely to be inaccurate compared to individuals
with the lowest education level. Other personal characteristics do not appear to be systematically
associated with misperceptions.




by less than 6%, and P95 by less than 10%.


                                                                                                                              15
Table 3: Accuracy of Perceived Position and P50 and P95 Incomes Within
Cohort
                                       Top 20% most inaccurate             Top 20% most accurate
                                     Position        P50         P95      Position       P50       P95
           Male                      -0.04        -0.06       -0.04       0.04           0.02    0.05
                                       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)
           Left-wing                   -0.02         0.00      0.03         0.01         0.01     0.02
                                       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)
           Right-wing                 -0.03         -0.01       -0.00      0.03          0.01      0.00
                                       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)
           Living in city               -0.01        0.01       0.01       0.02          0.00    -0.02
                                       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)
           Private sector                0.01       -0.00       -0.01       0.00        -0.00     -0.01
                                       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)
           Not employed                 -0.02       0.04         0.01       0.03        0.02     -0.04
                                       (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)

           Educational level (Ref.: Primary)
           Upper secondary     -0.06     -0.04                  -0.00        0.01       -0.00     0.05
                                (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)
           Vocational           -0.03    -0.03                  -0.02        0.02       0.03       0.01
                                (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)
           Short cycle higher   -0.05  -0.07                    -0.04        0.02       0.02     0.06
                                (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)
           Bachelor           -0.08    -0.06                    -0.02       0.04        0.03      0.04
                                (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)
           Master or PhD      -0.15    -0.11                    -0.01      0.10        0.06      0.07
                                (0.02)  (0.02)                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)
           N                     9415    9415                   9415        9415        9415      9415
           R2                   0.084   0.031                  0.024        0.077      0.035      0.029
           Cohort FE
           Actual position FE

Notes : The first 3 outcomes are indicator variables equal to 1 if the respondent is among the 20% of respondents with
the largest misperceptions numerically. The last 3 outcomes are indicator variables equal to 1 if the respondent is
among the 20% of respondents with the smallest misperception numerically. Left-wing and Right-wing are indicators
that equal one if a respondent reported having either a very left-wing/left-wing or very right-wing/right-wing view on
economic policy. Living in city is a dummy indicating if the respondent live in one of Denmark's four largest cities.
Private sector equals one if a respondents works in the private sector and Not employed equals one if a respondent
is unemployed or out of the workforce. The Actual position FE is fixed effects for all 100 positions in the income
distribution. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                         16
3.2    Distributions of Reference Groups
Large groups: education, sector, municipality, and gender groups
Figure 5a plots the perceived median income level of different reference groups against the actual
medians. Each dot represents either a gender group, an education group, a sector, or a set of
municipalities grouped into ten bins by median income. In general, the points are very close to
the 45 degree line reflecting that people are well aware of the median income level of their various
reference groups. The deviations from the 45 degree line are largest for some sectors, particularly
for the two sectors with the highest median income levels, namely "Finance & Insurance" and
"Information & communication" where respondents tend to underestimate the median.13
    Figure 5b shows a similar graph for the perceived P95 level. Individuals are also well aware of
this moment of the whole cohort distribution (black dot), the gender-specific distribution (red dots)
and the municipality-specific distribution (blue dots). Note, however, that they systematically
underestimate P95 of their education group and, in particular, underestimate P95 in the sector
where the work (the green and purple dots are all below the 45 degree line). In this dimension,
the respondents are not aware of the degree of inequality within their education groups and within
their sectors.14
    Recall that not all respondents reported their reference groups in accordance with the register
data. This inaccuracy does not affect the misperception patterns described here as shown in Figure
A-12 where the sample is restricted to individuals who reported all their reference groups as they
are in the register data.
    In Figure 6a, we plot the median income for men and women (horizontal lines) and the average
perceived median among men and women of their gender group, by actual cohort position. Con-
ditional on being at the same income position in their cohort, males (females) tend to correctly
report a higher (lower) median income for their own gender group. In fact, the vertical distance
between the reports of men and women at the same cohort position is very close to the actual
difference between the median incomes. Yet, there is a systematic bias in perceptions: high-income
men and women overestimate the median income level of their gender group, while lower-income
ones underestimate it. This bias that tends to assume the median is closer to one's own position is
similar to the one observed for the cohort median in Figure 3.
    In Figure 6b, we split respondents into two roughly equally-sized groups, depending on whether
they live in a low income or high income municipality. At each cohort position, we then plot the
average perceived median income of their municipality for respondents at different positions. We
repeat the same procedure for education groups and sectors (Figures 6c-d). For all reference groups
at all income levels, we observe that people belonging to a high income group consistently report
a higher P50 for their group than people belonging to the corresponding low-income group. For
municipality and education reference groups, the differences in perceptions between low-income and
high-income groups (vertical differences between the blue and red dots) tend to be somewhat smaller
than the actual differences (difference between the red and blue lines), while for the sector reference
group we observe a significant compression of perceptions. This reflects to a large extent that people
with low and middle income working in high-income sectors tend to significantly underestimate the
   13
      The latter sector covers a wide range of industries, from computer programming to the publication of newspapers.
It does not include advertising or marketing.
   14
      The outlier in the lower-right corner is the sector "Agriculture, forestry and fishing." This is a small sector in
Denmark measured by the number of employed people in the sector and we only have 80 respondents in our sample
that work in this sector. Furthermore, it is a sector with large income inequality: the P50 income level is the lowest
of the ten sectors, yet it has the second highest P95 income level.



                                                          17
Figure 5: Perceived P50 and P95 Incomes for Gender, Municipality, Educa-
tion and Sector (Large Reference Groups)
                                                            (a) P50                                                                                      (b) P95




                                                                                                                                 1700
                                             Cohort                                                                                       Cohort
                                             Gender                                                                                       Gender
                                 600




                                             Municipality                                                                                 Municipality




                                                                                                                                 1500
                                             Education                                                                                    Education
 Perceived reference group P50




                                                                                                 Perceived reference group P95
                                             Sector                                                                                       Sector




                                                                                                                                 1300
                                 500




                                                                                                                                 1100
                                 400




                                                                                                                                 900
                                 300




                                                                                                                                 700
                                                                                                                                 500
                                 200




                                       200            300      400        500         600                                               500        700   900    1100    1300    1500   1700
                                                 Actual P50 in reported reference group                                                       Actual P95 in reported reference group

Notes : For gender, we show one scatter for men and one for women. For municipality we divide the respondents into
10 similar sized groups based on the actual municipality P50 and P95 income and plot one scatter for each group.
For education and sector we show one scatter for each educational level or sector. The scatters show the means of
the reported P50 or P95 winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile within the group.




median of the sector. In the Appendix, Figure A-13 shows that these patterns are robust to
restricting the sample to respondents whose reported reference group matches the group in the
register data.




                                                                                            18
Figure 6: Perceived P50 Incomes for Gender, Municipality, Education and
Sector (Large Reference Groups)
                                                                                  Gender                                                                                                   Municipality
                                                           650




                                                                                                                                                                          650
                                                                     Women                                                                                                          Low income municipality
           Perceived P50 within reported reference group




                                                                                                                          Perceived P50 within reported reference group
                                                                     Men                                                                                                            High income municipality
                                                           550




                                                                                                                                                                          550
                                                           450




                                                                                                                                                                          450
                                                           350




                                                                                                                                                                          350
                                                           250




                                                                                                                                                                          250
                                                                 0         20           40      60        80   100                                                              0         20          40       60        80   100
                                                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                                         Actual cohort position


                                                                                Education                                                                                                         Sector
                                                           650




                                                                                                                                                                          650




                                                                     Lower education                                                                                                Low income sector
           Perceived P50 within reported reference group




                                                                                                                          Perceived P50 within reported reference group




                                                                     Higher education                                                                                               High income sector
                                                           550




                                                                                                                                                                          550
                                                           450




                                                                                                                                                                          450
                                                           350




                                                                                                                                                                          350
                                                           250




                                                                                                                                                                          250




                                                                 0         20           40      60        80   100                                                              0         20          40       60        80   100
                                                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                                         Actual cohort position

          Notes : The solid lines indicate the actual average P50 for each group within the bin. The
          high/low income split for municipality is based on the median of within cohort in sample actual
          municipality P50 income. This is also the case for sector. For education, Higher education is
          short cycle higher education, bachelor programs and master programs.


    Figure 7 shows respondents' actual position for each large reference group (top panels) and
perceived position (bottom panels) as a function of their actual positions within the cohort. We
split respondents into high-income reference groups (blue dots) and low-income reference groups
(red dots), which both represent roughly half of the sample. This is reminiscent of Figure 6, which
focuses on the median of the reference group, while the current figure focuses on the individual's
own position. The top, left panel shows that males' position in the cohort is higher than their
position in the distribution of males, while the females' position is lower than their position in the
distribution of females. The panel below shows females perceived position in the female distribution


                                                                                                                     19
and males perceived position in the male distribution as a function of their overall position within
the cohort. These relationships have the by-now familiar inverted S-shapes because of the mean-
reversion logic described earlier. The diagram shows that the differences in the perceptions of males
and females about their positions in the respective reference groups (as captured by the vertical
distance between the red and blue dots) are smaller than the actual differences. For the other
reference groups, we see a similar pattern. The differences in perceptions between high- and low-
income groups are most compressed for education and sector in line with the result for the perceived
median. Appendix Figure A-14 shows similar patterns when we restrict the sample to respondents
whose reported groups match the actual group. In general, the differences in perceptions are more
compressed when looking at own position compared to the median, which can be explained by the
mean-reversion effect of misperceptions that moves perceptions of own position towards the mean.
    Figure 8a plots respondents' average perceptions of their own position within each reference
group as a function of their actual position within that group. To better compare the different
reference group positions, we show local linear polynomials for each group in the same plot.15
Figure 8b recasts this information in a different way, by plotting respondents misperception of
their reference group positions for given overall position in the cohort. People in the lower part of
the income distribution tend to overestimate their position within all reference groups and vice versa
for high-income people. Especially within sector or education groups, the relation between actual
and perceived position is quite weak. At all income levels, people tend to be most optimistic about
their position within their education group and their sector. In particular, people with income
below the median level in the cohort greatly overestimate their position within the sector where
they work. This is in line with our previous findings that people in general tend to underestimate
the inequality in their sector (as reflected by a negative misperception of P95), and that particularly
people in the lower part of the distribution significantly understate the median income level of their
sector.
    One may wonder to what extent people report very similar positions for all reference groups. If
they do not really know, they may be tempted to simply state the same perceived position across
the groups. Appendix Figure A-16 shows this not to be the case. For each perceived position in
the overall cohort distribution, we observe a lot of variation in perceived positions in the reference
groups.

Small groups: co-workers, schoolmates, neighbors and family
In this section, we look at perceptions related to smaller reference groups that are perhaps easier to
relate to and closer to a respondent's daily life. Figure 9 shows how people rank themselves among
co-workers at the same workplace, among neighbors living on the same road (if living in a house)
or stairwell (if living in an apartment), and among former schoolmates.16 Recall from Section 2
that for each group, we first asked the respondent about the perceived number of individuals in
the group (N) and then asked them to report their perceived income position (X) on a horizontal
slider going from 1 to N. Finally, to construct Figure 9, we compute the perceived percentile rank
as X/N*100 and the actual percentile rank using the true X and N from the register data.
  15
     See Appendix Figure A-15 that shows that the pattern is the same if we restrict the sample to those who reported
each group correctly or respondents who reported all groups correctly.
  16
     For the small reference groups, it does not make sense to ask about moments of the distribution such as P50 and
P95 as we did for the large reference groups. The small size of the groups prevents us also from running information
treatments informing people about their true positions within these reference groups, which would be against the
Danish rules of conduct.



                                                         20
Figure 7: Correlation between Actual Cohort Position and Actual versus
Perceived Position within Reference Groups
                                                          (a) Gender                                                                                     (b) Municipality                                                                                           (c) Education                                                                                              (d) Sector
                                                100




                                                                                                                                                        100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
Actual position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                        Actual position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Actual position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Actual position within reported ref. group
                                                80




                                                                                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                60




                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                40




                                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                              Women                                                                              Low income municipality                                                                                        Lower education                                                                                     Low income sector
                                                                                              Men                                                                                High income municipality                                                                                       Higher education                                                                                    High income sector
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                      0    20        40       60         80       100                                                         0   20        40       60         80      100                                                         0   20        40       60         80       100                                                         0    20        40       60         80     100
                                                                Actual cohort position                                                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                                Actual cohort position                                                                                  Actual cohort position
                                                100




                                                                                                                                                        100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100
Perceived position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                        Perceived position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Perceived position within reported ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perceived position within reported ref. group
                                                80




                                                                                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                60




                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                40




                                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                              Women                                                                              Low income municipality                                                                                        Lower education                                                                                     Low income sector
                                                                                              Men                                                                                High income municipality                                                                                       Higher education                                                                                    High income sector
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                      0    20        40       60         80       100                                                         0   20        40       60         80      100                                                         0   20        40       60         80       100                                                         0    20        40       60         80     100
                                                                Actual cohort position                                                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                                Actual cohort position                                                                                  Actual cohort position

Notes : The top panels plot actual reference group positions by actual cohort positions, while the bottom panels plot
perceived reference group positions by actual cohort positions. The high/low income split for municipality is based on
the median of within cohort in sample actual municipality P50 income. This is also the case for sector. For education,
Higher education is short cycle higher education, bachelor programs and master programs.




    The graph of the perceived position among co-workers at the same workplace in Figure 9a is
very similar to the result for perceived position among co-workers in the same sector in Figure
8. In both cases, people who are in the bottom of the distribution at percentile 20 believe on
average they are above percentile 40. At the upper part of the distribution people underestimate
their positions, but the misperceptions are smaller than in the bottom. The graph of the perceived
position among neighbors in Figure 9b is similar, but with smaller misperceptions at the lower
part of the distribution. Actually, this graph is very similar to the graph for municipalities in
Figure 8, which aligns with the conclusion that misperceptions at the bottom are larger when
comparing yourself to co-workers than when comparing to people living in your area. The graph
of the perceived position among schoolmates in Figure 9c has the same shape as the other graphs.
The most notable conclusion from this graph is probably that people tend to make smaller errors
when ranking themselves among their former schoolmates in adolescent than among their current
co-workers.
    A deviation between perceived and actual rank could reflect that people misperceive the number
of people belonging to their refererence group rather than their own position within the group. In
Appendix Figures A-17a, A-17b and A-17c, we show that respondents are well aware of the size of
their reference groups except for a smaller group of respondents who have more than one hundred
neighbors, which they underestimate. Appendix Figure A-18 shows that we obtain similar results
if we restrict the analysis to respondents whose reported number of people in the small reference
group matches the number observed in the register data (±10%) or use bin medians instead of bin

                                                                                                                                                                                                            21
Figure 8: Perceived and Actual Position for Cohort, Gender, Municipality,
Education and Sector
                                                                (a) Within reference group                                                                                                             (b) Within cohort




                                                                                                                               Perceived - actual position within reported reference group
                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                                             30
 Perceived position within reported reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cohort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Municipality
                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sector
                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                      40




                                                                                                   Cohort




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                   Sex
                                                                                                   Municipality
                                                      20




                                                                                                   Education
                                                                                                   Sector

                                                                                                                                                                                             -10
                                                                                                   45 degree line
                                                      0




                                                            0          20        40        60         80            100                                                                            0   20       40         60        80             100
                                                                Actual position within reported reference group                                                                                             Actual cohort position

Notes : The local linear polynomials have a bandwidth of 10.




averages. In addition, Appendix Figure A-18 also shows similar patterns for co-workers and for
neighbors if we split the respondents into people working in small firms versus large firms and into
those living in apartments versus houses.
    Figure 10 shows results for family members. Figures 10a and 10b show the perceived positions
of parents of the respondents, when the respondents were fifteen years old, as a function of the true
position in the ranking of parents of children from the same cohort. The line is close to flat for
the ranking of fathers in panel 10a, except for fathers who were ranked in the top 25%, indicating
that respondents have little idea about the historical income positions of their fathers. The same
goes for mothers, where respondents starkly underestimate the ranking of mothers, including at the
very top. Figure 10c shows the share of respondents who report having income higher than their
siblings, as a function of their actual cohort position and split by whether they actually do have
higher income than their sibling or not. In general, respondents are well aware whether they are
making more or less than their siblings. The share of those who report making more and who in
fact make less is very small, except for respondents who are ranked close to the top of their cohort.
On the other hand, information is far from perfect even among siblings and, in line with evidence
above, misperceptions correlate systematically with the respondent's cohort position. People who
are higher ranked than their siblings are less aware of this if they have a low cohort rank, and
people who are lower ranked than their siblings are more likely to wrongly believe they are higher
ranked if they belong to the upper part of the cohort distribution.




                                                                                                                          22
Figure 9: Perceived Position Within Co-workers, Neighbors and School-
mates (Small Reference Groups)
                                                  (a) Co-workers                                                                               (b) Neighbors                                                                                        (c) Schoolmates
                                        100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                                                            Perceived position within schoolmates
 Perceived position within co-workers




                                                                                               Perceived position within neighbors
                                        80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                        60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                        40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                        20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                        0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                              0    20        40         60          80   100                                               0    20         40        60          80   100                                                       0         20          40        60        80   100
                                                   Actual position within co-workers                                                            Actual position within neighbors                                                                         Actual position within schoolmates

Notes : There are 25 bins in each panel. They are of equal size, except the top bin for co-workers and neighbors,
which have more observations.




                                                                  Figure 10: Perceived Position of Family Members
                                                    (a) Father                                                                                  (b) Mother                                                                                                (c) Siblings
                                        100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Actually higher
                                                                                                                                                                                            Share reporting higher income than siblings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Actually lower
                                        80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                               Perceived position of mother
 Perceived position of father
                                        60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                        40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                        20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                              0    20        40         60          80   100                                               0    20         40        60          80   100                                                       0         20          40        60        80   100
                                                        Actual position of father                                                                    Actual position of mother                                                                                   Actual cohort position

Notes : We asked about the respondents' perceived position of father's or mother's position when the respondent was
15 years old relative to parent's of other children from the same cohort as the respondent. We asked men about their
father's position and we asked women about their mother's position. The right panel only includes responses from
people reporting the correct number of siblings. Actually higher means that a respondent's income is at least 25 pct.
higher than the siblings' mean income. Actually lower means that a respondent's income is more than 25 pct. below
the siblings' mean income.




                                                                                                                                                            23
4         Relationship Between Social Positions and Fairness Views
This section analyses the relationship between social position and views on fairness. We approach
this question in four ways. First, we study the simple, contemporaneous correlation between
position and fairness views across people. We then show how fairness views relate to changes in
social position over the history of a respondent, and to changes in position caused by major life
events such as unemployment, health shocks, disability, and promotions. Finally, we analyze how
fairness views are causally affected by changes in (mis)perceived social position induced by the
information treatment.
    For brevity in the main part of the paper, we only focus on three key outcomes: perceptions of
fairness of inequality for all the large reference groups, the belief that effort matters more than luck
for differences in income, and whether the respondent would vote for a right-wing party. Other
outcomes are in the Appendix.

4.1         Correlations
How do the perceived or actual rankings within the various reference groups correlate with views
on fairness? Figure 11a shows, first, that those who believe they are ranked higher in the cohort
find inequality within the cohort to be less unfair and, similarly, those ranked higher within each
reference group systematically find differences in income within that group to be less unfair. Second,
unfairness of inequality within cohort, sex and municipality show very similar levels and patterns
by position. But compared to these groups, income inequalities within education and sector are
considered considerably more unfair at all positions in the distribution. In addition, the slope is
steeper for these groups, showing a stronger relation of fairness views with actual position. The same
pattern holds if we instead plotted fairness views against actual (rather than perceived) position
in each reference group or actual position in the cohort on the x-axis (see Appendix Figure A-19a
that also shows the distribution of fairness views by reference group). This makes sense in light of
the findings in Section 3 that perceptions of position are in general in line with actual positions.
    Figure 11b shows that those positioned higher within the different reference groups also tend to
believe that high positions in the reference groups are the result of effort rather than luck. In this
dimension, there is no major difference between reference groups either on the level or the slope.17
    17
         See the distribution of luck vs. effort views by reference group in Figure A-19b.




                                                              24
Figure 11: View on Fairness and Effort vs. Luck by Position Within Cohort,
Gender, Municipality, Education and Sector
                                                           (a) Fairness                                                                                 (b) Effort vs. Luck
                                      3.5




                                                                                                                                            5.5
                                                                                                                                                               Cohort
                                                                                                                                                               Gender
                                                                                                                                                               Municipality
  Unfairness within reference group




                                                                                                       Luck/effort within reference group
                                                                                                                                                               Education
                                      3




                                                                                                                                                               Sector




                                                                                                                                            5
                                      2.5




                                                                                                                                            4.5
                                                         Cohort
                                      2




                                                         Gender
                                                         Municipality
                                                         Education
                                      1.5




                                                         Sector
                                                                                                                                            4

                                            0       20             40   60         80       100                                                   0       20             40   60         80       100
                                                Perceived position within reference group                                                             Perceived position within reference group

Notes : The figures are only based on the control group respondents. The bandwidth for the local linear polynomials
is 20.




                                                                                                  25
Table 4: Correlation Between Actual Position and Misperception and Fair-
ness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View
                                                          More unfair                              More       Right-
                                    Cohort      Gender          Mun.       Edu.       Sector       effort      wing
  Panel A: No controls

  Position                         -1.18        -1.13       -1.27        -1.36       -1.42        0.81       0.91
                                    (0.07)       (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.07)

  Misperception                    -0.38        -0.60       -0.48        -0.38       -0.86        0.43       0.45
                                    (0.10)       (0.09)      (0.09)       (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.10)     (0.10)
  Panel B: With controls

  Position                         -1.09        -1.01       -1.09        -1.03       -1.19        0.92       0.86
                                    (0.09)       (0.08)      (0.08)       (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.09)     (0.09)

  Misperception                    -0.40        -0.41       -0.42        -0.30       -0.61        0.46       0.44
                                    (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.09)       (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.10)     (0.10)
  N                                  4690         4690        4690         4690        4450        4690       4690
  Outcome mean                      (2.01)       (2.16)      (2.09)       (2.54)      (2.53)      (4.81)     (3.01)
                                    (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)

Notes : In the table, we only use control group respondents. All outcomes are z-scores. Position denotes the actual
position within the reference group from percentile 1 to 100 divided by 100. A coefficient of 1 means that going from
the bottom of the distribution to the top increases the outcome by one standard deviation. Similarly, Misperception
is the difference between perceived and actual position within the reference group divided by 100. For More effort
and Right-wing, we use cohort position and misperception. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy,
municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects.
Outcome mean is the mean of the non-standardized outcome variable and Outcome std. err. is the standard error of
the estimated mean. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

    Table 4 confirms the graphical analysis in Figure 11 without controls (Panel A) and with controls
(Panel B), showing also political views in the last column.18 Outcome variables in the columns
are transformed to z-scores so that coefficients can be compared across outcomes. The "Outcome
mean" row shows the average, non-standardized fairness views by reference group and highlights
the different levels of perceived unfairness across reference groups. The precisely estimated means
confirm that education and sector-level income differences are considered significantly more unfair
than inequality overall within cohort or within other reference groups.
    Panel A shows the simple correlations, while panel B includes as controls fixed effects for cohort,
gender, municipality, educational level, sector of work, and employment status. The inclusion of
controls makes no substantial difference. A higher position in the cohort and a higher positive
misperception of the position both significantly correlate with lower perceptions of unfairness, a
higher belief in the role of effort over luck, and a higher likelihood of being right-wing. The
precisely estimated coefficients on actual position show that moving from the bottom of the cohort
distribution to the top is associated with a one standard deviation change or more in the perceived
unfairness within all reference groups. Across reference groups, moving up by 10 positions in
  18
     Appendix Tables A-6 and A-7 show similar results if we restrict the sample to only include respondents whose
reported group matches the group reported in the register data.



                                                           26
the income distribution is correlated with a 0.12-0.14 standard deviation increase in perceived
unfairness. The effects of moving up in misperceived rank are around 30-60% of moving up in
actual rank across the reference groups, yet still significant and sizable.
     On the full range of other outcomes, Table A-8 shows that respondents who are ranked higher
or who misperceive their position as being higher are also significantly more likely to say that
inequality is not a problem, that they are satisfied with their life, that their work effort has paid
off, that they support less redistribution, that the rich deserve to keep their income, and that being
poor is one's own fault.

4.2   Historical Variation in Social Positions
What is the relative importance of your social position today and your position historically in
shaping your views on fairness, inequality, and politics? To address this question, we make use
of the rich register data to reconstruct people's income and economic histories for the last twenty
years and correlate these with their views today. In this section, we focus on their income path in
general, while in the next section, we look at the effects of changes in social position due to specific
negative and positive shocks.
    Figure 12 plots respondents' views on fairness, source of inequality and politics against their
position in the cohort, measured at different points in time. More precisely, we split the last twenty
years into five-year intervals and also show views as a function of their father's position relative to
other fathers in the cohort. All outcomes plotted in the different panels are standardized z-scores,
so that the magnitudes are comparable.
    Panel A depicts the z-score of the answers to the question whether income inequality for people
within the same cohort is unfair. In line with previous results, we observe a strong negative
correlation between current social position and unfairness with a change of close to one standard
deviation in unfairness when going from the bottom to the top of the income distribution. The
association between fairness view today and historical social position becomes weaker and weaker
when going backwards in time from today to twenty years ago. The father's social position measured
when the individual was 15 years old is almost unrelated to fairness views today. Recall from Section
3 that perceived and actual position are quite closely aligned for most respondents. Thus, although
we do not have respondent's history of perceived positions (as opposed to actual positions), it is
likely that these have co-moved to a significant extent.
    Panels B and C show how views on the source of inequality (effort versus luck) and political
views relate to historical social position. Clearly, these outcomes are not as strongly related to
current social position as the view on fairness and they do not show the same systematic trend over
time (lines for different years are much closer to each other). This suggest that these outcomes
are more sticky and do not move together with changes in social position to the same extent as do
views of fairness.
    The patterns in Figure 12 whereby historical social position matters less and less for current
views can be understood by a larger degree of income mobility when looking over a longer time
span. Indeed, Appendix Table A-9 and A-10 show that the correlation between the current social
position and the historical position decreases the longer we go back in time. To understand whether
historical position is correlated with fairness view conditional on current position, Table 5 reports
results from multivariate regressions. Each column shows the regression coefficients of the view
variables in the column title on positions 20, 15, 10 and 5 years ago, as well as this year's position,
and controlling for cohort, gender, education, and treatment fixed effects. The table shows that
the coefficients on current social position are large on all fairness views, in particular compared


                                                  27
Figure 12: Historic Cohort Position and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and
Political View
                                       (a) Fairness                                                                  (b) Effort/luck                                                         (c) Political view
                          .8




                                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                          .4




                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
 Cohort Unfairness View




                                                                                 Cohort Luck/effort View




                                                                                                                                                                      Right-wing
                          0




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                          -.4




                                                                                                           -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.4
                                     This year            5 years ago                                                       This year                5 years ago                                     This year                5 years ago
                                     10 years ago         15 years ago                                                      10 years ago             15 years ago                                    10 years ago             15 years ago
                                     20 years ago         Father                                                            20 years ago             Father                                          20 years ago             Father
                          -.8




                                                                                                           -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.8
                                0       20          40      60        80   100                                   0     20       40         60          80       100                      0      20       40         60          80       100
                                             Actual cohort position                                                         Actual cohort position                                                   Actual cohort position

Notes : Bandwidth for local linear polynomials is 20. For Father, the x-axis is the father's position among fathers
when the respondent was 15 years old. In all panels, the y-axis is the z-score for the survey answers. All panels are
based on the same respondents from the control group.




to political views. Some of the historical positions are also significantly related to fairness, but
they matter much more for the political view, where even the position of the father is strongly
significant conditional on the individual's own historical positions. Appendix Tables A-11, A-12
and A-13 show that the conclusions are unchanged if we leave out the controls, use 5 year average
position instead of yearly position 20, 15, 10 and 5 years ago or restrict the sample.19

4.3                                 Natural Experiment: Variation in Social Positions due to Unemployment,
                                    Health Shocks, Disability, or Promotions
How do shocks to social position affect people's views on fairness? We consider four major life
events, negative and positive, that could have happened to people over the past ten years: having
experience an unemployment spell, having become disabled, having had a health condition that
requires hospitalization, and having received a promotion in one's company.
    For each of these shocks, we perform the analysis on the subsample of individuals who did not
experience this shock in any of the years 2008-11 (the "pre-shock" period) and assign a treatment
indicator to individuals who experienced the shock sometime during the years 2012-2017 (shock
period). We regress our fairness outcomes, perceptions of the role of effort, and being right-wing on
the treatment indicator, detailed individual level controls including fixed effects for cohort, gender,
municipality, education, sector and percentile cohort position prior to the shock and control also
for respondents' vote in the last general election.20 The question we are asking thus is: conditional
             19
     In Appendix Figure A-20 and Table A-14, we produce similar plots for other outcomes. The pattern between
history and views today varies in a way that is consistent with priors on which attitudes are more likely to persist
and which are likely to be mostly related related to current circumstances. Most strongly related to current positions
are respondents' life satisfaction and their view on whether their work effort has paid off. Slightly less so, but still
quite correlated with today's position is the view that being poor is not one's own fault.
  20
     The unemployment shock is defined as more than three months of unemployment in at least one year in the shock
period. We estimate this regression on respondents who were not unemployed according to this definition at anytime



                                                                                                                                 28
Table 5: Income History and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View
                                                    More unfair                              More ef-      Right-
                            Cohort       Gender       Mun.       Edu.             Sector       fort         wing
     Position father         -0.059       -0.051      -0.068    -0.081           -0.075       0.025       0.122
                            (0.037)      (0.037)     (0.037)    (0.036)          (0.037)     (0.037)       (0.036)

     Position -20 yr.      -0.122        -0.097       -0.108       -0.113       -0.131         0.061      0.141
                            (0.042)      (0.041)       (0.041)      (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.042)      (0.041)

     Position -15 yr.      -0.203       -0.169        -0.148       -0.126       -0.139        0.131       0.268
                            (0.048)      (0.048)       (0.048)      (0.047)      (0.048)      (0.049)      (0.047)

     Position -10 yr.        -0.085       -0.100      -0.117      -0.186        -0.162       0.206        0.197
                            (0.058)      (0.057)      (0.057)      (0.056)       (0.057)      (0.058)      (0.057)

     Position -5 yr.         -0.108       -0.096      -0.152         -0.108       -0.130       0.037       -0.030
                            (0.070)      (0.068)      (0.069)       (0.067)      (0.069)      (0.070)     (0.068)

     Position this yr.     -0.655       -0.618       -0.647       -0.678        -0.761       0.540        0.358
                            (0.074)      (0.073)      (0.073)      (0.071)       (0.074)      (0.074)      (0.072)
     Observations            9046         9046         9046         9046          8575         9046         9046
     Controls

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. Position denotes the cohort position from percentile 1 to 100 divided by 100.
A coefficient of 1 means that going from the bottom of the distribution to the top increases the outcome by one
standard deviation. More unfair and More effort are in the cohort dimension. Position father is the repondent's
father's income rank when the respondent was 16 years old compared to other fathers of 16 year olds. Controls
includes a treatment indicator cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed
effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, **
p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



on starting from the same position ten years ago, and conditional on an array of personal charac-
teristics, do those that experienced one of these four shocks that shifted their social position hold
different views today than those who did not?
    Table 6 shows the results. Column 9 reports the size of the subsamples of analysis for each type
of shock, column 10 shows the share of those who are affected by the shock (treatment group),
and column 1 shows the effect of the shocks on the current social position. The unemployment
and promotion propensities are 5-7 percent with large effects on social position going in opposite
directions. Disability is rare, hitting less than 1 percent of the sample, but causes a drop of more
than 20 percentiles in social position. In contrast, half of the sample visits the hospital during
the shock period, but this shock is only associated with an average drop of 2 percentiles in social
position.
in the pre-shock period and who were in the workforce for the entire ten-year period. A disability shock is identified
by a respondent receiving disability insurance benefits in one of the years in the shock period (according to the official
Integrated Database for Labour Market Research, IDA, from Statistics Denmark). We only use respondents who
were not on disability insurance in the pre-shock period. Hospitalization denotes at least one emergency room visit
or hospital visit by referral from a general practitioner, but excluding visits due to congenital diseases, pregnancy, or
routine checks, which do not reflect unexpected health shocks. In the regression we only use respondents who were
not hospitalized according to this definition in the pre-shock period. Finally, promotion in the table indicates if a
respondent switched from a job position as regular employee in the pre-shock period to a management position in
the following period.


                                                           29
    The outcomes in columns 2-7 are z-scores. Respondents who have experienced any of the
negative shocks (unemployment, disability, and hospitalization) are significantly more likely to see
inequality as unfair within all (large) reference groups. In contrast, those who have been promoted
are less likely to consider inequality as unfair, especially within sector, which is the domain most
closely related to work promotions. Consistent with our results above, the effects of the shocks
are weaker and less significant on the perceived role of effort versus luck relative to their effect on
fairness views. Yet, those who have experience disability are significantly less likely to believe effort
is more important; the opposite holds for those who have experienced a promotion. Respondents
who have experienced a promotion are significantly more likely to be right-wing. There are no
other significant effects on political view.21
    Of course, these results do not necessarily identify the causal effects as the shocks are not
random and may be correlated with other unobservable characteristics of the respondents that also
affect their views. Still, the detailed controls, accounting for the starting position ten years ago and
for past political affiliation do bring us closer to a quasi-experiment. We actually obtain similar
effects if we omit individual level controls except for starting position (see Appendix Table A-17),
suggesting that there is not a highly systematic correlation between these individual characteristics
and the likelihood of these shocks occurring. It is also illuminating to be able to study four different
types of shocks, with some that could be perceived closer to quasi-experimental conditional on this
set of controls (e.g., hospitalization or disability) than others (e.g., promotion).
    Second, there are different channels through which these shocks could affect views, over and
above the social position. Yet, clearly, social position is affected and, furthermore, the shocks that
move social position the most are also the ones that have the largest effects on fairness views. As
we have four different shocks, we can exploit the fact that they move social positions to different
extents and estimate the implied impact of social position on fairness views if the only channel
through which the shocks acted on views was through social position. Put differently, to explore
this further, we can do an IV-type analysis where we instrument for current position using the
occurrence of these shocks. This is in Table A-18. The pooled IV results, using all four shocks are
close to the baseline correlations in Table 4. Using the shocks as instruments one by one yields
broadly consistent effects as well, except for hospitalization, which is both very frequent and shifts
income position only by a little (the "first stage" is very weak). The magnitude of the effects of
social position on fairness views from this suggestive IV is thus very consistent with the simple
OLS correlations.




  21
    The results are similar if we restrict the sample to only include respondents whose reported group matches the
group reported in the register data (see Appendix Table A-15). Table A-16 shows the other views and attitudes as a
function of past shocks.


                                                       30
                          Table 6: Historic Shocks and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View
                                          Current                           More unfair                           M. effort     Right-       N      Affected
                                          position     Cohort     Gender       Mun.        Edu.       Sector       Cohort         wing                 %
                                            (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)      (9)       (10)
            Unemployment                  -12.2        0.19       0.22        0.20        0.17        0.19          -0.098       -0.026    7537       5.03
                                           (0.78)      (0.050)    (0.049)     (0.049)     (0.048)     (0.051)      (0.051)      (0.046)

            Disability                    -21.6         0.26       0.51        0.39         0.24                    -0.28        -0.18     9246       0.61
                                           (2.31)       (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.13)      (0.13)                   (0.13)      (0.12)

            Hospitalization               -1.82        0.093      0.079       0.089       0.060        0.039       -0.0096      -0.0070    4749       55.5
31




                                           (0.49)      (0.029)    (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.027)     (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.026)

            Promotion                      8.44         -0.11      -0.10       -0.10      -0.15       -0.20         0.13        0.14       7970       6.66
                                           (0.74)      (0.045)    (0.044)     (0.044)     (0.043)     (0.044)      (0.045)      (0.040)
            Pre-shock position FE
            Controls

     Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. Each cell in the table is a separate regression of the column outcome on the row regressor and the controls indicated in the
     bottom part of the table. The explaining variables are all indicators that equal 1 if the respondent experienced the shock between 2012 and 2017. In each
     row, we exclude respondents who experienced the shock between 2008 and 2011. For Unemployment, we only use respondents who were in the workforce in
     the entire period. For Disability, we do not estimate the effect on fairness within sector, because very few disabled people work. The controls indicated in
     the bottom are included in all regressions. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and
     sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects, all measured in 2008, a treatment indicator and an indicator that equals one if a respondent voted for
     a right-wing party in the 2015 general election. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
4.4   Survey Experimental Variation in Social Position: Correction of Misper-
      ceptions
The previous sections documented strong associations between fairness views and actual and per-
ceived cohort positions of the individuals. In this section, we analyze the casual impact of changes
in perceived position on fairness views. As described in section 2.2, we informed a random half
of the sample (the treatment group) about their true social positions before the module asking
about their views on fairness, effort versus luck and political attitudes. The rest of the sample was
informed about their true position only after this module (the control group).
    Table 7 shows the main experimental results. The outcome variables are exactly as in Table
4, which focused on simple correlations. The rows here show the coefficients on actual position,
on the misperception level of the respondent (perceived minus actual position), on an indicator
for being in the treated group, and on the interaction between the treatment indicator and the
level of misperception. The treatment has positive significant effects on views of fairness, but it
is the interaction with misperception that is most telling. In line with the correlations in Table
4, respondents with positive misperceptions in general believe inequality is less unfair, conditional
on position fixed effects. But when they are informed about their misperception, their views on
inequality revert back to being more aligned with those of respondents at the same income position
who do not overestimate their position to start with (i.e., the coefficients on the treatment effect
interacted with positive misperceptions cancel out those on having a strong positive misperception).
The opposite happens for respondents with negative misperceptions. These patterns confirm that
the treatment acts differently based on whether respondents were over- or underestimating their
rank to start with, as it corrects their misperceptions and thus moves perceived position in different
directions.
    The last two columns show that the treatment has no significant effects on the role of effort
versus luck and on political preferences. Similarily, we do not detect any significant effects on other
views and attitudes (see Appendix Table A-19). This suggests that changes in perceived social
position have stronger effects on fairness than on other normative views.
    The appendix reports a number of robustness checks: The results are unaffected if we include
controls (see Table A-20). The treatment information is based on people's reported income, not on
their actual income, so one may potentially worry that the treatment effects could be affected by
errors in people's reported income. However, this is not the case. As Appendix Table A-21 shows,
restricting the sample to respondents who reported their own income accurately gives the same
results. We also check that the heterogeneous treatment effect is indeed driven by the misperception,
rather than by income per se. Appendix Table A-22 shows that the results are unchanged if we also
include treatment-income interactions in the regressions. Appendix Tables A-23 and A-24 show
similar results when we use actual groups instead of reported groups and if we restrict the sample
to respondents whose reported group matches the group observed in the register data, for each
reference group.


5     Concluding Remarks
Our results provide answers to the opening questions in the Introduction. First, we find that people,
although making systematic misperceptions, are well informed about social positions. People tend
to believe others are closer to themselves than they really are and, in this sense, perceive inequalities
to be smaller than they really are. This applies across all reference groups and both when people
report social positions of themselves and others (P50 and P95). However, the misperceptions are


                                                   32
Table 7: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and
Political View
                                       More unfair within reference group                        More        Right-
                            Cohort       Gender       Municip.     Education       Sector        effort       wing
 Position                  -1.148       -1.092        -1.255       -1.393         -1.373        0.935       0.961
                            (0.049)      (0.049)       (0.048)      (0.048)        (0.052)      (0.049)     (0.045)

 Misperception             -0.356       -0.577        -0.461        -0.398        -0.819        0.530       0.528
                            (0.092)      (0.086)       (0.083)       (0.075)       (0.079)      (0.092)     (0.084)

 Treatment                 0.080         0.059         0.062         0.049          0.039        -0.006       -0.024
                           (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.020)

 T × Misperception          0.307        0.274          0.187         0.036        0.259         -0.140       -0.008
                            (0.118)      (0.110)       (0.108)       (0.091)       (0.093)      (0.118)      (0.109)
 N                           9331         9331          9331          9331          8854          9331         9331

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference between
perceived position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the More ef-
fort and Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception. Right-wing is imputed based which party the respondent
reported to vote for if there was an election today. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



not large. They may seem large when assessing peoples own position, as normally done in the
literature, but this is due to a mechanical mean-reversion property when asking about ranks.
    Second, we provide a number of results suggesting that the fairness views of people depend
strongly on their current social position. Fairness views ­ in contrast to political views ­ correlate
strongly with current social positions compared to past positions. Movements up or down in social
positions caused by real-life shocks or induced by information treatments strongly correlate with
peoples' fairness views and not much with their political views.
    Third, people consider inequalities conditional on the same level of education or sector of work as
most unfair. Exactly in these dimensions, where it matters most, people are least informed about
inequality and lower-income people strongly overestimate their positions. Standard tax-transfer
policies are not targeted such dimensions of inequality in particular and it is an open question what
drives this observed pattern. One reason could be that people see education and type of work as
choices of individuals that are key determinants of income. People from the same cohort, gender, or
municipality can have very different education and work and so it is more expected that they earn
different levels of income. The flip side is then that inequality conditional on the key determinants
of income (education and sector of work) seems more due to factors outside of people's control and,
therefore, is perceived as more unfair.
    Are our results portable to other countries? Clearly, Denmark is one of the most equal countries
in the world (Atkinson and Søgaard, 2016; Boserup et al., 2016; Jakobsen et al., 2020) and attitudes
vary across countries (Alesina et al., 2001, 2018; Alm° as et al., 2020). Yet, because we analyze rank
positions, relative inequality perceptions (e.g, differences between perceived and actual P95 levels
compared to corresponding P50 levels) and relative fairness views across reference groups, it is not
clear a priori that our results should be different in one direction or the other.
    Key to our results is the linking of large-scale survey data on perceived social positions and


                                                         33
fairness to administrative records on actual social positions across time, life events and reference
groups. We see this combination of subjective and objective information as a promising avenue
to learn more about the determinants of perceptions and attitudes. Future research along this
line could explore the link between people's circumstances and life histories and a broad range of
perceptions and attitudes

References
Alesina, A. and G.-M. Angeletos (2005). Fairness and redistribution. American Economic Re-
  view 95 (4), 960­980.
Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote (2001). Why Doesn't the United States Have a European-
  Style Welfare State? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2001 (2), 187­277.
Alesina, A., S. Stantcheva, and E. Teso (2018). Intergenerational mobility and preferences for
  redistribution. American Economic Review 108 (2), 521­54.
Alm°as, I., A. W. Cappelen, K. G. Salvanes, E. . Sørensen, and B. Tungodden (2017). Fairness and
  family background. Politics, Philosophy & Economics 16 (2), 117­131.
Alm°
   as, I., A. W. Cappelen, and B. Tungodden (2020). Cutthroat capitalism versus cuddly socialism:
  Are americans more meritocratic and efficiency-seeking than scandinavians? Journal of Political
  Economy 128 (5), 1753­1788.
Andersen, H. Y. and S. Leth-Petersen (2020). Housing Wealth or Collateral: How Home Value
 Shocks Drive Home Equity Extraction and Spending. Journal of the European Economic Asso-
 ciation 0 (0), 1­38.
Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Søgaard (2016). The Long-Run History of Income Inequality in Denmark.
  The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 118 (2), 264­291.
Baker, M., Y. Halberstam, K. Kroft, A. Mas, and D. Messacar (2019). Pay transparency and the
  gender gap. NBER Working Paper 25834. National Bureau of Economic Research .
Blanchflower, D. G. and A. J. Oswald (2004). Well-being Over Time in Britain and the USA.
  Journal of Public Economics 88 (7-8), 1359­1386.
B´
 enabou, R. and E. A. Ok (2001). Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The Poum
  Hypothesis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 447­487.
Boserup, S. H., W. Kopczuk, and C. T. Kreiner (2016, May). The Role of Bequests in Shaping
  Wealth Inequality: Evidence from Danish Wealth Records. American Economic Review 106 (5),
  656­61.
Boskin, M. J. and E. Sheshinski (1978). Optimal redistributive taxation when individual welfare
  depends upon relative income. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92 (4), 589­601.
Card, D., A. Mas, E. Moretti, and E. Saez (2012). Inequality at work: The effect of peer salaries
  on job satisfaction. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2981­3003.
Charit´
      e, J., R. Fisman, and I. Kuziemko (2015, March). Reference points and redistributive pref-
  erences: experimental evidence. NBER Working Paper 21009. National Bureau of Economic
 Research .
Clark, A. E. and A. J. Oswald (1996). Satisfaction and comparison income. Journal of Public
  Economics 61 (3), 359­381.



                                                34
Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013). Biased perceptions of income distribution
  and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 98, 100­112.
Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018a). How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary
  Comparisons. NBER Working Paper 24841. National Bureau of Economic Research .
Cullen, Z. B. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018b). The salary taboo: Privacy norms and the diffusion of
  information. NBER Working Paper 25145. National Bureau of Economic Research .
Duesenberry, J. (1949). Income, saving, and the theory of consumer behavior. Economic studies :
 No. 87. Harvard University Press.
Dynan, K. E. and E. Ravina (2007). Increasing income inequality, external habits, and self-reported
 happiness. American Economic Review 97 (2), 226­231.
Easterlin, R. A. (1974). Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence.
  In P. A. David and M. W. Reder (Eds.), Nations and households in economic growth, pp. 89 ­
  125. Academic Press.
Easterlin, R. A. (1995). Will raising the incomes of all increase the happiness of all? Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization 27 (1), 35­47.
Easterlin, R. A. (2001). Income and happiness: Towards a unified theory. The Economic Jour-
  nal 111 (473), 465­484.
Easterlin, R. A., L. A. McVey, M. Switek, O. Sawangfa, and J. S. Zweig (2010). The happiness-
  income paradox revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
  of America 107 (52), 22463­22468.
Epper, T., E. Fehr, H. Fehr-Duda, C. T. Kreiner, D. D. Lassen, S. Leth-Petersen, and G. N.
  Rasmussen (2020). Time discounting and wealth inequality. American Economic Review 110 (4),
  1177­1205.
Fehr, D., J. Mollerstrom, and R. Perez-Truglia (2019). Your place in the world: The demand for
  national and global redistribution. NBER Working Paper 26555. National Bureau of Economic
  Research .
Ferrer-i Carbonell, A. (2005). Income and well-being: an empirical analysis of the comparison
  income effect. Journal of Public Economics 89 (5-6), 997­1019.
Fisman, R., I. Kuziemko, and S. Vannutelli (2020). Distributional Preferences in Larger Groups:
  Keeping up with the Joneses and Keeping Track of the Tails. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 0 (0), 1­32.
Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2014). Growing up in a recession. Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 81 (2), 787­817.
Jakobsen, K., K. Jakobsen, H. Kleven, and G. Zucman (2020). Wealth taxation and wealth ac-
  cumulation: Theory and evidence from Denmark. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1),
  329­388.
Karadja, M., J. Mollerstrom, and D. Seim (2017). Richer (and holier) than thou? The effect of
 relative income improvements on demand for redistribution. Review of Economics and Statis-
 tics 99 (2), 201­212.
Kleven, H. J., M. B. Knudsen, C. T. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011). Unwilling or unable
  to cheat? Evidence from a tax audit experiment in Denmark. Econometrica 79 (3), 651­692.



                                                35
Kreiner, C. T., D. D. Lassen, and S. Leth-Petersen (2019). Liquidity constraint tightness and con-
  sumer responses to fiscal stimulus policy. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11 (1),
  351­379.
Kuziemko, I., R. W. Buell, T. Reich, and M. I. Norton (2014). 'Last-place aversion': Evidence and
 redistributive implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 105­149.
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How elastic are preferences for redis-
 tribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic Review 105 (4),
 1478­1508.
Luttmer, E. F. P. (2005). Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 120 (3), 963­1002.
McBride, M. (2001). Relative-income effects on subjective well-being in the cross-section. Journal
 of Economic Behavior & Organization 45 (3), 251­278.
Meltzer, A. H. and S. F. Richard (1981). A rational theory of the size of government. Journal of
 Political Economy 89 (5), 914­927.
Perez-Truglia, R. (2020). The effects of income transparency on well-being: Evidence from a natural
  experiment. American Economic Review 110, 1019­1054.
Roth, C. and J. Wohlfart (2018). Experienced inequality and preferences for redistribution. Journal
  of Public Economics 167, 251­262.




                                                 36
                                              APPENDIX

A-1       Survey Quality

                                  Table A-1: Attrition analysis
                                                                    Not in sample
                          Panel A
                          Treatment                            0.007           (0.008)
                          Male                              -0.083             (0.008)
                          Age                                  0.001           (0.003)
                          Married                            -0.021            (0.008)
                          Ref.: Middle 40%
                          Bottom 50 %                        0.149             (0.009)
                          Top 10 %                          -0.060             (0.012)
                          Ref.: Master programs
                          Primary education                  0.157             (0.017)
                          Upper secondary edu.                0.017            (0.019)
                          Vocational education               0.086             (0.012)
                          Short cycle higher edu.              0.014           (0.017)
                          Bachelor programs                   0.026            (0.012)
                          Ref.: Nothern Jutland
                          Copenhagen                           0.016           (0.015)
                          Sealand                             -0.000           (0.016)
                          Southern Denmark                     0.007           (0.015)
                          Middle Jutland                      -0.014           (0.015)
                          Observations                        13667
                          Panel B                                               Share
                          Not in the sample                                     0.312
                          Conditional on not being in the sample
                             Drop out at consent question                       0.033
                             Drop out at income question                        0.327
                             Drop out before treatment                          0.775
                             Drop out after treatment                           0.037
                             Screened out                                       0.158

Notes : Respondents who dropped out before the treatment, were not assigned to either the treatment or control
group. We randomly assign these individuals to one of the groups. The number of observations in the regression
in Panel A is 19 lower than total number of people who started the survey. This is because we miss educational
information for these individuals. The sum of Drop out before treatment, Drop out after treatment and Screened out
sum to 97%. The last 3% are people who are assigned to the control but do not complete the survey. Standard errors
in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                      A-1
Figure A-1: Full distribution of time spent on answering the survey




                             2500
                             2000
                             1500
                 Frequency
                             1000
                             500
                             0




                                             0        30            60          90        120
                                                 Time spent on survey in minutes

               Notes : The figure shows the distribution of time spent on
               the survey for the sample. The bin width is 5 minutes and
               the distribution is censored above 120 minutes.



        Figure A-2: Distribution of actual cohort position
                             2         1.5
                 Share of sample in pct.
                           1 .5
                             0




                                             0   20            40         60         80   100
                                                           Actual cohort position

               Notes : The panel shows the share of respondents in the
               sample from each income position.




                                                                A-2
                               Table A-2: Treatment balancing
                                                   Control    Treatment         Difference
                 Actual cohort position           64.003      64.370        -0.367 (0.513)
                 Treatment information            -5.812      -6.048         0.237 (0.335)
                 Cohort misperception             -5.767      -6.064        0.297 (0.353)
                 Economic policy view              0.001      -0.001        0.001 (0.021)
                 Male                              0.511       0.518        -0.007 (0.010)
                 Age                              47.058      46.998        0.060 (0.029)
                 Primary education                 0.077       0.075         0.001 (0.005)
                 Upper secondary education         0.061       0.054         0.007 (0.005)
                 Vocational education              0.317       0.312        0.005 (0.010)
                 Short cycle higher education      0.090       0.091        -0.001 (0.006)
                 Bachelor programs                 0.264       0.274        -0.010 (0.009)
                 Master programs                   0.190       0.193        -0.003 (0.008)
                 Self-employed                     0.037       0.037         0.000 (0.004)
                 Employee                          0.901       0.903        -0.002 (0.006)
                 Unemployed                        0.013       0.013        -0.000 (0.002)
                 Private sector                    0.660       0.657        0.003 (0.010)
                 Not in work force                 0.049       0.047        0.002 (0.004)
                 Copenhagen                        0.087       0.086         0.001 (0.006)
                 Sealand                           0.237       0.229        0.008 (0.009)
                 Southern Denmark                  0.199       0.215        -0.016 (0.008)
                 Middle Jutland                    0.312       0.308        0.004 (0.010)
                 Nothern Jutland                  0.164       0.161         0.003 (0.008)
                 N                                                           9415

Notes : Column 1 and 2 show the group means of the variables. Column 3 shows the difference. Standard errors in
parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

          Table A-3: Match between survey response and register data

                                                                 N      Share

                               Correct municipality            9,239      0.98
                               Correct level of education      6,958      0.74
                               Correct sector                  6,768      0.72
                               All correct                     4,952      0.53




                                                     A-3
          Table A-4: Change of workplace and misreporting of sector
                                                       Probability of misreporting sector
              Same workplace in 2018 as in 2017        -0.113 -0.102           -0.102
                                                        (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.011)

              Same workplace in 2016 as in 2017                     -0.035        -0.035
                                                                     (0.011)       (0.011)

              Constant                                 0.366        0.384         0.350
                                                       (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.021)
              Observations                               9415         9415          9415
              R2                                        0.012        0.013         0.026
              Controls

Notes : Controls include cohort FE, gender dummy and educational level FE. Standard errors in parentheses. *
p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.



A-2      Full survey
A-2.1     Questionnaire in English
Consent

Background questions

   1. What is your birthyear
      Dropdown menu with years. Only 1969-1973 accepted.

   2. What is your gender?
      Male; Female

   3. How many siblings do you have with the same biological mother and father as you?
      0; 1; 2 or more

   4. Which municipality did you live in at the beginning of 2017? Note that, in the following
      options, some of the municipalities are grouped together.
      Dropdown menu with Danish municipalities

   5. Which of the following categories best describes your highest educational level?
      Primary education; Upper secondary education; Vocational education and training; Short cycle
      higher education; Bachelor program or vocational bachelor education; Master program or PhD
      program

   6. What was your employment status at the beginning of 2017?
      Full-time employment; Part-time employment; Self-employed; Unemployed; Not in the labor
      force

                                                    A-4
  7. Which sector did you work in at the beginning of 2017? Note that we mean the sector, which
     your workplace belongs to. For example, if you work with PR in a bank, you should choose
     the sector "Finance and insurance" and not the sector "Information and communication".
     Construction; Real estate activities; Business services; Finance and insurance; Trade and
     transport; Manufacturing, raw material extraction and utilities; Information and communi-
     cation; Culture, leisure and other services; Agriculture, forestry and fishing; Public adminis-
     tration, education, health and social work activities

Political views

  1. Which political party did you vote for in the last general election (in 2015)?
     Socialdemokratiet; Venstre, Danmarks Liberale Parti; Radikale Venstre; Enhedslisten - De
     Rød-Grønne; Det Konservative Folkeparti; Alternativet; SF - Socialistisk Folkeparti; Liberal
     Alliance; Kristendemokraterne; Dansk Folkeparti; Other; Did not vote; Do not wish to answer

  2. How would you describe your attitude towards economic policy?
     Very left wing; Left wing; Moderate; Right wing; Very right wing

Income

  1. We will now ask you about your total income before tax in 2017. You should not include
     contributions to employer-managed pension schemes or forced pension contributions. When
     we later will inform you about your own position, it is important that you state your total
     income as precisely as possible. If you are in doubt about the amounts, you can view them
     on your annual statement for 2017 from SKAT under Opgørelse af indkomst below Før AM-
     bidrag. You can also see a description of the different categories below. Note: In the scheme
     below we ask you to please state the yearly amounts in entire thousand kroner. If you enter
     1 this corresponds to 1.000 DKK.
     Salary and fees; Net profit from self-employment; Unemployment benefits, social assistance,
     study grants and pension payments

Perceptions

  1. Instruction video

  2. We will now ask you a question to see if you have understood the video's explanation of the
     ladder's different positions. Think about a person with an income, where 73 out of 100 people
     have an income that is the same as or less than this person's income. 27 out of 100 people
     have an income, which is higher than this person's income. Select this person's position on
     the income ladder using the slider below.




                                                 A-5
 3. What do you think the income for P50 was in 2017 for individuals born [PIPED birthyear]?
   Remember that P50 is the income, where half have an income that is the same as or less
   than this income, and half have an income that is higher than this income. Remember also
   that income is before tax for the whole of 2017 and consists of salary, net profit from self-
   employment, other business income, unemployment benefits, transfers and payments from
   private and public pensions. Note: Please state your answer in entire thousand DKKs. If you
   enter 1 it corresponds to 1.000 DKK

 4. We will now ask you what you think the before tax income for P50 was in 2017 for the groups
   below, which you are a part of. The first slider shows your answer from the previous question.
   You can use the other sliders to select, what you think the income was for P50 for the different
   groups of people, who were born the same year as you.

 5. What do you think the income for P95 was in 2017 for individuals born in [PIPED birthyear]?
   Remember that P95 is the income, where 95 out of 100 have an income that is the same as
   or less than this income, and 5 out of 100 have an income that is higher than this income.
   Please state your answer in entire thousand DKKs. If you enter 1 it corresponds to 1.000
   DKK

 6. We will now ask you what you think the before tax income for P95 was in 2017 for the groups
   below, which you are a part of. The first slider shows your answer from the previous question.
   You can use the other sliders to select, what you think the income was for P95 for the different
   groups of people, who were born the same year as you.

 7. Your rank among [PIPED SEX]. Now, think about all [PIPED SEX] born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR].
   Use the slider to select where you think you were placed on the income ladder in 2017 for this
   group of people. Later we will inform you about your true position.

 8. Your rank within [PIPED MUNICIPALITY] municipality. Now, think about people who
   also lived in [PIPED MUNICIPALITY] at the beginning of 2017 and were born in [PIPED
   BIRTHYEAR]. Use the slider to select where you think you were placed on the income ladder
   in 2017 for this group of people. Later we will inform you about your true position.

 9. Your rank with in the educational level [PIPED EDUCATION]. Now, think about people
   whose educational level also was [PIPED EDUCATION] at the beginning of 2017 and were
   born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]. Use the slider to select where you think you were placed on
   the income ladder in 2017 for this group of people. Later we will inform you about your true
   position.


10. Your rank within the sector [PIPED SECTOR]. Now, think about people who also worked
   in [PIPED SECTOR] at the beginning of 2017 and were born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]. Use


                                              A-6
   the slider to select where you think you were placed on the income ladder in 2017 for this
   group of people. Later we will inform you about your true position.

11. Think about your [FOR WOMEN: mother's. FOR MEN: father's] total income in year,
   where you turned 15. Compared to other [FOR WOMEN: mothers. FOR MEN: fathers]
   of children, who were also born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR], where do you think your [FOR
   WOMEN: mother. FOR MEN: father] was placed on the income ladder in the year, where
   you turned 15?

12. Is your income higher or lower than [FOR REPONDENTS WITH ONE SIBLING: your
   brother's/sister's income? FOR RESPONDENTS WITH 2 OR MORE SIBLINGS: the aver-
   age income of your siblings?]
   Higher; The same; Lower

13. Think about your colleagues at the beginning of 2017. By colleagues, we mean the people
   who had the same workplace as you at the beginning of 2017. A workplace usually has the
   same address; consequently, if you, for example, worked in a chain store, then your colleagues
   are those who worked in the same store as you and not all the people, who were employed in
   the same company. How many worked at your workplace, including yourself, at the beginning
   of 2017? If you cannot remember the exact number, then write your best guess.

14. Imagine that we rank you and your colleagues by your income in 2017, such that the person
   with the lowest income is number 1 and the person with the highest income is number [PIPED
   # COWORKERS]. Where do you think you were placed in this rank in 2017?

15. Think about your neighbors at the beginning of 2017. By neighbors, we mean the people
   who lived on the same road as you, if you lived in a house, or the people living on the same
   stairwell as you, if you lived in an apartment. Think only about the people, who were between
   25 and 65 years old. How many people lived on the same road or on the same stairwell as
   you, including your own household, at the beginning of 2017? If you cannot remember the
   exact number, then write your best guess.


16. Imagine that we rank you and your neighbors by your income in 2017, such that the person
   with the lowest income is number 1 and the person with the highest income is number [PIPED
   # NEIGHBORS]. Where do you think you were placed in this rank in 2017?

17. Think about your schoolmates when you were 15 years old. By schoolmates, we mean ev-
   erybody at your school, who was born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR], and not just the people in
   the same class as you. How many schoolmates were you including yourself? If you cannot
   remember the exact number, then write your best guess.



                                             A-7
 18. Imagine that we rank you and your schoolmates by your income in 2017, such that the person
     with the lowest income is number 1 and the person with the highest income is number [PIPED
     # SCHOOLMATES]. Where do you think you were placed in this rank in 2017?

Treatment

For the treatment group this block appears here. For the control group it appears after the block
"Outcomes".
   For each reference group, cohort/gender/municipality/educational level/sector, we provide the
followong information:


You GUESSED that you were on position PXX.
Based on the income you have entered, your TRUE position is PXX.
You are actually X positions higher/lower on the ladder than you thought.

Outcomes

  1. Do you think that it is fair or unfair on a scale from 1 to 7 that there are differences in income
     among people born the same year as you within the following reference groups that you are
     a part of yourself in 2017?

      (a) Differences in income between people born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]
      (b) Differences in income between [PIPED SEX] born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]
      (c) Differences in income between people, who live in [PIPED MUNICIPALITY] municipal-
          ity
      (d) Differences in income between people, who have the educational level [PIPED EDUCA-
          TION]
      (e) Differences in income between people, who work in the sector [PIPED SECTOR]

  2. Now, think about people born the same year as you within your reference groups (see below).
     Indicate on a scale from 1 to 7 for each referencegroup to what extent you think differences
     in income are caused by differences in people's efforts in life or caused by differences in luck.
     By luck, we mean conditions, which you have no control over. By effort, we mean conditions,
     which you can control.

      (a) Reason for different incomes among people born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]?
      (b) Reason for different incomes among [SEX] born in [PIPED BIRTHYEAR]?
      (c) Reason for different incomes among people living in [PIPED MUNICIPALITY] munici-
          pality?



                                                 A-8
     (d) Reason for different incomes among people with the educational level [PIPED EDUCA-
           TION]?
     (e) Reason for different incomes among people working in the sector [PIPED SECTOR]?

  3. Which party would you vote for if there was a general election today?
    Socialdemokratiet; Venstre, Danmarks Liberale Parti; Radikale Venstre; Enhedslisten - De
    Rød-Grønne; Det Konservative Folkeparti; Alternativet; SF - Socialistisk Folkeparti; Liberal
    Alliance; Kristendemokraterne; Dansk Folkeparti; Nye Borgerlige; Other; Do not wish to
    answer

  4. Below, you see six statements, which one can either agree or disagree with. We would like
    you to state to what degree you agree or disagree with each statement on a scale from 1 to 7.

     (a) Income inequality is a problem in Denmark
     (b) The government should increase redistribution of income by increasing taxes and trans-
           fers to reduce inequality
     (c) I am generally satisfied with my life
     (d) My work has generally paid off
     (e) People with high incomes have worked hard for their income and deserve it
        (f) If a person is poor this is mainly due to lack of effort from his or her side

Outro

  1. It is detrimental for our study that we only use responses from people, who have given
    the survey their full attention; otherwise, many years of work will go to waste. You will
    automatically participate in the lottery no matter what you answer, but we would like to
    know how much attention you have given the survey.
    1 I barely gave the survey any attention; ... ; 7 I gave the survey my full attention

  2. Do you think that the survey was biased?
    Yes, it was right winged; Yes, it was left winged; No, it was neutral

  3. If you have any comments about the survey, then you are welcome to write them here:




                                                  A-9
Figure A-3: Income Question




           A-10
   Figure A-4: Comparison of Position using Different Income Definitions




                                                                                 100
                                                                                            Total income




                              Income position using total or disposable income
                                                                                            Disposable income




                                                                                 80
                                                                                 60
                                                                                 40
                                                                                 20
                                                                                 0




                                                                                       0           20        40        60        80        100
                                                                                           Income position using survey definition of income

                            Notes : The figures uses all individuals born from 1969 to
                            1973 observed in the income register data. N=389,759.
                            We use total income and disposable income as defined by
                            Statistics Denmark.



                   Figure A-5: Elicitation of cohort P50 perception




Notes : The figure shows a screenshot from the survey for a person who reported being born in 1971.




                                                                                                             A-11
      Figure A-6: Elicitation of large reference group P50 perceptions




Notes : The top slider shows the piped answer to the question in figure A-5 and cannot be moved. The sliders go
from 20,000 to 8,069,000 in 200 steps according to Y = 20000  EXP (0.03  Step). In the middle position the slider
has the value 402,000.




                                                     A-12
                   Figure A-7: Elicitation of own perceived position




Notes : The figure shows a screenshot from the survey for a person who reported being born in 1971 and having an
income of 350,000 DKK. The slider starts at P1, and when the respondent moves the slider with the cursor, the
position marked with red changes accordingly.




                                                     A-13
Figure A-8: Elicitation of number of co-workers and position among co-
workers
          (a) Number of co-workers                                 (b) Position among coworkers




Notes : The figure shows two screenshots from two pages in the survey. In this example, the respondent reports having
50 co-workers in the left panel (the box is empty as default). In the right panel, this number is piped as the max of
the slider, and when the respondent moves the slider with the cursor the red position number changes accordingly.


A-2.2      Instruction video script
We will now ask you some questions regarding the distribution of income between Danes born the
same year as you.
    It may be difficult to answer, but we ask you to try your best.


There are differences between peoples' incomes. Some people have a high income, others have a
low income.
    The ladder to the left illustrates how the incomes are distributed between Danes born
the same year as you.
    This is also called the income distribution


Think of 100 people born the same year as you.
    They are ranked according to their income such that the person with the lowest income is at
the bottom of the ladder and the person with the highest income is at the top of the ladder.


Look at the person next to the first rung of the ladder.
    5 out of 100 people (i.e. 5 %) have an income which is the same as or lower than the income
of this person.
    We call this P5, because the person has position 5 on the income ladder.


The person on the middle rung has position 50.
    Exactly half of all people (i.e. 50 %) born the same year as you have an income which is


                                                       A-14
the same as or lower than the income of this person and exactly half have an income which is
higher than the income of this person.
   We call the position in the middle for P50.
   Remember that P50 is the position in the middle since we will use this several times in the
following questions.


The person next to the top rung has position 95.
   95 out of 100 (i.e. 95 %) have an income which is the same as or lower than the income of this
person and only 5 out of 100 people born the same year as you (i.e. 5 %) have an income which is
higher than the income of this person.
   Remember what P95 indicates since we are going to use this several times.


Shortly, we will now ask you what you think the income is for P50 and P95, respectively, for Danes
born the same year as you
   Next, we will ask you what you think your position is on the ladder.
   You are welcome to watch the video again if you are not sure of the meaning of the different
positions.




                                                 A-15
A-3       Overall perceptions

                      Figure A-9: Within cohort P50 and P95 by age




                                                                 1000
                                                                            P50
                                                                            P95




                                                                 800
                               Within cohort income (1000 DKK)
                                                                 600
                                                                 400
                                                                 200
                                                                 0




                                                                        0   20    40          60     80         100
                                                                                       Age

                            Notes : This figure shows the within cohort P50 and P95
                            income based on a 10% sample of the full population in
                            Denmark. We use the same income definition as in the
                            survey which excludes early retirement benefits, since the
                            cohorts surveyed are not yet eligible for this benefit. The
                            age cut-off for early retirement benefits is 60 and there-
                            fore we see a sharp drop at this age. We include pension
                            payments, since we cannot disentangle old age pension and
                            disability pension.



                  Table A-5: Moments in the full income distribution
                                                                                  Income distribution percentiles
                                                                                  P5     P25       P50    P75         P95
                        Full population                                            0         57    198    358         622
                        Adult population                                          36         158   261    394         670
                        Working age population                                    39         217   333    447         751
                        Prime age population                                      112        262   373    502         896

Notes : This table shows different moments of the income distribution in 1,000 DKK based of different definitions of
the population. The moments are based on a 10% sample of the full population in Denmark in 2017. Adult population
are individuals from age 18 and up. Working age population are from age 25 to 65 and Prime age population are
from age 45 to 50.




                                                                                  A-16
                                 Figure A-10: Perception of cohort P50 and P95
                                           (a) P50                                                                                 (b) P95




                                                                                                             1800
                                 Median                                                                                  Median
                       700

                                 P25                                                                                     P25




                                                                                                             1500
                                 P75                                                                                     P75
                       600




                                                                                                             1200
 Reported cohort P50




                                                                                       Reported cohort P50
                       500
                       400




                                                                                                             900
                       300




                                                                                                             600
                       200




                                                                                                             300
                       100
                       0




                                                                                                             0
                             0        20         40               60   80        100                                 0        20       40         60        80   100
                                           Actual cohort position                                                                  Actual cohort position

Notes : The left shows the median of the perceived P50 reported in DKK by position of people
in the within-cohort income distribution. The right panel similarly shows the perceived P95.
Both bin scatter figures have 25 bins.
Notes :



                        Figure A-11: Distribution of perceived cohort position
                                                       .02
                                                       .015
                                             Density
                                                       .01
                                                       .005
                                                       0




                                                              0        20         40                                60        80        100
                                                                            Perceived cohort position

                                           Notes : The panel shows a density plot and is constructed
                                           using Epanechnikov kernels with a bandwidth of 5.




                                                                                  A-17
A-4                                                 Reference groups

Figure A-12: Perceived P50 and P95 Incomes for Large Reference Groups
with Sample Restrictions and Using Medians
                                                                                                                                                                         (a) P50

                                                 Actual groups                                                                                      Ref. groups match                                                                                                      Bin medians

                                              Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort
                                              Gender                                                                                                    Gender                                                                                                    Gender
                                 600




                                                                                                                                           600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     600
                                              Municipality                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                              Municipality
                                              Education                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                 Education
 Perceived reference group P50




                                                                                                           Perceived reference group P50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perceived reference group P50
                                              Sector                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                    Sector
                                 500




                                                                                                                                           500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     500
                                 400




                                                                                                                                           400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
                                 300




                                                                                                                                           300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                 200




                                                                                                                                           200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                        200             300            400          500       600                                                 200             300            400          500       600                                                 200             300         400          500       600
                                                             Actual reference group P50                                                                                Actual reference group P50                                                                     Actual P50 in reported reference group



                                                                                                                                                                         (b) P95

                                                 Actual groups                                                                                      Ref. groups match                                                                                                      Bin medians
                                 1700




                                                                                                                                           1700




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1700
                                              Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort
                                              Gender                                                                                                    Gender                                                                                                    Gender
                                              Municipality                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                              Municipality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1500
                                 1500




                                                                                                                                           1500




                                              Education                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                 Education
 Perceived reference group P95




                                                                                                           Perceived reference group P95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perceived reference group P95




                                              Sector                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                    Sector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1300
                                 1300




                                                                                                                                           1300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1100
                                 1100




                                                                                                                                           1100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     900
                                 900




                                                                                                                                           900




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     700
                                 700




                                                                                                                                           700




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     500
                                 500




                                                                                                                                           500




                                          500          700       900         1100   1300   1500     1700                                            500          700       900         1100   1300   1500     1700                                            500          700    900         1100   1300   1500     1700
                                                             Actual reference group P95                                                                                Actual reference group P95                                                                     Actual P95 in reported reference group

Notes : In the left panels, we use actual reference group instead of reported reference group. In the middle panels,
we restrict the sample and only include respondents in each reference group if the reported group matches the group
observed in the register data. In the right panels, we show bin medians instead of bin means using the same sample as
in figure 5. For gender, we show one scatter for men and one for women. For municipality we divide the respondents
into 10 similar sized groups based on the actual municipality P50 and P95 income and plot one scatter for each group.
For education and sector we show one scatter for each educational level or sector. The scatters show the means and
median of the reported P50 or P95 winzorized at the 5th and 95th percentile within the group.




                                                                                                                                                                            A-18
Figure A-13: Perceived P50 Incomes for Large Reference Groups with Sam-
ple Restrictions
                                                                                                                                                      (a) Actual reference groups

                                                          Gender                                                                                Municipality                                                                                       Education                                                                                                Sector
                                        650




                                                                                                                                      650




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       650




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        650
                                                  Women                                                                                         Low income municipality                                                                          Lower education                                                                                  Low income sector
                                                  Men                                                                                           High income municipality                                                                         Higher education                                                                                 High income sector
 Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                               Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Perceived P50 within reference group
                                        550




                                                                                                                                      550




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       550




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        550
                                        450




                                                                                                                                      450




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       450




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        450
                                        350




                                                                                                                                      350




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       350




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        350
                                        250




                                                                                                                                      250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        250
                                              0       20       40         60        80   100                                                0         20          40       60        80   100                                                0         20           40      60        80   100                                                0        20          40        60        80   100
                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position




                                                                                                                                                        (b) Reference groups match

                                                          Gender                                                                                Municipality                                                                                       Education                                                                                                Sector
                                        650




                                                                                                                                      650




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       650




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        650

                                                  Women                                                                                         Low income municipality                                                                          Lower education                                                                                  Low income sector
                                                  Men                                                                                           High income municipality                                                                         Higher education                                                                                 High income sector
 Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                               Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                Perceived P50 within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Perceived P50 within reference group
                                        550




                                                                                                                                      550




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       550




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        550
                                        450




                                                                                                                                      450




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       450




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        450
                                        350




                                                                                                                                      350




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       350




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        350
                                        250




                                                                                                                                      250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        250




                                              0       20       40         60        80   100                                                0         20          40       60        80   100                                                0         20           40      60        80   100                                                0        20          40        60        80   100
                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position                                                                           Actual cohort position


Notes : In the top panels, we use actual reference group instead of reported reference group. For each reference group,
the bottom panels only include respondents whose reported reference group matches the actual reference group. The
solid lines indicate the actual average P50 for each group within the bin. The high/low income split for municipality
is based on the median of within cohort in sample actual municipality P50 income. This is also the case for sector.
For education, Higher education is short cycle higher education, bachelor programs and master programs.




                                                                                                                                                                                          A-19
Figure A-15: Perceived and Actual Position for Large Reference Groups
with Sample Restrictions
                                         (a) Each group matches                                                                                                                       (b) All groups match                                                                                                (c) Actual ref. groups

                                                                Within ref. group                                                                                                         Within ref. group                                                                                                         Within ref. group
                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100
 Perceived position within reference group




                                                                                                                           Perceived position within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perceived position within reference group
                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                      40




                                                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                   Cohort                                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                                    Cohort
                                                                                                   Sex                                                                                                                       Sex                                                                                                                       Sex
                                                                                                   Municipality                                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                                              Municipality
                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                   Education                                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                                 Education
                                                                                                   Sector                                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                                    Sector
                                                                                                   45 degree line                                                                                                            45 degree line                                                                                                            45 degree line
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                            0       20        40         60           80             100                                                              0       20        40         60           80             100                                                              0       20        40         60           80             100
                                                                  Actual position within reference group                                                                                    Actual position within reference group                                                                                    Actual position within reference group



                                                                 Within cohort                                                                                                             Within cohort                                                                                                             Within cohort
                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                30
 Perceived - actual position within reference group




                                                                                                                           Perceived - actual position within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Perceived - actual position within reference group
                                                                                                      Cohort                                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                                    Cohort
                                                                                                      Sex                                                                                                                       Sex                                                                                                                       Sex
                                                                                                      Municipality                                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                                              Municipality
                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                      Education                                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                                 Education
                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                      Sector                                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                                    Sector
                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                      -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                                                                                                                                                                -10
                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -20




                                                            0       20        40         60           80             100                                                              0       20        40         60           80             100                                                              0       20        40         60           80             100
                                                                          Actual cohort position                                                                                                    Actual cohort position                                                                                                    Actual cohort position

Notes : In the left panels, we only use respondents in each reference group if the reported group matches the group
observed in the register data. In the middle panels, only respondents where all reported groups match the groups in
the register data are included and the sample is the same across groups. In the right panels, we use actual reference
groups instead of reported reference groups. The local linear polynomials have a bandwidth of 10.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       A-20
Figure A-14: Correlation Between Actual Cohort Position and Within
Large Reference Groups with Sample Restriction
                                                                                                                                                      (a) Actual reference group

                                                 Gender                                                                                        Municipality                                                                                   Education                                                                                      Sector
                                       100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                              Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Actual position within ref. group
                                       80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                       60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                       40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                       20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                    Women                                                                       Low income municipality                                                                               Lower education                                                                           Low income sector
                                                                                    Men                                                                         High income municipality                                                                              Higher education                                                                          High income sector
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                             0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0     20        40       60         80      100                                                0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0   20        40       60         80     100
                                                      Actual cohort position                                                                          Actual cohort position                                                                       Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position
                                       100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                              Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                             Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Perceived position within ref. group
                                       80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                       60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                       40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                       20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                    Women                                                                       Low income municipality                                                                               Lower education                                                                           Low income sector
                                                                                    Men                                                                         High income municipality                                                                              Higher education                                                                          High income sector
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                             0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0     20        40       60         80      100                                                0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0   20        40       60         80     100
                                                      Actual cohort position                                                                          Actual cohort position                                                                       Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position



                                                                                                                                                      (b) Reference groups match

                                                 Gender                                                                                        Municipality                                                                                   Education                                                                                      Sector
                                       100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                              Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Actual position within ref. group
                                       80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                       60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                       40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                       20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                    Women                                                                       Low income municipality                                                                               Lower education                                                                           Low income sector
                                                                                    Men                                                                         High income municipality                                                                              Higher education                                                                          High income sector
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                             0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0     20        40       60         80      100                                                0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0   20        40       60         80     100
                                                      Actual cohort position                                                                          Actual cohort position                                                                       Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position
                                       100




                                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                              Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                             Perceived position within ref. group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Perceived position within ref. group
                                       80




                                                                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                       60




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                       40




                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                       20




                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                    Women                                                                       Low income municipality                                                                               Lower education                                                                           Low income sector
                                                                                    Men                                                                         High income municipality                                                                              Higher education                                                                          High income sector
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                             0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0     20        40       60         80      100                                                0   20        40       60         80       100                                                0   20        40       60         80     100
                                                      Actual cohort position                                                                          Actual cohort position                                                                       Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position

Notes : In panel A, we use actual reference groups instead of reported reference groups. For each reference group, the
figures in panel B only include respondents whose reported reference group matches the actual reference group. The
high/low income split for municipality is based on the median of within cohort in sample actual municipality P50
income. This is also the case for sector. For education, Higher education is short cycle higher education, bachelor
programs and master programs.


                                                                                                                                                                                           A-21
Figure A-16: Variation in perceived position across large reference groups
                                             (a) Gender                                                                              (b) Municipality                                                                                            (c) Education                                                                              (d) Sector
                                   100




                                                                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                         Perceived position within educational level
                                                                                          Perceived position within municipality
                                   80




                                                                                                                                   80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
Perceived position within gender




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Perceived position within sector
                                   60




                                                                                                                                   60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                   40




                                                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                   20




                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                   0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                         0    20         40        60          80   100                                                  0   20         40        60          80   100                                                       0     20         40        60          80   100                                            0    20         40        60          80   100
                                                   Perceived cohort position                                                                      Perceived cohort position                                                                             Perceived cohort position                                                                 Perceived cohort position


Notes : This figure shows 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 95th percentile of reported position within the large reference
group by bins of perceived cohort position.




                                                                                                                                                                                   A-22
Figure A-17: Actual and reported number of people in small reference
groups
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (a) Co-corkers

                                                     < 4000                                                                                               < 500                                                                                                                                  < 100                                                                                                 < 50
                                3000




                                                                                                                                    500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                           Average
                                           Median
                                2500




                                                                                                                                    400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
Reported number of co-workers




                                                                                                    Reported number of co-workers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reported number of co-workers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reported number of co-workers
                                2000




                                                                                                                                    300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                1500




                                                                                                                                    200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                1000




                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Average                                                                                                 Average                                                                                              Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Median                                                                                                  Median                                                                                               Median
                                0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                       0      500          1000   1500   2000         2500   3000                                         0       100         200                                      300         400             500                                          0         20          40       60           80             100                                        0        10          20       30           40             50
                                                     Actual number of co-wokers                                                                         Actual number of co-wokers                                                                                                             Actual number of co-wokers                                                                           Actual number of co-wokers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Neighbors

                                                       < 500                                                                                              < 100                                                                                    < 50 (Apartments)                                                                                                                      < 50 (Houses)
                                400




                                                                                                                                    100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                           Average                                                                                            Average                                                                                                                                Average                                                                                              Average
                                           Median                                                                                             Median                                                                                                                                 Median                                                                                               Median
                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
Reported number of neighbors




                                                                                                    Reported number of neighbors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reported number of neighbors




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Reported number of neighbors
                                300




                                                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                200




                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                100




                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                       0             100          200           300          400                                          0        20          40                                       60         80              100                                          0         10          20       30           40             50                                         0        10          20       30           40             50
                                                     Actual number of neighbors                                                                         Actual number of neighbors                                                                                                             Actual number of neighbors                                                                           Actual number of neighbors




                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c) Schoolmates
                                                                                                                                                                                                      120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Median
                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                     Reported number of schoolmates
                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0      20             40    60                                     80       100       120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Actual number of schoolmates




Notes : The figures show bin scatters of the reported number of co-workers by the actual number of co-workers.
In each panel, the sample is restricted to observations where the Actual number of co-workers is below a certain
threshold. All observations are used to calculate the bin averages but the panels only show the averages if they are
smaller than the threshold. There are 25 bins in each panel and there is the same number of observations behind
each bin. The bin averages are only plotted if they are lower than the maximum actual number. For Schoolmates, the
figure is based on respondents enrolled in "Grundskole" (Basic School) at age 15. The figure excludes observations
from one very large school.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A-23
                                                       Figure A-18: Perceived position in small reference groups
                                                  Co-workers                                                                                                     Neighbors                                                                                               Schoolmates
                                        100




                                                                                                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Perceived position within schoolmates
 Perceived position within co-workers




                                                                                                         Perceived position within neighbors
                                        80




                                                                                                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                        60




                                                                                                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                        40




                                                                                                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                        20




                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                 Average all respondents                                                                                       Average all respondents                                                                                  Average all respondents
                                                                 Median all respondents                                                                                        Median all respondents                                                                                   Median all respondents
                                                                 Average if correct # co-workers                                                                               Average if correct # co-workers                                                                          Average if correct # schoolmates
                                        0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                              0   20        40          60           80            100                                                      0   20        40          60           80            100                                                 0   20        40            60          80            100
                                                  Actual position within co-workers                                                                             Actual position within neighbors                                                                         Actual position within schoolmates
                                        100




                                                                                                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Perceived position within schoolmates
 Perceived position within co-workers




                                                                                                         Perceived position within neighbors
                                        80




                                                                                                                                               80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                        60




                                                                                                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                        40




                                                                                                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                        20




                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                        0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                              0   20        40          60           80            100                                                      0   20        40          60           80            100                                                 0   20        40            60          80            100
                                                        Actual cohort position                                                                                       Actual cohort position                                                                                    Actual cohort position
                                        100




                                                                                                                                                      100
 Perceived position within co-workers




                                                                                                                Perceived position within neighbors
                                        80




                                                                                                                                                      80
                                        60




                                                                                                                                                      60
                                        40




                                                                                                                                                      40
                                        20




                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                          Small workplaces                                                                                                       Apartments
                                                                          Large workplaces                                                                                                       Houses
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                      0




                                              0   20        40          60           80            100                                                      0   20        40           60           80           100
                                                  Actual position within co-workers                                                                              Actual position within neighbors

Notes : There are 25 bins in each panel. They are of equal size, except the top bin for co-workers and neighbors in
the top panels, which have more observations. The top panels show similar patterns as in figure 9 using medians
instead of averages or restricting the sample to respondents who reports a number of people in the small reference
group that matches the number observed in the register data ± 10%. In the bottom panels, we use actual cohort
position instead actual position within the small reference group. Again, we see a pattern similar to figure 9. The
local linear polynomials have a bandwidth of 10 and are based on the respondents who report the correct number of
people in the reference group ±10%. Small workplaces have 10 to 100 employees. Large workplaces have more than
100 employees.




                                                                                                                                                                        A-24
A-5                                                          Social positions and fairness views

Figure A-19: View on Fairness and Effort vs. Luck Within Large Reference
Groups: Distribution and by Position
                                                                                                                                                                                             (a) Distributions



                                                                                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cohort                                                                          Cohort
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gender                                                                          Gender
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Municipality                                                                    Municipality
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Education                                                                       Education




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                                                                                                                                            .4                                                         Sector                                                                          Sector
                                                                                                          Share




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                  Completely fair             Neither fair or unfair    Completely unfair                                                  Only luck                                    Only effort




                                                                                                                                                                                                       (b) Fairness

                                           Actual position                                                                                        Cohort position                                                                                                      Actual groups                                                      Ref. groups match
                                     3.5




                                                                                                                                            3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3.5
Unfairness within reference group




                                                                                                       Unfairness within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Unfairness within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Unfairness within reference group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                     3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                     2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                           Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                                  Cohort                                                                                           Cohort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                            2




                                                           Gender                                                                                                    Gender                                                                                                                  Gender                                                                                           Gender
                                                           Municipality                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                                            Municipality                                                                                     Municipality
                                                           Education                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                               Education                                                                                        Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                           Sector                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                                  Sector                                                                                           Sector
                                                                                                                                            1.5




                                           0          20             40   60         80          100                                               0            20              40            60       80             100                                              0                20             40   60     80          100                                               0       20             40   60         80       100
                                               Actual position within reported reference group                                                                        Perceived cohort position                                                                                   Actual position within reference group                                                             Perceived position within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                       (c) Luck vs. effort

                                           Actual position                                                                                        Cohort position                                                                                                      Actual groups                                                      Ref. groups match
                                     5.5




                                                                                                                                            5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5.5




                                                           Cohort                                                                                                    Cohort                                                                                                                  Cohort                                                                                           Cohort
                                                           Gender                                                                                                    Gender                                                                                                                  Gender                                                                                           Gender
                                                           Municipality                                                                                              Municipality                                                                                                            Municipality                                                                                     Municipality
Luck/effort within reference group




                                                                                                       Luck/effort within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Luck/effort within reference group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Luck/effort within reference group




                                                           Education                                                                                                 Education                                                                                                               Education                                                                                        Education
                                                           Sector                                                                                                    Sector                                                                                                                  Sector                                                                                           Sector
                                     5




                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                     4.5




                                                                                                                                            4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4.5
                                     4




                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4




                                           0          20             40   60         80          100                                               0            20              40            60       80             100                                              0                20             40   60     80          100                                               0       20             40   60         80       100
                                               Actual position within reported reference group                                                                        Perceived cohort position                                                                                   Actual position within reference group                                                             Perceived position within reference group


Notes : The figure only uses responses from the control group. The local linear polynomials have a bandwidth of 20.
The top row panels show the raw distribution of the answers on the 7 point scale. The middle and bottom rows show
different robustness checks. In the first column panels, we use actual position within each reference group instead
of perceived position as in figure 11. In the second column panels, we use perceived cohort position. In the third
column panels, we use actual reference groups instead of reported reference groups. In the fourth column panels, we
only include respondents for each group if the reported group matches the group observed in the register data.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A-25
Table A-6: Correlation Between Actual Position and Misperception and
Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View with Actual Reference Groups
                                                       More unfair                            More      Right-
                                  Cohort      Gender       Mun.        Edu.       Sector      effort     wing
  Panel A: No controls

  Position                        -1.18      -1.13       -1.27       -1.38       -1.44       0.81       0.91
                                   (0.07)     (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.07)

  Misperception                   -0.38      -0.60       -0.47       -0.43       -0.83       0.43       0.45
                                   (0.10)     (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.09)     (0.10)     (0.10)
  Panel B: With controls

  Position                        -1.09      -1.01       -1.10       -1.04       -1.22       0.92       0.86
                                   (0.09)     (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.09)

  Misperception                   -0.40      -0.41       -0.41       -0.28       -0.54       0.46       0.44
                                   (0.10)     (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.10)     (0.10)
  N                                4690        4690        4690        4690        4330       4690       4690

Notes : In the table, we only use the control group respondents and use actual reference groups instead of reported
groups. All outcomes are z-scores. Position denotes the actual position within reference group from percentile 1 to
100 divided by 100. A coefficient of 1 means that going from the bottom of the distribution to the top increases
the outcome by one standard deviation. Similarly, Misperception is the difference between perceived and actual
position within the reference group divided by 100. For More effort and Right-wing we use cohort position and
misperception. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level
fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects. Outcome mean is the mean of the non-
standardized outcome variable and Outcome std. err. is the standard error of the estimated mean. Standard errors
in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                       A-26
Table A-7: Correlation Between Actual Position and Misperception and
Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View with Sample Restrictions
                                                         More unfair                             More       Right-
                                   Cohort      Gender        Mun.        Edu.        Sector      effort      wing
  Panel A: No controls

  Position                         -1.18       -1.13       -1.27        -1.45       -1.46       0.81       0.91
                                    (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.07)     (0.07)

  Misperception                    -0.38       -0.60       -0.48        -0.52       -0.93       0.43       0.45
                                    (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.10)     (0.10)
  Panel B: With controls

  Position                         -1.09       -1.01       -1.10        -1.12       -1.19       0.92       0.86
                                    (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.09)       (0.09)      (0.10)      (0.09)     (0.09)

  Misperception                    -0.40       -0.41       -0.41        -0.39       -0.58       0.46       0.44
                                    (0.10)      (0.10)      (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.10)     (0.10)
  N                                  4690        4690        4598        3451         3217       4690        4690
  Outcome mean                      (2.01)      (2.16)      (2.08)       (2.6)       (2.58)      (4.81)     (3.01)
                                    (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.01)

Notes : In the table we only use the control group respondents and for each reference group, we only include respon-
dents whose reported group matches the group reported in the register data. All outcomes are z-scores. Position
denotes the actual position within reference group from percentile 1 to 100 divided by 100. A coefficient of 1 means
that going from the bottom of the distribution to the top increases the outcome by one standard deviation. Similarly,
Misperception is the difference between perceived and actual position within the reference group divided by 100. For
More effort and Right-wing we use cohort position and misperception. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male
dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed
effects. Outcome mean is the mean of the non-standardized outcome variable and Outcome std. err. is the standard
error of the estimated mean. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                         A-27
Table A-8: Correlation Between Actual Position and Misperception and
Inequality Views
                                        Ineq.        Less        Less       Work not       Rich not       Poor's
                                      not prob.     redist.      satis.      paid off         deserve   own fault
    Panel A: No controls

    Position                           2.32         2.07        -1.22        -2.20            -1.45      -1.08
                                       (0.12)       (0.13)      (0.11)        (0.11)          (0.11)      (0.11)

    Misperception                      0.95         0.78        -0.38        -1.08            -0.83      -0.69
                                       (0.18)       (0.19)      (0.16)        (0.16)          (0.16)      (0.16)
    Panel B: With controls

    Position                           1.17         1.15        -0.83        -1.36            -1.07      -0.57
                                       (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.09)        (0.09)          (0.09)      (0.09)

    Misperception                      0.50         0.46        -0.32        -0.70            -0.60      -0.44
                                       (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.10)        (0.10)          (0.10)      (0.10)
    N                                   4690         4690        4690          4690            4690        4690
    Outcome mean                       (4.08)       (4.52)      (2.32)        (2.53)          (3.19)      (4.78)
                                       (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)      (0.02)

Notes : In the table we only use the control group respondents. All outcomes are z-scores. Position denotes the actual
cohort position from percentile 1 to 100 divided by 100. A coefficient of 1 means that going from the bottom of the
distribution to the top increases the outcome by one standard deviation. Similarly, Misperception is the difference
between perceived and actual cohort position divided by 100. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy,
municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects.
Outcome mean is the mean of the non-standardized outcome variable and Outcome std. err. is the standard error of
the estimated mean.Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

A-6       Income History and Life Events

           Table A-9: Pairwise correlations of historic income positions
                                        -20 yr.    -15 yr.    -10 yr.     -5 yr.   This yr.
                           -20 yr.       1.00        0.41       0.29      0.22         0.22
                           -15 yr.       0.41        1.00       0.62      0.54         0.51
                           -10 yr.       0.29        0.62       1.00      0.70         0.65
                           -5 yr.        0.22        0.54       0.70      1.00         0.78
                           This yr.      0.22        0.51       0.65      0.78         1.00

Notes : Based on the full cohorts born between 1969 and 1973. We only include individuals we observe in all years.
N=355,625.




                                                         A-28
 Table A-10: Transition matrix of income position 20 years ago and today
                                                         Quintile today
                                                  1      2       3       4      5     Total
                     Quintile 20 years ago
                         1                       5.2    3.2     3.1     3.9    4.4     19.8
                         2                       5.2    4.7     3.5     3.3    3.2     19.9
                         3                       3.4    6.0     4.9     3.4    2.3     20.1
                         4                       2.0    4.0     5.5     5.0    3.5     20.1
                         5                       1.5    2.1     3.8     5.4    7.3     20.1
                     Quintile 10 years ago
                         1                       9.5    4.4     2.0     1.5    1.0     18.3
                         2                       4.0    8.7     4.8     1.9    0.7     20.1
                         3                       1.9    4.4     8.0     4.9    1.3     20.5
                         4                       1.2    1.8     4.7     8.6    4.2     20.6
                         5                       0.8    0.7     1.3     4.2    13.4    20.5
                     Total                      17.4    20.1   20.8    21.1    20.7   100.0

Notes : Based on the full cohorts born between 1969 and 1973. We only include individuals we observe in all years.
The columns do not sum to 20% each because immigrants are included when the income percentiles are generated
but not in the table, since we do not observe them historically. N=355,625.




                                                       A-29
                                            Figure A-20: Historic Cohort Position and Inequality Views
                                         (a) Inequality                                                                                 (b) Redistribution                                                                              (c) Satisfaction
                               .8




                                                                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
 Inequality is not a problem
                               .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                           Want less redistribution




                                                                                                                                                                                              Generally less satisfied
                               0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                               -.4




                                                                                                                                  -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                 This year                5 years ago                                                               This year                5 years ago                                                 This year             5 years ago
                                                 10 years ago             15 years ago                                                              10 years ago             15 years ago                                                10 years ago          15 years ago
                                                 20 years ago             Father                                                                    20 years ago             Father                                                      20 years ago          Father
                               -.8




                                                                                                                                  -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.8
                                     0      20          40       60         80       100                                                0      20          40       60         80       100                                         0       20          40       60        80   100
                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                             Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position



                                             (d) Work                                                                                               (e) Rich                                                                                     (f) Poor
                               .8




                                                                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                           The rich do not deserve their income




                                                                                                                                                                                              It is not the poors own fault
                               .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
 Work has not paid off
                               0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                               -.4




                                                                                                                                  -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4


                                         This year              5 years ago                                                                 This year              5 years ago                                                           This year             5 years ago
                                         10 years ago           15 years ago                                                                10 years ago           15 years ago                                                          10 years ago          15 years ago
                                         20 years ago           Father                                                                      20 years ago           Father                                                                20 years ago          Father
                               -.8




                                                                                                                                  -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.8




                                     0      20          40       60         80       100                                                0      20          40       60         80       100                                         0       20          40       60        80   100
                                                 Actual cohort position                                                                             Actual cohort position                                                                        Actual cohort position

Notes : Bandwidth for local linear polynomials is 20. For Father, the x-axis is the father's position among fathers
when the respondent was 15 years old. In all panels, the y-axis is the z-score for the survey answers. All panels are
based on the same respondents from the control group. N=4657.




                                                                                                                                                           A-30
Table A-11: Income History and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political
View without Controls
                                                  More unfair                               More ef-       Right-
                         Cohort        Gender         Mun.          Edu.        Sector         fort         wing
  Position father         -0.049        -0.027       -0.063        -0.040       -0.047        -0.023       0.065
                         (0.036)       (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.035)       (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)

  Position -20 yr.      -0.153        -0.183        -0.150       -0.308        -0.265        0.169        0.305
                         (0.037)       (0.037)       (0.037)      (0.036)       (0.037)      (0.037)      (0.037)

  Position -15 yr.      -0.228        -0.217        -0.182       -0.228        -0.236        0.171        0.352
                         (0.048)       (0.047)       (0.047)      (0.047)       (0.048)      (0.048)      (0.048)

  Position -10 yr.        -0.099      -0.155         -0.145      -0.290        -0.269        0.205        0.239
                         (0.057)       (0.057)       (0.057)      (0.056)       (0.057)      (0.058)      (0.057)

  Position -5 yr.         -0.110        -0.093       -0.159        -0.077       -0.113        -0.009       -0.061
                         (0.069)       (0.068)       (0.068)      (0.068)       (0.070)      (0.069)      (0.069)

  Position this yr.     -0.739        -0.725        -0.764       -0.716        -0.858        0.527        0.353
                         (0.068)       (0.068)       (0.068)      (0.067)       (0.071)      (0.069)      (0.068)
  Observations             9046         9046          9046          9046         8575          9046         9046
  Controls

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. More unfair and More effort are in the cohort dimension. Position father is the
repondent's father's income rank when the respondent was 16 years old compared to other fathers of 16 year olds. All
positions used as explaining variables have been re-scaled to go from 0.1 to 1. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                        A-31
Table A-12: Income History and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political
View with 5-year Average Income Positions
                                                   More unfair                                More ef-      Right-
                          Cohort       Gender          Mun.          Edu.         Sector         fort        wing
  Pos. -20 to -16        -0.221        -0.186        -0.189       -0.198        -0.197         0.182       0.357
                          (0.059)       (0.058)      (0.058)       (0.057)       (0.058)       (0.059)      (0.058)

  Pos. -15 to -11         -0.156        -0.151        -0.142       -0.147         -0.136       0.149        0.227
                          (0.074)       (0.073)      (0.073)       (0.071)       (0.073)       (0.075)      (0.073)

  Pos. -10 to -6          -0.084        -0.087        -0.121        -0.150        -0.135        0.083        0.143
                          (0.091)       (0.090)      (0.090)       (0.088)       (0.090)       (0.092)      (0.090)

  Pos. -5 to -1           -0.271        -0.212        -0.271       -0.269        -0.260         0.122        -0.149
                          (0.114)       (0.113)      (0.113)       (0.110)       (0.114)       (0.115)      (0.112)

  Position this yr.      -0.516        -0.511       -0.518        -0.525        -0.635        0.470        0.408
                          (0.092)       (0.091)      (0.091)       (0.089)       (0.093)       (0.093)      (0.091)
  Observations             9316          9316          9316          9316          8825         9316          9316
  Controls

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. More unfair and More effort are in the cohort dimension. Pos. -20 to -16, Pos.
-15 to -11, Pos. -10 to -6 and Pos. -5 to -1 are five year average positions. All positions used as explaining variables
have been re-scaled to go from 0.1 to 1. Controls includes a treatment indicator, cohort fixed effects, a male dummy,
municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects.
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                         A-32
Table A-13: Income History and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political
View with Sample Restrictions
                                                  More unfair                                More ef-       Right-
                          Cohort       Gender         Mun.          Edu.         Sector         fort         wing
  Position father         -0.059        -0.051        -0.070      -0.112         -0.024        0.025       0.122
                          (0.037)      (0.037)       (0.037)       (0.042)       (0.044)      (0.037)      (0.036)
  Position -20 yr.       -0.122        -0.097        -0.118        -0.103       -0.148         0.061       0.141
                          (0.042)      (0.041)       (0.041)       (0.046)       (0.049)      (0.042)      (0.041)
  Position -15 yr.      -0.203        -0.169         -0.147       -0.143         -0.081       0.131        0.268
                          (0.048)      (0.048)       (0.048)       (0.053)       (0.058)      (0.049)      (0.047)
  Position -10 yr.        -0.085        -0.100       -0.119       -0.195         -0.177      0.206         0.197
                          (0.058)      (0.057)       (0.058)       (0.066)       (0.071)      (0.058)      (0.057)
  Position -5 yr.         -0.108        -0.096       -0.143        -0.109        -0.205        0.037        -0.030
                          (0.070)      (0.068)       (0.069)       (0.078)       (0.086)      (0.070)      (0.068)
  Position this yr.     -0.655        -0.618        -0.646        -0.683       -0.729        0.540         0.358
                          (0.074)      (0.073)       (0.073)       (0.085)       (0.094)      (0.074)      (0.072)
  Observations             9046          9046          8878         6698          6164          9046         9046
  Controls

Notes : For each reference group, we only include respondents if the reported group matches the group observed in
the register data. All outcomes are z-scores. More unfair and More effort are in the cohort dimension. Position
father is the repondent's father's income rank when the respondent was 16 years old compared to other fathers of
16 year olds. All positions used as explaining variables have been re-scaled to go from 0.1 to 1. Controls includes a
treatment indicator, cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and
sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***
p < 0.001.




                                                         A-33
                    Table A-14: Income History and Inequality Views
                             Inequal.       Less         Less       Work not      Rich don't      Not poors
                            not prob.      redist.      satis.       paid off       deserve       own fault
      Position father         0.088       0.115         -0.006        0.009          -0.028         -0.020
                             (0.035)      (0.036)      (0.038)       (0.037)        (0.037)        (0.037)

      Position -20 yr.       0.142        0.137         0.001         -0.017       -0.147          -0.110
                             (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.042)       (0.041)        (0.042)        (0.041)

      Position -15 yr.        0.087       0.190        -0.103        -0.114        -0.169           -0.076
                             (0.046)      (0.047)      (0.049)       (0.048)        (0.049)        (0.048)

      Position -10 yr.        0.112        0.040        0.061         -0.021         0.023          0.069
                             (0.055)      (0.057)      (0.059)       (0.058)        (0.058)        (0.058)

      Position -5 yr.         0.061        0.012       -0.207       -0.283          -0.208          -0.050
                             (0.066)      (0.068)      (0.071)       (0.069)        (0.070)        (0.069)

      Position this yr.      0.694        0.699       -0.455        -0.714         -0.551         -0.261
                             (0.070)      (0.072)      (0.075)       (0.073)        (0.074)        (0.073)
      Observations             9035         9035         9035          9035           9035           9035
      Controls

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. More unfair and More effort are in the cohort dimension. Position father is the
repondent's father's income rank when the respondent was 16 years old compared to other fathers of 16 year olds.
All positions used as explaining variables have been re-scaled to go from 0.1 to 1. Controls includes a treatment
indicator, cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector
(incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***
p < 0.001.




                                                       A-34
Table A-15: Historic Shocks and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political
View with Sample Restrictions
                                                       More unfair                        M. effort    Right-
                                  Cohort     Gender      Mun.         Edu.     Sector      Cohort        wing
       Unemployment               0.19       0.22       0.20         0.17       0.21        -0.098      -0.026
                                  (0.050)    (0.049)    (0.050)     (0.058)    (0.068)     (0.051)     (0.046)
         Observations               7537       7537       7397        5599       5498        7537        7537
         Affected %                 5.03       5.03       4.96        4.80       3.62        5.03         5.03
       Disability                   0.26     0.51        0.39        0.32                   -0.28        -0.18
                                   (0.13)     (0.13)     (0.14)      (0.15)                 (0.13)      (0.12)
         Observations               9246       9246       9073        6841                   9246        9246
         Affected %                 0.61       0.61       0.57        0.61                   0.61         0.61
       Hospitalization            0.093      0.079      0.090        0.054     0.0098      -0.0096     -0.0070
                                  (0.029)    (0.028)    (0.028)     (0.032)    (0.034)     (0.029)     (0.026)
         Observations               4749       4749       4662        3543      3257         4749        4749
         Affected %                 55.5       55.5       55.5        55.5       54.3        55.5         55.5
       Promotion                   -0.11      -0.10      -0.10     -0.17      -0.19         0.13       0.14
                                  (0.045)    (0.044)    (0.044)     (0.050)    (0.054)     (0.045)     (0.040)
         Observations               7970       7970       7832        5950      5622         7970        7970
         Affected %                  6.7        6.7        6.7         6.7        6.4         6.7          6.7
       Pre-shock position FE
       Controls

Notes : For each reference group, we only include respondents if the reported group matches the group observed in
the register data. All outcomes are z-scores. Each cell in the table is a separate regression of the column outcome
on the row regressor and the controls indicated in the bottom part of the table. The explaining variables are all
indicators that equal 1 if the respondent experienced the shock between 2012 and 2017. In each row, we exclude
respondents who experienced the shock between 2008 and 2011. For Unemployment, we only use respondents who
were in the workforce in the entire period. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed
effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects, all measured in
2008, a treatment indicator and an indicator that equals one if the respondent voted for a right-wing party in the
2015 general election. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                        A-35
                                                Table A-16: Historic Shocks and Inequality Views
                                                    Inequal.       Less        Less      Work not      Rich don't      Not poors        N      Affected
                                                   not prob.      redist.     satis.      paid off       deserve       own fault                  %
                      Unemployment                   -0.14        -0.098      0.15        0.17            0.10           -0.040       7537       5.03
                                                     (0.047)      (0.047)    (0.052)      (0.051)        (0.051)         (0.050)

                      Disability                      -0.20       -0.36        0.27        0.37            0.19          0.48         9246       0.61
                                                      (0.12)      (0.12)      (0.14)       (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.13)

                      Hospitalization                -0.035       -0.0100     0.075       0.076           0.058          0.066        4749       55.5
                                                     (0.026)      (0.026)    (0.029)      (0.029)        (0.028)         (0.027)

                      Promotion                      0.16         0.17       -0.13        -0.098         -0.15           -0.034       7970       6.66
                                                     (0.041)      (0.041)    (0.045)      (0.045)        (0.044)         (0.044)
A-36




                      Pre-shock position FE
                      Controls

       Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. Each cell in the table is a separate regression of the column outcome on the row regressor and the controls indicated in the
       bottom part of the table. The explaining variables are all indicators that equal 1 if the respondent experienced the shock between 2012 and 2017. In each row,
       we exclude respondents who experienced the shock between 2008 and 2011. For Unemployment, we only use respondents who were in the workforce in the
       entire period. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not
       in workforce) fixed effects, all measured in 2008, a treatment indicator and an indicator that equals one if the respondent voted for a right-wing party in the
       2015 general election. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
          Table A-17: Historic Shocks and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View without Controls
                                            Current                           More unfair                          M. effort     Right-       N     Affected
                                           position     Cohort      Gender       Mun.        Edu.      Sector       Cohort        wing                  %
              Unemployment                 -12.3         0.17       0.19        0.18         0.098      0.13         -0.069       0.014     7537       5.03
                                            (0.81)      (0.051)     (0.050)     (0.050)     (0.050)    (0.052)      (0.051)      (0.051)

              Disability                    -24.8        0.32       0.56        0.44        0.26                     -0.31        -0.21     9246       0.61
                                             (2.40)      (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.13)      (0.13)                   (0.13)      (0.13)
A-37




              Hospitalization               -2.20       0.11       0.098        0.11        0.080      0.065         -0.022       -0.029    4749       55.5
                                             (0.51)     (0.029)    (0.028)      (0.028)     (0.028)    (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.028)

              Promotion                     8.86        -0.13       -0.12       -0.13      -0.16       -0.22         0.15        0.18       7970       6.66
                                            (0.77)      (0.045)     (0.044)     (0.045)    (0.044)     (0.045)      (0.045)      (0.044)
              Pre-shock position FE
              Controls

       Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. Each cell in the table is a separate regression of the column outcome on the row regressor and the controls indicated in the
       bottom part of the table. The explaining variables are all indicators that equal 1 if the respondent experienced the shock between 2012 and 2017. In each row,
       we exclude respondents who experienced the shock between 2008 and 2011. For Unemployment, we only use respondents who were in the workforce in the
       entire period. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
                 Table A-18: Historic Shocks and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort and Political View with 2SLS
                                                                       More unfair                            M. effort     Right-       N       Affected
                                                 Cohort      Gender        Mun.        Edu.        Sector      Cohort        wing                    %
                   Unemployment                  -1.52       -1.71       -1.64        -1.27       -2.17          0.80        0.21       7537       5.03
                                                  (0.41)      (0.39)       (0.41)      (0.37)      (0.59)       (0.41)      (0.38)

                   Disability                     -1.21      -2.20        -1.72        -1.11                    1.30         0.84       9246       0.61
                                                  (0.60)      (0.58)       (0.57)      (0.58)                   (0.61)      (0.55)

                   Hospitalization                -5.09       -3.83        -4.80       -3.43        -2.54        0.53        0.39       4749       55.5
                                                  (1.93)      (1.54)       (1.87)      (1.76)      (2.30)       (1.55)      (1.37)

                   Promotion                      -1.28       -1.16        -1.20      -1.53       -1.85         1.54        1.63        7970       6.66
                                                  (0.52)      (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.43)      (0.42)       (0.53)      (0.49)
A-38




                   Pooled                        -1.51       -1.91       -1.69        -1.48       -2.10        1.15          0.73      29685       12.1
                                                  (0.33)      (0.34)       (0.34)      (0.32)      (0.38)       (0.32)      (0.31)
                   Pre-shock position FE
                   Controls

       Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. Each cell in the table is a separate 2SLS regression of the column outcome on current position instrumented using the row
       regressor and the controls indicated in the bottom part of the table. The instruments are all indicators that equal 1 if the respondent experienced the shock
       between 2012 and 2017. In each row, we exclude respondents who experienced the shock between 2008 and 2011. For Unemployment, we only use respondents
       who were in the workforce in the entire period. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy, municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects
       and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects, all measured in 2008, a treatment indicator and an indicator that equals one if the respondent
       voted for a right-wing party in the 2015 general election. Standard errors in parentheses. In the pooled regression we cluster the standard errors at the
       individual level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
A-7         Survey experiment

       Table A-19: Survey Information Experiment and Inequality Views
                                 Inequal.       Less          Less      Work not      Rich don't     Not poors
                                  Cohort      Gender       Municip.     Education       Sector         effort
        Position                 1.232        1.068        -0.738       -1.218        -0.871         -0.624
                                  (0.048)      (0.048)      (0.049)      (0.048)       (0.049)        (0.049)

        Misperception            0.502        0.400         -0.214       -0.559        -0.495         -0.386
                                  (0.089)      (0.091)      (0.093)       (0.090)       (0.092)        (0.091)

        Treatment                 -0.014        0.025        0.003         0.017         0.023          0.019
                                 (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.022)       (0.021)       (0.021)        (0.021)

        T × Misperception         -0.021        0.070        -0.101        0.016        0.277           0.006
                                 (0.115)       (0.117)      (0.119)       (0.116)       (0.118)        (0.118)
        N                          9322         9322          9322         9322          9322           9322

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual cohort misperceptions, meaning the difference
between perceived position and actual position. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***
p < 0.001.

Table A-20: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort
and Political View with Controls
                                        More unfair within reference group                        More      Right-
                             Cohort       Gender         Municip.     Education      Sector      effort       wing
   Position                 -1.017       -0.942          -1.060       -1.052        -1.115     0.985        1.008
                             (0.062)      (0.060)         (0.060)      (0.055)       (0.058)    (0.063)      (0.055)

   Misperception            -0.338       -0.355          -0.373       -0.331        -0.554     0.576        0.569
                             (0.092)      (0.087)         (0.084)      (0.075)       (0.078)    (0.092)      (0.081)

   Treatment                0.085           0.063        0.062         0.050        0.041          -0.008    -0.030
                             (0.021)        (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.021)   (0.019)

   T × Misperception         0.329          0.265         0.195         0.037       0.264          -0.155    -0.051
                             (0.118)        (0.108)      (0.107)       (0.090)      (0.090)       (0.118)   (0.104)
   N                          9331           9331         9331          9331         8854           9331      9331
   Controls

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference be-
tween perceived position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the
More effort and Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception. Right-wing is imputed based which party the
respondent reported to vote for if there was an election today. Controls includes cohort fixed effects, a male dummy,
municipality fixed effects, educational level fixed effects and sector (incl. unemployed/not in workforce) fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                           A-39
Table A-21: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort
and Political View if Income is Reported Correctly
                                      More unfair within reference group                        More       Right-
                           Cohort       Gender       Municip.     Education       Sector        effort      wing
 Position                 -1.143       -1.085        -1.217        -1.411        -1.326       0.932       0.992
                           (0.053)      (0.054)       (0.053)       (0.053)       (0.058)      (0.054)     (0.050)

 Misperception              -0.188     -0.519        -0.343         -0.198       -0.639        0.237      0.372
                           (0.114)      (0.108)       (0.104)       (0.093)       (0.098)      (0.115)     (0.107)

 Treatment                 0.081        0.070         0.063          0.022         0.026        0.021      -0.032
                           (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.025)       (0.023)       (0.024)      (0.026)     (0.024)

 T × Misperception          0.348       0.419         0.285          0.044         0.227       -0.044       0.007
                           (0.148)      (0.139)       (0.136)       (0.114)       (0.116)      (0.150)     (0.140)
 N                           6660         6537         6539          6272          5873         6660        6660

Notes : In this table, we only use respondents whose reported income generate treatment information that is at most
five positions from the information they would have received if the reported and actual income exactly matched. All
outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference between perceived
position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the More effort and
Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception. Right-wing is imputed based which party the respondent reported
to vote for if there was an election today. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                      A-40
Table A-22: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort
and Political View with Interaction of Treatment and Position
                                      More unfair within reference group                        More       Right-
                           Cohort       Gender       Municip.     Education       Sector        effort      wing
 Position                 -1.176       -1.121        -1.269        -1.358        -1.424       0.816       0.912
                           (0.069)      (0.069)       (0.068)       (0.068)       (0.073)      (0.069)     (0.063)

 Misperception            -0.377       -0.599        -0.471        -0.371        -0.862       0.437       0.489
                           (0.099)      (0.094)       (0.090)       (0.083)       (0.090)      (0.099)     (0.091)

 Treatment                  0.047         0.023        0.045         0.090        -0.022       -0.150      -0.083
                           (0.062)      (0.063)       (0.062)       (0.059)       (0.065)      (0.062)     (0.057)

 T × Misperception          0.351        0.320         0.207        -0.019        0.346         0.053       0.072
                           (0.142)      (0.133)       (0.129)       (0.117)       (0.128)      (0.142)     (0.130)

 T × Position               0.055         0.061        0.028        -0.071         0.103       0.241        0.099
                           (0.098)      (0.099)       (0.096)       (0.096)       (0.104)      (0.098)     (0.090)
 N                           9331         9331         9331          9331          8854         9331        9331

Notes : All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference between
perceived position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the More
effort and Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception and cohort income group. Right-wing is imputed based
which party the respondent reported to vote for if there was an election today. Standard errors in parentheses. *
p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                      A-41
Table A-23: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort
and Political View using Actual Reference Groups
                                        More unfair within reference group                      More       Right-
                            Cohort       Gender      Municip.     Education       Sector        effort      wing
   Position                -1.148       -1.092       -1.256       -1.412         -1.395       0.935       0.961
                            (0.049)      (0.049)      (0.048)      (0.048)        (0.053)      (0.049)     (0.045)

   Misperception           -0.356       -0.577       -0.458        -0.449        -0.790       0.530       0.528
                            (0.092)      (0.086)      (0.083)       (0.073)       (0.081)      (0.092)     (0.084)

   Treatment                0.080        0.059        0.061         0.051         0.043         -0.006      -0.024
                             (0.021)     (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.020)       (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.020)

   T × Misperception        0.307        0.274         0.179         0.053        0.204         -0.140      -0.008
                            (0.118)      (0.110)      (0.108)       (0.091)       (0.096)      (0.118)     (0.109)
   N                         9331         9331         9331          9331          8647          9331        9331

Notes : In the table, we use actual reference groups observed in the register data instead of reported reference groups.
All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference between per-
ceived position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the More effort
and Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception. Right-wing is imputed based which party the respondent
reported to vote for if there was an election today. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

Table A-24: Survey Information Experiment and Fairness, Luck vs. Effort
and Political View if Reference Groups Are Reported Correctly
                                        More unfair within reference group                      More       Right-
                            Cohort       Gender      Municip.     Education       Sector        effort      wing
   Position                -1.148       -1.092       -1.245       -1.489         -1.403       0.935       0.961
                            (0.049)      (0.049)      (0.048)      (0.057)        (0.064)      (0.049)     (0.045)

   Misperception           -0.356       -0.577       -0.455        -0.545        -0.886       0.530       0.528
                            (0.092)      (0.086)      (0.084)       (0.088)       (0.097)      (0.092)     (0.084)

   Treatment                0.080        0.059        0.064          0.036         0.043        -0.006      -0.024
                             (0.021)     (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.021)     (0.020)

   T × Misperception        0.307        0.274         0.181         0.102        0.292         -0.140      -0.008
                            (0.118)      (0.110)      (0.109)       (0.109)       (0.116)      (0.118)     (0.109)
   N                         9331         9331         9156          6901          6356          9331        9331

Notes : For each reference group, we only use respondents if the reported group matches the group observed in the
register data. All outcomes are z-scores. The misperceptions are the actual misperceptions, meaning the difference
between perceived position and actual position within the reported reference group specified in each column. For the
More effort and Right-wing outcomes, we use cohort misperception. Right-wing is imputed based which party the
respondent reported to vote for if there was an election today. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                                         A-42
