                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SIZING UP CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING IN THE COVID CRISIS

                                        Robin Greenwood
                                        Benjamin Iverson
                                         David Thesmar

                                       Working Paper 28104
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28104


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




This paper was prepared for the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. We thank Usman Omer
and Jiaheng Yu for great research assistance, and Sam Antill, Jan Eberly, Sam Hanson, Edie
Hotchkiss Adi Sunderam and Eric Zwick for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28104.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robin Greenwood, Benjamin Iverson, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sizing up Corporate Restructuring in the COVID Crisis
Robin Greenwood, Benjamin Iverson, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 28104
November 2020
JEL No. D22,G33,G38

                                          ABSTRACT

In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the financial and legal system will need to deal with a
surge of financial distress in the business sector. Some firms will be able to survive, while others
will face bankruptcy and thus need to be liquidated or reorganized. Many surviving firms will
need to be downsized or acquired. In normal times, this triage is supported by the court system,
banks, and financial markets. The goal of this paper is to size up the coming surge of financial
distress, list the challenges it presents in the current environment, and analyze potential
policy solutions. Overall, our analysis suggests that the two key issues will be court
congestion and excess liquidation and failure of small firms.

Robin Greenwood                                  David Thesmar
Harvard Business School                          MIT Sloan School of Management
Baker Library 267                                100 Main Street, E62-632
Soldiers Field                                   Cambridge, MA 02142
Boston, MA 02163                                 and NBER
and NBER                                         thesmar@mit.edu
rgreenwood@hbs.edu

Benjamin Iverson
679 TNRB
Provo, UT 84602
United States
biverson@byu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28104
      The 2019 Coronavirus pandemic is an economic shock of unprecedented magnitude. In the first two

quarters of 2020, US GDP contracted by 9.5%, with many forecasters anticipating at best a slow recovery

and persistent output gap for years to come.1 Even if the most acute effects of the shock turn out to be

temporary, the consequences for many businesses will be severe. Many have failed already, others will

have to undergo major changes in order to survive. Failure may mean acquisition by a rival, voluntary exit,
or liquidation. Even surviving firms may have to renegotiate debt, raise fresh funds or downsize.

      In normal times, the triage between dying and surviving firms is implemented by bankruptcy courts

and financial markets. This architecture is generally suited to the job, but gets stretched during recessions.

This time around, the size of the task appears daunting.

      The goal of this paper is to estimate how many firms will fail, evaluate how effective the triage will

be, and what, if anything, should be done to help it occur efficiently. We size up the coming surge of
financial distress, list the challenges it presents to the legal and financial architecture in the current

environment, and close by describing potential policy solutions.

      To set the stage, we estimate the upcoming increase in financial distress. To do so, we first show that

the impact on firm profits and revenues so far is comparable to the worst quarter of the 2008-2009 financial
crisis. But analyst forecasts beyond 2021 suggest the intermediate-term consequences will be milder. We

then turn to forecasting the impact on corporate leverage, which will rise as a function of the severity and

length of the recession. Using a methodology similar to Crouzet and Gourio (2020), but using data on

smaller firms, we forecast the impact of reduced revenues and profits on corporate balance sheets (see also

Gourinchas et al, 2020 for a related analysis). Unsurprisingly, the effects will be particularly acute for the

smallest firms in the economy, because they have weaker initial balance sheets and, to a lesser extent, larger

fixed costs. Then, relying on analysis by Ma (2020) and Altman (2020), we forecast bond ratings

downgrades and defaults. The number of defaults can be expected to increase substantially in the coming

year. We perform a similar analysis to forecast business bankruptcy filings based on unemployment rates.




1
 While, as of Feb 14, 2020, economic forecasters polled by the Survey of Professional Forecasters anticipated
cumulative growth over 2020-2022 of 5.8%, as of Aug 14, they expect growth over 2020-2023 to be 3.8%. Thus,
even though they expect a clear rebound in 2021, professional forecasters anticipate an output gap (compared to
earlier forecasts) lasting well into 2023.

                                                        2
Based on the unemployment rate at the time of writing, we expect overall bankruptcies to increase by as

much as 140% in the current year.2 By all metrics, corporate financial distress is set to increase.

         In Section II, we discuss the challenges posed by this surge to the legal and financial infrastructure

that deals with corporate distress. This infrastructure usually triages amongst financially distressed firms,

filtering those that    ill disappear ( liq ida e ) from those that will reemerge ( res r c re ). This ime,
because of the unprecedented amount of distress as well as the uncertainty created by the pandemic, this

triage may be difficult to implement, leaving some firms wrongly liquidated, while other firms artificially

alive.

         First, we investigate the oft-cited claim that the COVID-led recession will require a large amount of

cross-industry or cross-regional reallocation of capital, reducing the need for the bankruptcy system to cull

the restructuring-worthy firms. To be sure, the short-run impact of COVID has had a significant industry
component: airlines and hospitality, among other industries, have been hard hit. But reallocation depends

on longer-term prospects of these industries. To test this, we calculate the dispersion of equity analyst

forecas s of firms f      re earnings a   ario s hori ons. S ch e pec ed dispersion is in general a reliable

indicator of ex-post realized dispersion. Since the crisis, it has, if anything, decreased. Second, we quantify
court capacity constraints. We predict that the coming surge of bankruptcies could increase the judge

caseload by 158% from 2019 levels, well beyond the caseloads seen in 2009-2010. Third, we contrast the

fates of small and large firms. Looking at the data, we show that small firms restructure very rarely. This is

especially worrisome as the balance sheets of small firms are hit the hardest by the current recession. Fourth,

we discuss the availability of financing for firms undergoing restructuring. When in the process of

redrafting their capital structures, firms typically need to rely on debtor-in-possession financing (DeMarzo,

Krishnamurthy and Rauh, 2020). Relying on analysis by the Bankruptcy and COVID-19 Working Group

(2020), we appraise the amount of such financing needed to handle the coming wave of restructuring. We

find the required amount to be very small relative to the size of the corporate debt market. Fifth and last,
we note that to handle default, banks must be able to absorb large losses on their corporate loan portfolios.

Our estimates suggest that for the moment, U.S. banks have sufficient capacity to absorb losses on



2
 Despite the economic headwinds, the pace of business bankruptcy filings in 2020 has been modest, with a strong
uptick among the very largest US companies but little change among small businesses. Among the largest US public
companies, bankruptcy filings have been concentrated in industries and companies in distress well before the
pandemic (retail, energy).

                                                        3
commercial loans. Overall, our analysis suggests that the two key issues will be court congestion and excess

liquidation of small firms.

      Building on the growing list of proposals that have circulated in the wake of the crisis, Section III

discusses policy options that could make the triage of distressed firms more efficient. We focus on two key

issues: alleviating court congestion, and targeting smaller firms. A first form of solution consists of
encouraging out-of-court restructuring for smaller firms. We discuss moratoria and payment deferral

schemes, which essentially freeze debt repayment for a limited amount of time. Such moratoria have been

implemented in many countries around the world, and could be implemented in the US. Another approach

has been suggested by Greenwood and Thesmar (2020), who propose a tax credit for lenders and landlords

who accept a haircut on existing loans to small businesses. Overall, restructuring subsidies and payment

deferrals are options that target the frictions associated with the liquidation of small businesses. At the same
time, even in ordinary times, just under half a million establishments per year close, suggesting that these

programs must be tailored to avoid subsidizing too many inefficient firms.

      A second set of policy options consists of changing the bankruptcy process itself. Iverson, Ellias, and

Roe (2020) focus on court staffing. They estimate that, by recalling between 50 and 250 judges, the U.S.
court system would ensure that caseload by bankruptcy judge stays at the level of the 2009 crisis. Other

policies are related to bankruptcy law. We discuss a recent provision enacted right before the pandemic,

Subchapter V of the bankruptcy code, which offers an off-the-shelf streamlined process for small businesses

to access restructuring. In recent months, Subchapter V filings have been increasing, but take-up is still

limited with only 506 total Subchapter V filings as of June 2020.3 We also discuss recent proposals by

Stiglitz4 who suggests a large scale, administrative procedure to substitute debt for government-sponsored

equity, and by Blanchard, Philippon and Pisani (2020) who propose that the government accepts larger

haircuts than other creditors, conditional on the firm reemerging from bankruptcy.

      Our paper complements a growing number of studies on the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on firms.
Gourinchas et al (2020) calibrate a model in order to forecast the number of bankruptcies among SMEs in

Europe; our forecasting approach is purely based on the statistical correlation between unemployment and


3
  https://www.epiqglobal.com/en-us/about/news/restructuring-bankruptcy/chapter-11-commercial-bankruptcies-up-
in-june
4
  https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-09/could-super-chapter-11-help-an-economy-avoid-systemic-
collapse

                                                       4
failures. Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy (2020) discuss the notion of excess leverage, and the effect of

the Federal Reserve policies on debt overhang. Hanson, Stein, Sunderam and Zwick (2020) and Saez and

Zucman (2020) emphasize direct government support to firms via grants. Compared to these papers, our

focus is on how to deal with firms once they are in extreme distress or have already failed. To be sure, if

the crisis is short and the landscape of economic activity looks similar post-pandemic, it may well make
sense to keep as many firms as possible alive, with the government subsidizing firms to avoid

macroeconomic scarring . But the longer is the crisis, the more the burden should be shared between the

government and private creditors and equity holders.



                   I.    The Impact of the COVID-19 Shock on US businesses
      As of September 2020, the ultimate length of the economic crisis is still highly uncertain. However,
it seems clear that the most acute effects of the crisis on US firms occurred in the second quarter of 2020,

when some industries including airlines, restaurants, and hotels came to a virtual standstill. This section

seeks to estimate the impact of the pandemic on creating distress and restructuring among U.S. businesses,

large and small.

      1.1 Revenues and Earnings for Small and Large Firms
      Early in the pandemic, the US Census administered weekly surveys to small and medium sized

enterprises on the impact that Covid-19 had had on their business. Panel A of Figure 1 plots data from the

most recent of these surveys, administered in late July 2020. We show the percentage of small firms, by

NAICS sec or, ha repor he pandemic ha ing a large nega i e effec              on heir b siness. The fig re

reveals the well-known pattern that entertainment, restaurants and hotels were the most severely affected

sectors. In the next group, more than 40% of firms in the mining, oil and gas, transportation and health care

sectors reported severe adverse impact on their business. Overall, with the exceptions of utilities,

construction, and finance and insurance, all sectors have a significant share of firms that have experienced
negative effects of the pandemic.

      More detailed measures of firm impact can be constructed for public firms, which report quarterly
revenues. Panel B presents the percentage change in revenue between the second quarter of 2019 and the

second quarter of 2020, weighted by 2019 revenues, for the same two-digit NAICS sectors shown in Panel
A based on data from Compustat. To preserve comparability across firms and sectors reporting at the same


                                                     5
time, we limit the sample to firms with US headquarters and fiscal years that end in December, March, June

of September. As can be seen, the sectors most impacted for smaller firms are also hit among larger

companies: entertainment, restaurants & hotels. But there are differences: smaller firms are hit more

severely than the typical Compustat firm.

       Panel C shows the distribution of revenue changes for the full universe of public firms. For larger
firms, the shock is big, but so far, its magnitude is similar to the Great Recession of 2009. Revenues for the

median firm dropped by 9.3% between 2019 Q2 and 2020 Q2, while median growth between 2008Q1 and

2009 Q1 (the trough of the 2009 crisis) was -8.1%.

       Compared to the Great Recession, the effect of the COVID crisis on sales is more left-skewed than

the financial crisis. As can be seen from Panel C, more than 10% of firms lost over half their revenues in

2020Q2, while only about 5% of firms lost half their revenues at the trough of the 2009 crisis. Suspecting
that this strong left tail could have been magnified by (operating and financial) leverage effects, we zoom

in on the share of firms reporting negative earnings, shown in Panel D. Among the largest firms, 37% report

negative earnings in 2020Q2, a number strikingly similar to the first quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of

2001. While the shock on sales is more left-tailed compared to the financial crisis, the share of firms with
negative earnings is not larger (so far). This suggests that the most severely hit firms had more flexible cost

structures. The length of the crisis is still unknown, however, limiting the value of this comparison.

       To help make the comparison between 2020 (which is ongoing) and 2009 (which is completed), we

turn to analyst forecasts, which allow us to go further into the future. We use the same data as Landier and

Thesmar (2020), which contain, for the largest 1,000 firms, analyst forecasts of earnings for years 2020,

2021, 2022 from data provider Refinitiv.5 Table 1 summarizes the revision of earnings forecasts for

different sectors since mid-February. For each industry, we compute the unweighted average of the growth

in earnings forecasts between February 2020 and May 2020. We exclude firms for which the beginning-of-

period forecast of earnings is negative. We compare these estimated growth rates to the beginning of the

Great Recession. Specifically, for the earlier period we compute the percentage revision between Jun 08


5
 For these larger firms, we show in Appendix Table B.1 that these forecasts have been reliable (i.e., unbiased) at a
one-year horizon, while slightly optimistic at longer horizons. It is well known that analyst forecasts at one year
horizon used to be biased towards optimism in the 1990s on the universe of IBES firms. But even on this sample,
short-term optimism has essentially disappeared since the late 1990s (Kothari, 2002).

                                                          6
and March 09. The table shows that, from the point of view of large public firms, equity analysts do not

believe that either the short- or long-term effects will be even half of what they believed would happen at

the beginning of the Great Recession. Second, the short-term dispersion of revision is modest compared to

2009, both at short and longer horizon. This is consistent with the idea that the COVID shock is expected

to have a relatively homogeneous impact across these large firms. In Section 2, we will use a version of this

dispersion to appraise the extent of future expected reallocation.

      To sum up, based on looking at current and expected earnings and revenues, large public firms are

less impacted than is commonly supposed, both in terms of realized and expected earnings. For these large

firms, the effect of the recession can be expected to be relatively homogeneous. Meanwhile, for smaller

firms, the PULSE survey suggests that the shock seems to be stronger: We explore this further below.



      1.2 Is the COVID crisis biased towards industries with predominantly smaller firms?
      We lack timely and granular data on the financial position of small firms, but we can study indirect

measures of small firm exposure by asking whether industries and sectors that are disproportionately

populated by small firms (agricultural, construction, restaurants) are also those industries and sectors that

are most impacted by the COVID-19 shock. Panel A of Figure 2 provides a simple depiction of this, by

plotting the sector-level unemployment rate in July 2020 against the share of total employment in that sector

represented by small businesses. As can be seen, leisure and hospitality suffered the largest increase in

unemployment, but overall this industry falls in the middle of the distribution in the mix of small and large

firms (restaurants are mainly small firms, but hotels include many large firms, for example). Overall, there

is no discernible correlation between sector-level unemployment and the small business employment share.

      Panel B of Figure 2 shows a related analysis. The solid line shows the national unemployment rate.

The dashed line shows the unemployment rate based on the sum of sector-level unemployment rates in

every month, weighted by small business employment. As can be seen, these two series track each other

closely, including in the most recent period.



                                                      7
       1.3 Impact on Leverage Ratios
       Crouzet and Gourio (2020), in a series of Federal Reserve blog posts, explore the financial position

of US public firms as they enter the pandemic and make forecasts of their leverage in the coming year.

Many nonfinancial publicly traded companies entered 2020 with elevated levels of leverage compared to

the historical average, but only slightly. However, they suggest that the fragility is tempered by their low
level of interest expense and high cash positions.

       Crouzet and Gourio (2020) forecast the future liquidity position of public firms using assumptions

about the impact of Covid-19 on operating cash flows, and holding fixed payouts and investment. Although

they forecast 30% of firms exhausting their cash buffers by the third quarter of 2020, the implications are

softened by the heightened availability of credit for public firms.

         There is much less information available on the financial structure of smaller, non-listed,
businesses. However, for selected years the IRS publishes aggregate income statement and balance sheet

data by size class through the Sources of Income Statistics. Table 2 summarizes statistics from these data

for the most recent year available which is 2013. Shareholders equity is the sum of capital stock, paid in

capital, and retained earnings. Leverage is one minus the ratio of shareholder equity to assets. Smaller
businesses have dramatically higher leverage ratios, relying heavily on bank debt and loans from

shareholders.6

       In the spirit of Crouzet and Gourio (2020), we ask what would happen if businesses in each size class

experienced a 30% decline in revenues with no decline in fixed expenses, except for cost of goods sold

which scales with revenues. For simplicity, in this exercise we assume no investment. Table 2 shows these

results. For the smallest businesses (less than $1m in revenue), a 30% drop in annual revenue with no

offsetting change in fixed expenses is enough to effectively wipe out the equity in the business. This comes

from two forces: smaller firms have higher leverage to start with, but also much larger ratios of fixed

expenses to sales and higher asset-to-sales ratios.7



6
  Some caution is warranted in interpreting financial statement for the very smallest firms in the economy, those with
total assets under $0.5 million. These firms have low book assets and typically no external shareholders, and limited
retained earnings because they are pass-through corporations. For the slightly larger smaller firms, these concerns are
somewhat alleviated. We focus on the next larger set of firms, those with assets between $0.5M and $1.0M.
7
  Carletti et al (2020) implement a similar analysis on Italian firms. They estimate that the lockdown will lead about
17% of Italian firms to end up with negative book equity. These firms are disproportionately smaller firms. We cannot
conduct the same analysis since e do no ha e de ails abo he dis rib ion of small firms balance shee s.

                                                          8
      1.4 Predicting Credit Downgrades and Defaults
      Ma (2020) dra s on 72 ears of his orical da a from he Mood s Default and Recovery Database,

o forecas defa l and do ngrade ra es for firms ra ed b Mood s. Across ra ings classes, she finds ha

increases in the unemployment rate and declines in real GDP growth strongly predict higher probabilities

of a rating downgrade. Drawing on recent forecasts of the unemployment rate and real GDP growth for
2020-2022 from professional forecasters, she predicts significant increases in downgrades, ratings

withdrawals, and default.

      Of the 4,476 issuers overseen by Moody's at the start of 2020, 1.4% have defaulted and 3.4% have

had their rating withdrawn by June of 2020. Ma forecasts that an additional 4.9% will default and an

additional 8.8% will have their ratings withdrawn by the end of 2020. According to her estimates, the US

economy is through only about a fifth of the predicted number of defaults for this year, not to mention the
additional defaults in the following years. Using different methodologies, Altman (2020) also forecasts

default rates in 2020, using data at the bond- and issuer level. His conclusions are similar, forecasting an

aggregate bond default rate of 5.75%.



      1.5 Predicting the Rate of Bankruptcy
      The most severe form of financial distress is firm failure or bankruptcy. Despite the economic

headwinds, the pace of business bankruptcy filings in 2020 has been modest, with large increases among

the largest US companies, but little change among small businesses (under 100 employees). Through

August 2020, overall business bankruptcies are actually 1% lower than the same timeframe in 2019.

However, larger firms have been entering bankruptcy at higher rates, with overall Chapter 11 bankruptcies

up 35% relative to 2019 and bankruptcies of firms with more than $50 million in assets rising by 194%

(Wang, Yang, Iverson and Kluender, 2020). But bankruptcy filings by the largest US public companies

have been concentrated in industries and companies that were experiencing distress well before the
pandemic or lockdown period. Among the largest 20 firms by assets filing for bankruptcy in the first two

quarters of 2020, five were in retail and apparel sectors, and seven were in oil and gas and mining.
      There is a strong and intuitive historical relationship between unemployment rate          as a high-

frequency measure of economic conditions and the frequency of business bankruptcy. Figure 3 shows the
close historical relationship between business bankruptcy filings nationally and the national unemployment


                                                     9
rate, based on official filing statistics from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts. Panel A plots the

relationship for business Chapter 7 (liquidation) filings, which are dominated by small businesses. Firms

that file for Chapter 11 (reorganization), shown in Panel B, are generally larger than those that enter Chapter

7, but still contain many small firms as well. If historical trends are repeated, an unprecedented number of

bankruptcies is on the horizon.
       Following Iverson, Ellias, and Roe (2020), we forecast business bankruptcies based on an expected

unemployment rate from 2020Q3-2020Q4 of 9.2 percent from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.8

Based on the historical relationship between bankruptcies and unemployment, a 9.2 percent unemployment

rate predicts that the pace of business bankruptcy filings can be expected to increase by 140% relative to

their 2019 level. Importantly, this forecast uses unemployment rate forecasts while ignoring the recent path

of unemployment rates of 14.7 percent, 13.3 percent, 11.1 percent, and 10.2 in April, May, June and July
of 2020. Even though much of this spike reflects temporary shutdowns, it is likely that the stresses of the

initial lockdown period will lead to bankruptcy for some firms.9

       These forecasts raise the question of why current business bankruptcy filings are so low? One reason

could be policy, including the CARES act, PPP, Main Street Lending Facility, and the extension of
unemployment insurance. Second, many of the triggers that force restructuring and bankruptcy have been

relaxed. In the lead-up to the pandemic, loan covenants for public firms were notably light, resulting in

fewer technical defaults and hence fewer renegotiations.10 And, when firms have defaulted, lenders and

landlords have been relatively lenient in allowing excess time to cure missed payments. Evidence suggests

that missed payments have been quite common. For example, the Census Small Business Pulse survey

shows that 11.5% of all small businesses had missed a loan payment by the first week of May, and 23.6%

had missed other payments such as rent. If lenders have willing to be lenient thus far, many firms that have

missed payments may avoid bankruptcy, at least in the short run. If these factors are only temporary, low

bankruptcy numbers seen so far are a period of calm before the storm. On the other hand, if these factors
actually prevent financial distress for many firms, our forecasted number of bankruptcies could be too high.

8
  https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-
forecasters/2020/survq320
9
  Iverson, Ellias, and Roe (2020) explicitly adjust bankruptcy forecasts for temporary unemployment. Even with this
adjustment, their methodology results in forecasted bankruptcy increases of close to 100%. Further, forecasts of the
unemployment rate arguably already account for the temporary nature of the unemployment seen in the second quarter
of 2020.
10
   https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-02-18/the-cov-lite-fight-in-leveraged-loans-is-lost

                                                        10
                    II.   Triaging of Distressed Firms in the Recession
       In this section, we first describe the triage-type process by which distressed firms shut down,

liquidate, or get reorganized. Within this framework, we lay out several frictions that could prevent efficient

liquidation or restructuring from occurring. Our overriding goal is to identify the specific restructuring
frictions that COVID-19 could exacerbate as well as those which might not be as concerning.



       2.1 Triaging Distressed Firms in a Wave of Corporate Distress
       How does the bankruptcy process triage distressed firms? To fix ideas, consider a firm with

continuation value V, liquidation value L, and debt repayment D. The firm is financially distressed: V is

close to D. It has barely enough future cash-flows to pay back its debt. The flow chart in Figure 4 describes
the different outcomes of financial distress and the empirical probabilities associated with each branch of

the tree.

       Continuation: If V>D and V>L, the firm has enough resources to pay back its debt. It can and seeks

to continue to operate. But because V is close to D, it may underinvest. This is the classic problem of debt
overhang: Debtholders absorb a disproportionate share of the value created by new projects, so that junior

investors    especially shareholders-- are reluctant to fund them (see Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy,

2020, for a recent presentation). The solution in this case would be an informal, out of court, restructuring

to reduce D, though this rarely happens in practice.

       Exit: If L>D but V<L, the firm simply stops operating without filing for bankruptcy. The entrepreneur

liquidates the firm, pays lenders, and pockets in the residual. This often occurs for small businesses such as

restaurants. For small businesses, such voluntary exit also happens when D>L, i.e. liquidation proceeds do

not cover existing obligations. Technically, the firm should file for bankruptcy, but for small firms the fixed

cost of doing so often outweighs the potential benefits for claimants such as landlords or lessors.
       Exiting out of court is incredibly common. Statistics from the Census Business Dynamics Statistics

database show that, in the past 20 years, 91.7% of firms that exit do so outside of bankruptcy.
       Bankruptcy with straight-out liquidation: When V<D and L>V. The firm defaults on payments, places

itself under the authority of a court of justice and is liquidated. In some instances, the entire firm is sold off.
In others, assets are sold separately (piecemeal liquidation). This is the most common path for bankrupt


                                                        11
firms, particularly for smaller businesses. Among firms going through a formal bankruptcy process, 84.4%

of the firms go through this process as opposed to the Chapter 11 filing that we describe below.11

       Chapter 11 filing. When V<D, but V ? L. When there is uncertainty about the continuation value of

the firm, the business may file for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code. This

occurs in 15.6% of bankruptcy filings. The court seeks to estimate the continuation value of the firm. If the
court estimates that L>V, it sends the firm to liquidation, either by converting the case to Chapter 7 or

dismissing it outright (leaving the firm to liquidate out of court). Alternatively, if the business is estimated

to be viable (V>L), it is reorganized. In a reorganization, equity holders and some junior creditor claims are

usually wiped out, with senior debtholders becoming owners of the new firm.12

       Conditional on chapter 11 filing, the majority of firms are liquidated. Among the 15.6% of

bankruptcy filings that happen under Chapter 11, 10.2% end up liquidated, and 5.6% re-emerge. As we
discuss below, the vast majority of the re-emerging firms are large.



       2.2 Frictions to Efficient Triage in the Pandemic
       The triage described above does not occur in a vacuum; it is organized by a financial and legal
architecture. It requires support from courts, including bankruptcy judges and trustees, and lawyers who

sometimes intervene ahead of the formal filing by drafting out-of-court restructuring proposals, which take

place under the shadow of the law, or prepackaged bankruptcy proposals to speed up the process after filing.

       On the financing side, different types of investors play important roles. First, firms may need funding

d ring he nego ia ion i self ( debtor in possession financing), hich is of en pro ided b senior lenders.

Second, firms may need funding to emerge from bankruptcy. Such funding can be provided by current

claimants as well as external investors. Last, investors may assist firms out of court in various capacities:

providing risky funds (distressed investors), financing the takeover of the firm by an acquiror, accepting

out of court renegotiation of their claims (usually in exchange for a share of the upside of the company).



11
   For ease of explanation, we assume that all firms for which V<D and L>V choose liquidation in bankruptcy. In
practice, firms of this type could also liquidate outside of court as long as creditors agree to take a loss without need
for court intervention.
12
   Increasingly, M&A activity in bankruptcy is blurring the lines between continuation and liquidation. Sales in
Chapter 11 could be an efficient way to quickly redeploy assets in bankruptcy. However, existing evidence on the rise
of M&A in bankruptcy, such as Gilson, Hotchkiss, and Osborn (2016), focus on the largest firms in Chapter 11. M&A
for the smallest firms is likely quite rare.

                                                           12
      The triage implemented by the financial and legal infrastructure is likely to become less efficient in

times of acute crisis. In theory, to be efficient, sorting should lead to continuation whenever V>L, and exit

whenever L>V. In the COVID crisis however, the accumulation of corporate distress will impose stress on

the legal and financial infrastructure, potentially reducing the quality of the triage. We have in mind four

mechanisms:

                Uncertainty about whether the COVID crisis is temporary or structural . If it is

        temporary, this corresponds to an increase in D (obligations that arose due to the temporary shock

        to revenue). V does not change as cumulative future cash-flows are virtually unchanged. In this

        case, continuation is best when the firm was viable before: V>L Alternatively, if COVID-19 leads

        to permanent reallocation across US regions or industries, this corresponds to a reduction of V (as
         he firm s prospec s are diminished) and an increase in L (as he firms asse s sho ld be deplo ed

        elsewhere).

                Congestion: Judges and lawyers are overwhelmed by the large wave of financial
        distress. As a result, their estimates of V and L are noisier and wrong decisions happen more often.

        Also, the duration of the process is longer, part of V is destroyed in the process, making it more
        likely that L>V due to restructuring costs.

                The COVID crisis disproportionately impacts smaller firms, which are harder to
        continue. For smaller firms, the estimate of V is noisier. Further, for small businesses a larger part
        of the continuation value V is not pledgeable to outside investors (for e ample he en reprene r s

        know-how). Suppose that only value V <V is pledgeable to investors. Then, investors value the
        continuation of the firm at V and will thus choose liquidation whenever V <L. Lastly, the fixed

        costs for restructuring small firms may be quite large relative to their size, forcing V down and

        resulting in L>V for these firms, even though V would be larger if restructuring were not needed.

                Critical outside funding may be lacking in a crisis. Firms typically need funding during
        the process and after emergence. The funding need is greatest among firms with large working

        capital balances, such as restaurants and retail, which are highly distressed due to the pandemic. As

        above, this may create a wedge between the actual continuation value of the firm V and what outside

        investors are able to fund. This can tilt the process towards excess liquidation.




                                                      13
       2.3 Costs of Financial Distress in the COVID Recession
         Before discussing the extent to which these frictions are exacerbated by the COVID crisis, we

perform a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the aggregate costs of financial distress that could occur during

the COVID pandemic. Even in regular times, bankruptcy and other milder forms of financial distress can

be costly. For example, Andrade and Kaplan (1998) estimate that the costs of financial distress are between
10 and 23 percent of enterprise value.

         Data from the Federal Judicial Cen er s In egra ed Da abase (IDB) gives the amount of liabilities

owed by bankrupt firms from 2008-2017. Over this ten-year period, the average firm in Chapter 7 had

$4.6M in liabilities at the time of filing while the average Chapter 11 firm owed $64.8M, and these

distributions have been very stable over time. The bankruptcy forecasting exercise we discussed earlier

suggested an estimated 15,638 Chapter 11 bankruptcies and 37,374 Chapter 7 bankruptcies over the next
year. Given the average size of firms that enter bankruptcy, this yields $1.01 trillion dollars of liabilities

will go into Chapter 11 and $171.9 billion will enter Chapter 7.

         How much value could be lost from these bankruptcies? Financial distress costs are notoriously

hard to estimate. We base o r es ima es on he midpoin of Andrade and Kaplan s (1998) es ima e s, but
also recognize that there are many distress costs which occur well before a firm enters bankruptcy (Elkamhi,

Ericsson, and Parsons, 2012) which are not included in our calculations. Assuming that 16.5% of firm value

is lost due to financial distress, we estimate that frictions to restructuring could result in a loss of $195.5

billion, equal to 0.9% of U.S. GDP.

         An alternative more fine-tuned calibration is obtained by predicting the number of bankruptcies for

different size ranges of firms using the IDB. We estimate:

                                                                                  

where  is the number of bankruptcies in size bucket  in month ,  is the national

unemployment rate, and  are calendar month fixed effects to soak up seasonality. We run this regression

separately for each size bucket  using data for 2008-2017.13 Based on these estimates, we can forecast the

number of bankruptcies in each size range if the unemployment rate were 9.2%, as expected in the Survey

of Professional Forecasters. This exercise yields an expected 91,256 business bankruptcies over the next


13
  The results of this estimation are in Appendix Table B.1, and we find essentially identical results if we use year-
over-year differences instead of levels in the regression.

                                                           14
year (Table B.1), substantially higher than we forecast when using the longer time series from 1980-2019.

From this projection, we estimate aggregate costs of financial distress of $282.0 billion (1.4% of US GDP).

Of these losses, roughly 20 percent are estimated to come from firms with less than $100M in liabilities.

       The exercises above assume that all firms experience a 16.5 percent loss of value due to financial

distress, but this estimate is based on large, public companies. There is evidence that suggests that smaller
firms may experience substantially higher losses. Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) estimate that direct fees

alone could be as high as 30% of firm value for small businesses. In addition, smaller firms are much more

likely to be liquidated, and Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) estimate that liquidation in Chapter 7 destroys

significantly more value than Chapter 11, even after accounting for selection of firms into each chapter.

       In addition to the firm value losses we just estimated, we can also estimate the costs of employee

separations and reduced wages. To do so, we start from Bernstein, Colonnelli, and Iverson (2019), who
show that the random assignment of a bankruptcy judge can exogenously move a firm from Chapter 11 to

Chapter 7, resulting in a 34% drop in the number of employees at the establishments owned by the bankrupt

firm. Their paper also shows that a surprisingly large fraction of firms              58%      are sensitive to the

assignment of the judge, meaning that a large fraction of firms could easily be shifted across bankruptcy
procedures. Based on average employment per establishment of 36, this suggests that assigning the most

lenient judge to the average bankrupt firm could save 58% x 34% x 36 = 7 jobs. Multiplying this figure

with our bankruptcy forecasting exercises above, this would lead to some excess destruction of 220,000 to

480,000 jobs, or about 0.15% of the U.S. workforce.14



       2.4 Evaluating Frictions in the COVID Crisis
       In this section, we evaluate the frictions listed above, and provide evidence on whether the pandemic

has made them more severe.



       2.4.1 Is the COVID Crisis Temporary or Structural?




14
   While many of these workers will be reallocated to new firms, there is extensive evidence that job losses lead to
permanent reduction in earnings. Looking at all mass layoffs in recessions, Davis and von Wachter (2011) find that
workers experience a 20 percent reduction in long-term wages. Focusing on bankruptcy-related layoffs, Graham et
al. (2019) find similar long-term wage reductions.

                                                         15
       How much reallocation should we expect in the current crisis? If the crisis leaves the economy

essentially unchanged except for a temporary, albeit very large shock, business fundamentals are unchanged

and few firms should be liquidated. If however the crisis is going to deeply affect the productive structure

of the economy, liquidation should become the norm so that capital and labor can be reallocated.

       It is obviously very hard to gauge the expected allocative effect of the current crisis. Jaimovitch and
Siu (forthcoming) document how recent business cycles have led to permanent shifts in capital-labor

substitution, indicating durable changes in the structure of the economy, but the current crisis is different

in nature. Barrero, Bloom and Davis (2020) use firm-level one-year ahead forecasts of employment to

derive a measure of expected reallocation and find it to be quite large. This, in addition to other evidence,

notably on stock returns dispersion and working from home, points to durable labor reallocation in the

economy, consistent with the view that the crisis will permanently destroy some jobs.
       We complement these analyses with an additional analysis is based on equity analyst forecasts. We

analyze the dispersion of eq i     anal s s earnings forecasts during the spring of 2020 using the same data

described in Section I. We compute the following reallocation index:

          ,      ,         ,   ,

where  is a firm weight and ,          ,   is the expected earnings growth for firm i, at date t, at horizon  

 2020,2021,2022 . The reallocation index              ,    captures the cross-sectional dispersion of expected

earnings growth.15 We compute  as the earnings share of firm i in 2019 (we restrict ourselves to firms

with positive 2019 earnings). Following Landier and Thesmar (2020), forecasted earnings growth of firm
                                                               1
i, as of date t, and for horizon h are given by: ,     ,       
                                                                    ,     + /,201             1 .

       Barrero, Bloom and Davis (2020), study smaller firms and conclude that the COVID shock will lead

to substantial reallocation. Our approach differs from theirs in several ways. Its advantage is that it can

leverage analyst forecasts, which are reasonably accurate and available at long horizons (until 2022, and

even 2024 for a smaller set of firms). One drawback is that we focus on larger, publicly listed, firms.

Another limitation of our approach is that it does not rely on actual forecasts of decisions (Barrero et al look

at hiring plans), but on expected profits from these decisions.


15
   The reallocation index Rt,h can also be interpreted more structurally. Appendix A shows within a Cobb-Douglas
production technology that Rt,h captures the share of capital that will move across firms, provide that investment
tracks future profits.

                                                          16
      In the Appendix we check how accurately our measure of expected reallocation tracks actual

reallocation for the 1990-2018 period. During this period, expected reallocation has tracked ex-post

realization. The only exception is for forecasts issued in April 2007, i.e. before the financial crisis, when

analysts underestimated the amount of reallocation that would eventually happen. But as soon as the crisis

unfolded, their forecasts jumped to be more closely match ex post realizations.
      In Figure 5, we show the evolution of our reallocation measure between February and May 2020, for

each one of the three horizons 2020, 2021 and 2022. While expected dispersion for 2020 went up

dramatically, this is not the case for longer horizon forecasts. Expected dispersion has not increased for

2021 and has actually decreased for 2022. Analyst forecasts have been revised downwards very strongly,

but all in the same direction, making firms more similar to one another. Another explanation for this

somewhat counter intuitive result is that, while some firms have benefited from the crisis (seeing their FG
going up and thereby contributing to increase the index), their weight in aggregate earnings is relatively

small. Most firms experienced a reduction in expected 2021 and 2022 earnings, which made firms more

similar to one another. Overall, the shock will make firms more different in the short-run, but less different

in the longer-run, reducing the need for capital reallocation. In short, industry reallocation is forecast to be
lower than is commonly supposed.



      2.4.2 Crowding of the Bankruptcy Court System

      Iverson (2018) estimates the effects of court congestion on several bankruptcy outcomes using the

2005 bankruptcy reform as a shock to court caseloads. First, looking at creditor recovery rates, Iverson

(2018) estimates that a 5.8% increase in caseloads results in a 10% increase in bank business loan charge-

offs. Extrapolating these estimates to a caseload shock of 30% (the typical increase seen in a recession), we

might expect recovery rates to drop by 47%.

      As discussed above, we use a simple forecasting model based on the unemployment rate to forecast
business bankruptcies. The same bankruptcy judges who oversee business cases also deal with consumer

bankruptcy cases, and consumers constitute about 80% of the total workload for an average bankruptcy
judge. We can use the same process outlined in Section 1.5 to forecast consumer bankruptcies to estimate




                                                      17
how overall bankruptcy court caseloads might react to the COVID-19 recession.16 If unemployment is 9.2

percent over the next year, caseloads are forecasted to rise by 158%, close to five times the rise seen in a

typical recession.

       The evidence in Iverson (2018) also suggests that as bankruptcy judges become busier, they focus

their effort on larger firms, possibly at the expense of smaller firms. As caseloads rise, larger firms are
actually more likely to emerge from bankruptcy, although the process takes longer. Meanwhile, smaller

firms are more likely be dismissed from court, leaving many of them to liquidate without court protection.

       If courts become congested, one possibility is that distressed firms will endogenously respond by

taking measures to shorten the workload required of judges. For example, firms may work to create pre-

negotiated bankruptcy plans or avoid bankruptcy altogether. In addition, as distressed debt markets have

become more liquid and sophisticated, M&A activity in bankruptcy has led to shorter bankruptcy durations
(Gilson, Hotchkiss, and Osborn, 2016). A combination of these forces has seen the median Chapter 11

bankruptcy duration decline from 18 months in the early 2000s to 10 months in recent years. To some

extent, asset sales and out-of-court negotiations can compensate for congestion in court, but this creates

burdens for firm managers and financial markets.



       2.4.3 The Small Firm Problem

       Small firms are especially vulnerable to the crisis, not not because the pandemic has especially

affected industries dominated by small firms (Section 1.2), but instead because small firms balance sheets

are more vulnerable to losses in revenues (Section 1.3).

       Figure 6 confirms that large firms in need of restructuring have multiple options available, while

small firms have no other option but to liquidate. Above $500m of liabilities, close to 80% of the bankruptcy

filings end up as a Chapter 11-backed reorganization. The contrast with small businesses is striking: Below

$1m of liabilities, 90% of the filings are straight-out liquidations, while less than 5% of bankruptcies end-
up as re-emergence from a Chapter 11 filing. For a small firm, failure typically means liquidation.

       For larger firms, Chapter 11 is reasonably efficient in normal times. While academics have pointed
out large frictions in the Chapter 11 process, in particular with regards to failures to fully rehabilitate



16
  A detailed explanation of this forecasting exercise and the calculation of court caseloads is in Iverson, Ellias, and
Roe (2020).

                                                          18
distressed firms (Hotchkiss, 1995) and long delays in bankruptcy courts (Dou, Taylor, Wang, and Wang,

2020), the majority of large firms that enter Chapter 11 successfully emerge, and most estimates of

inefficient continuation or liquidation are small (Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shliefer (2008); Dou, Taylor,

Wang, and Wang (2020)). One exception to these findings is Antill (2020), who estimates that 22% of large

firms are inefficiently liquidated. We further note that, even if the firm itself is efficiently continued, many
contracts within the firm may be inefficiently terminated. For example, Graham, Kim, Li, and Qiu (2019)

show that, on average, employees who work for large corporations that enter Chapter 11 experience a 10%

decline in wages over the next seven years. Inefficient reallocation of workers plays a role in these losses.

      Frictions to restructuring small firms are substantially larger. Even small disruptions to cash flow can

trigger restructuring as many of these firms maintain low cash buffers and lack access to lines of credit

(Bartik et al 2020). Based on the June 27 Census Pulse Survey, including financial assistance and loans,
only 30% of small businesses reported having enough cash to maintain operations for another three months.

Thus, even when        , it is possible that forced, inefficient restructuring can occur simply because smaller

firms run out of financing to continue to operate. Second, when restructuring does occur, smaller firms have
fewer options available. Chapter 11 bankruptcy imposes costs that can be as high as 30% of a small

b siness s o al al e (Bris, Welch, and Zhu, 2006), making it close to prohibitive for many small

businesses even if they wish to continue. Consistent with this, small firms are more likely to simply shut

down: Data from the Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) shows that, on average from 2000

  2016, 412,209 firms close annually. Meanwhile, only 36,783 businesses file for bankruptcy annually
during the same time period, according to U.S. Courts filing statistics. In the end, while only 5.6% of all

firms going bankrupt survive the process, these firms are predominantly large firms, so in liabilities-
weighted terms, about 43% of the dollars of claims re-emerge.

      High liquidation rates among small businesses are not inherently inefficient; it depends on how well

labor and capital can be redeployed to new uses. Most evidence suggests that after liquidation, reallocation

is difficult. Graham, Li, Kim, and Qiu (2019) show that workers experience large wage losses after

liquidation, especially in thin markets. Capital reallocation appears even harder than labor reallocation.

Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) show that capital reallocation is lower during recessions, indicating stronger

search and financing frictions precisely when liquidations tend to happen. Bernstein, Colonnelli, and

Iverson (2019) estimate the effects on capital utilization when a small business is forced to Chapter 7: a


                                                      19
business establishment that is forced to liquidate is 17 percentage points more likely to be unoccupied five

years after the bankruptcy, relative to an identical establishment that remained in Chapter 11.17



       2.4.4 Financing Restructuring

       To deal with the upcoming large flow of bankruptcies, and in particular handle debt restructuring,
the financial system will be needed at several levels. Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy (2020) fear that

banks will have a propensity to interrupt lending to firms in financial trouble, and propose policies designed

avoid this. DeMarzo, Krishnamurthy and Rauh (2020) fear a lack of DIP financing for firms in the process

of restructuring (DIP) financing, and propose setting a government-sponsored SPV to fill that gap.



       2.4.4.1 Corporate debt restructuring will have a small effect on ba k bala ce hee
       We e plore here ho         m ch banks balance shee s           o ld be impac ed b         he pcoming        a e of

defaults and also large-scale debt restructuring. Our main finding is that the effect of a large wave of defaults

or deb res r c ring o ld be modes , since SME loans are onl a small frac ion of banks asse s.

       In the first step of this analysis, we predict corporate loans charge-offs using unemployment data. To
do this, we use Call Reports to compute aggregate charge-off rates (we use Charge-off rates on C&I loans

and secured loans to corporations, which we aggregate over all banks covered in the Call reports).

Historically, charge-off rates closely track the unemployment rate. We exploit this relationship to build an

econometric model linking the innovation of charge-off rates and unemployment rate (in this we follow

Blank, Hanson, Stein, and Sunderam 2020). We obtain an R-squared of 0.87 for secured loans and 0.55 for

C&I loans.

       We then use forecasts of unemployment for 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023 from the Survey of

Professional Forecasters, which, combined with our models allow us to make forecasts of charge-off rates

until 2023. We expect charge-off rates on C&I loans to be as high as 3% and secured loans to increase to
2%. These projections are less dramatic than during the financial crisis because, as of this writing in August



17
   This is not because Chapter 11 firms are inefficiently continued. Roughly 75% of all business establishments that
stay in Chapter 11 are reallocated to other uses, so even in Chapter 11 there is a large amount of reallocation. But,
because the liquidation is not forced, it allows for reallocation that leads to higher utilization rates overall. Moreover,
 hese effec s are dri en en irel b forced liq ida ion in hin asse marke s, defined as areas i h fe o her
businesses in the same industry or areas with low amounts of small business financing available.

                                                           20
2020, professional forecasters anticipate that, post COVID crisis, unemployment will return faster to normal

than in the aftermath of the financial crisis.

       Do hese projec ions ha e he po er o shock banks balance shee s in a meaningf l                  a ? Current

data suggests they do not. In Table 3, we report the results of this analysis, separately for all banks, the 20

largest ones by assets and the rest. The first take away is that SME loans are already just a fraction of equity
(slightly less than 40% for all banks, and a much smaller fraction for the top 20, a priori systemically more

important, banks). As a result, a 2 percentage points increase in the fraction of charge-offs only has a very

small impact on aggregate equity (2% times 40%), an order of magnitude smaller than 2019 dividend

payouts which were 26% of book equity. The overall lesson of this quantification exercise is that SME loan

defaults will not meaningfully affect bank balance sheet in aggregate, even if they were as big as, or even

twice as large as the GFC.18
       The main reason for this small effect is that banks       in particular the largest ones -- are not lending

much to small businesses, as noted by Chen, Hanson, and Stein (2017) and Gopal & Schnabl (2020). This

is due to the rise of non-banks, notably Fintech, which have replaced bank lending over the past few years.



       2.4.4.2 DIP financing: Will there be enough DIP financing?

       Firms that restructure need financing to operate during the negotiation phase. Such debtor-in-

possession (DIP) financing is critical to allow the firm to function and make sure capital structure

restructuring happens effectively. DIP financing is typically supplied by senior debtholders. Using various

data sources covering bankruptcies of more than $50m in constant dollars, the Bankruptcy and COVID-19

Working Group (2020) estimate that, over 1996-2014, about 60% of the firms receive DIP financing.

Looking at all 99 large chap er 11 filings from Jan ar           o June 2020, they find that such bankruptcies

raised some $10.8bn in DIP financing or about 5.9% of the $182m of liabilities involved. Smaller

bankruptcies are much less likely to receive DIP financing. Overall, these amounts are reasonably small
compared to total corporate credit, which is about $3,000bn.

       In addition, it is not entirely obvious why DIP financing would be lacking. A classic problem with
debt overhang is that new investors are not granted priority over existing ones. If they are, in theory this


18
  The main reason for this small effect is that banks in particular the largest ones -- are not lending much to small
businesses. This is due to the rise of non-banks, notably Fintech, which have replaced bank lending over the past few
years.

                                                         21
solves the problem of overhang, since overhang arises from legacy lenders having priority over the present

value of new investments. But DIP is by definition senior in bankruptcy, so this problem should not arise.

In addition, DIP is typically provided by senior lenders. If these are banks, the above analysis suggests that

their balance sheets might be more resilient than commonly expected.

      In sum, we do not consider it likely that there will be a scarcity in DIP financing, but the situation
should be monitored closely, and if needed, setting a government sponsored SPV dedicated to DIP financing

(as suggested by DeMarzo et al, 2020), could prove useful and relatively cheap for the US taxpayers.



      2.4.4.3 Distress Investing: High elasticity to the Incidence of Distress

      Bankruptcy and liquidation are not the only mechanisms to reallocate assets. Another mechanism for

reallocation is merger or acquisition by a firm in a stronger financial position, or by a financial buyer such
as a private equity firm. Consider the role of M&A in saving struggling public firms during the Great

Recession. Out of approximately 5,600 firms listed as of June 2008 in the CRSP database, about 7% were

acquired between September 2008 and December 2009. For comparison, about 8% were delisted for

reasons other than exchange or merger, usually because they were headed towards bankruptcy. But
acquisition is not a common path for firms that are struggling to survive: the market for corporate control

is a more viable exit path for firms experiencing only moderate distress. For example, the two largest

acquisitions during the Great Financial Crisis were the March 2009 purchase of Genentech by Roche and

the October 2009 purchase of Wyeth by Pfizer. Neither of these were distressed, with both acquisitions

occurring at valuations that exceeded their valuations in June 2008.

      Gilson, Hotchkiss and Osborn (2016) document a rise in M&A in bankruptcy in recent years. They

show that post-bankruptcy survival rates are similar whether bankrupt firms sell businesses as going

concerns versus reorganizing independently, consistent with redeployment of asset via sales.

      Specialized financial buyers also play a role. Distressed bond investors seek to benefit from the
resolution of financial distress by buying debt at discounted values and see the company reemerge.

Distressed equity investors bring in managerial skills to develop a strategy in order to benefit from the
compan s s reng hs and       eaknesses. Ahead of the crisis, assets under management held by distressed

investors were at an all-time low (about $20bn in 2020Q1). But the supply of funds in that industry is highly
elastic to the state of the economy. Beyond the strict specialty of distressed investing, there is much dr


                                                     22
po der in he pri a e eq i      ind s r that could be deployed to rescue struggling but viable businesses.

Bain Capital documents that the amount of funds raised by the private equity sector was about $894bn in

2019, the second highest level since 2017.



      III.      Policy options
      A series of policy proposals address the frictions listed in the previous section. These proposals fall

into roughly three categories, tabulated in Table 4. First, several proposals involve straight-out grants to

firms to keep them alive through the initial lockdowns and subsequent downturn. The second category of

proposal consists of steps to encourage out-of-court restructuring, including payment moratoria and debt

restructuring subsidies. The third category consists of modifications to bankruptcy procedures       such as

increasing the number of judges and easing debtor-in-possession financing to make it easier to restructure
or liquidate in court. We focus our discussion on proposals dealing in the two latter categories.



3.1 Encouraging out-of-court restructuring
        Although bankruptcy is the most extreme outcome of financial distress, it is not the only one. Some
businesses, after having accumulated obligations during the lockdown, will remain functional (like a

restaurant becoming a food delivery operation), yet the accumulation of legacy debt will lead to debt

overhang and underinvestment. Many firms will seek to deleverage progressively, by cutting investment

and possible equity payouts, but this could be too slow, leading to a protracted period of underinvestment,

in a sense similar to the slow recovery of consumption after the financial crisis. Debt overhang may not just

arise from financial debt, but also fixed expenses coming from utility bills or rents (the focus of Hanson,

S ein, S nderam and Z ick s 2020). A number of policies can help restructuring this debt out-of-court,

thereby avoiding bankruptcy. The proposals below focus on smaller firms.



3.1.1 Moratoria & payment deferrals programs for SMEs

        One simple option is for the government to temporarily stop contractual payments to claimholders.
Most moratoria have historically applied to individuals (for rents) and government (for public debt). For

instance, during the first world war, French landlords did not receive rent from their occupants by decree
until 1920. Since the beginning of the COVID crisis, various states and cities have implemented eviction


                                                     23
moratoria. In mid-April, the G20 suspended debt payments for many developing countries. The CARES

act allows borrowers to suspend or reduce payments on federally-backed mortgages, but interest and

principal still accrue. So this provision is more of a payment deferral program.

        As shown by Coelho and Zamil (2020), many countries have implemented loan payment deferral

programs since the beginning of the crisis. Programs targeting SME lending were implemented in Australia,
Hong-Kong, Italy, Singapore and South Africa. Although the details vary, in most of these programs firms

can reschedule both interest and principal, and in no case are interest and principal forgiven. In some of

them, banks have been required to accep companies req es s o resched le pa men s. In o hers, banks are

not mandated to do so but the government coordinates with professional associations to encourage

compliance. In some countries (like Italy), banks can request state guarantees for loans whose payments

are suspended. Overall, this crisis has revealed how reluctant most countries are to arbitrarily modify private
contracts without the consent of participants without providing implicit or explicit subsidies.

        A key challenge facing payment moratoria is the pain these inflict on lenders, primarily banks. We

alread addressed he effec of SME loans on US banks balance shee s in Sec ion II. Overall our take is

ha SME loans do no ha e he po er o shock banks balance shee s o a significan e en , because SME
loans ha e al a s been a small frac ion of U.S. banks balance shee s, and also beca se non-banks have

taken over this market since the financial crisis (see e.g. Gopal and Schnabl, 2020).



3.1.2 Subsidizing voluntary restructuring

        Another related policy option is to subsidize voluntary restructuring. Greenwood and Thesmar

(2020) propose a one-size-fits-all approach for small businesses, subsidized by the government to reduce

haggling between different counterparties and thereby to reduce the deadweight costs of bankruptcy and

business failure.

        Greenwood and Thesmar focus their discussion on unpaid rents, because these are often the largest
class of financial claim facing the smallest businesses, after salaries and wages. Using SOI data, Figure B.4.

in the Appendix shows the aggregate rent to asset ratio by firm size. Cancelling rents altogether can offer a
significant relief: In the smallest category of firms, cancelling one year of rent can reduce the debt to asset

ratio by some 8 percentage points.




                                                      24
        To illustrate their proposal, consider a restaurant owner with a viable business post-pandemic, with

a landlord to whom she owes $1000. The landlord voluntarily gives up her $1000 claim against the

restaurant in exchange for a tax credit of $300. If, for instance, rents are taxed at say 40%, giving up $1000

worth of claims has a net cost of only $300 to the landlord. This proposal is designed to make renegotiation

of debt simple and fast, and, because the agreement is standardized, eliminates the need of the landlord or
creditor to investigate the financial resources of the small business. It is focused on small firms and valid

for a prespecified grace period.

        Government-subsidized restructuring shares the costs of restructuring between taxpayers (in the

form of lower tax receipts in the future) and lenders or landlords. In this way, subsidized out-of-court

restructuring lies somewhere between straight-out grants, which pass costs fully to taxpayers, and

moratoria, which keep restructuring costs fully with investors.         The Greenwood-Thesmar proposal
recognizes the unique position of the government in implement a form of debt-for-equity swap: the

go ernmen        b s   he forgi en deb in e change for a slice of he al e crea ed from res r c ring he

debt. The government can do this because it can both give tax credits and cash via corporate income taxes.



3.2 Bankruptcy-specific policies
3.2.1 Bolstering the Bankruptcy Judicial System

        If bankruptcies increases as much as we forecast, they will strain the legal system. Crowded courts

may lead to either excess liquidation or excess continuation and lower recovery rates overall.

        There are 349 bankruptcy judges in the US. According to Iverson, Ellias, and Roe (2020), between

50 and 246 temporary judges could be needed to ensure that the workload per judge does not increase more

than it did in 2010. Congress could authorize additional judgeships, or retired bankruptcy judges could be

temporarily recalled. Bankruptcy caseloads are expected to vary substantially across districts, with the

largest needs in Delaware, Texas, Illinois, and Florida, suggesting the need to transfer judges across
jurisdictions.

        Since February 2020, small businesses have their own simplified version of Chapter 11, as put forth
by the Small Business Restructuring Act. All businesses with less than $7.5m of liabilities can file under

the new Subchapter V, whose goal i is o pro ec he o ners eq i . The economic ra ionale is ha , for




                                                     25
man small b sinesses, iping o         he o ner s eq i      des ro s he en erprise al e, as he en reprene r is

critical to the going concern value of the firm.

        There are two key differences between the Subchapter V procedure and Chapter 11. First,

unsecured debt loses priority to equity. Second, the court has the power to confirm a plan without a formal

vote of creditors. This has the effect of making creditors weaker than in Chapter 11, and leaves a pivotal
role for the judge and trustee. It is, in short, untested. The efficiency of the process depends heavily on the

ability of the legal system to filter viable from non-viable firms. As this form of bankruptcy became

available just as the pandemic was taking root, its take-up has so far been limited. We suspect it will have

little impact on the very smallest businesses that will close without filing for bankruptcy, but still has the

potential to alleviate pressures on businesses with assets between $1 million and $10 million. To the extent

that Subchapter V becomes more widely used, even more judges and trustees will be needed to be able to
carefully consider these small business cases.



3.2.2 Pre-packaged Bankruptcies for Small Firms

        So-called pre-packaged bankr p cies can save time and resources, but are still used almost
exclusively by large firms, where the firm files for Chapter 11 with a plan that is already preapproved by

all classes of creditors. This shortens the procedure considerably, avoiding uncertainty, court fees, and a

need for DIP financing. Skeel (2020) suggests generalize this insight to help the bankruptcy system absorb

the coming wave of financial distress.

        An example of such pre-packaged bankruptcy is he S per Chap er 11 proposed b Marcus Miller

and Joseph Stiglitz (1999). This proposal creates a new chapter of the bankruptcy code which resembles

Chapter 11. The main difference is that the government injects fresh funds and becomes an equity holder,

while creditors get a haircut. Management stays in place, allowing the firm to continue operations without

firing employees. An economic rationale for such a policy is that firms are to some extent interdependent,
so that the government is best placed to internalize these externalities, against taking a slice of the upside.

The other rationale is that such a restructuring is simple and reduces costs of financial distress.
        Such a proposal comes with many caveats. First, the government cannot rescue all firms that file,

and if it did so it would rescue far too many nonviable entities. It has to make a choice, and it would need
to set up a large-scale administrative process with little expertise and no time. This would be battlefield


                                                      26
medicine with no experienced surgeon. As we discussed earlier, to this point it appears that private DIP

financing is sufficient for the larger firms that typically rely on it. Second, some firms may have such large

claims that the government would become the primary equity holder. Third, political economy

considerations would likely pollute the process, with local politicians lobbying for federal funds to save

small businesses.



3.2.3 Government subsidizing successful restructuring.

        In the same spirit as Greenwood and Thesmar (2020), Blanchard, Philippon and Pisani (2020)

suggest that the government could subsidize court-assisted debt restructuring, by taking an extra haircut on

its debt. This extra haircut would be a transfer to existing creditors, but only conditional on the firm

emerging from bankruptcy. If the firm were to liquidate, the government would not make any concession.
In theory, the difference between the haircut facing private investors and the haircut taken by the

government should reflect the wedge between the private and social value of business continuity. This

wedge would need to be estimated in order to calibrate the policy parameters.



3.2.4 DIP financing subsidy

        DeMarzo, Krishnamurthy and Rauh (2020) suggested that there is an undersupply of debtor-in-

possession funding. They suggest that the government setup a funding special purpose vehicle, itself funded

by equity from the Treasury and with Fed backing, to lend senior at very low discount rates. As our earlier

discussion suggests an abundant supply of private capital, this will not be necessary.



3.2.5 Extending Chapter 11 Court Deadlines

        Finally, there are policy options to modify the bankruptcy code without requiring any government

funding. In May 2020, the Bankruptcy and COVID-19 Working Group sent a letter to Congress with
recommendations designed to give small businesses more breathing room once they enter Chapter 11.19 In

particular, their proposal is to temporarily extend all major deadlines by six months for small business
bankruptcies. This would allow the business to continue to operate with protection from creditors, but give



19
  The full text of the letter can be found here: http://blogs.harvard.edu/bankruptcyroundtable/files/2020/06/Small-
Business-Letter-Final-5.26.20-pm.pdf

                                                        27
the owner, judge, and trustee more time to evaluate the long-term viability of the business before needing

to come up with a reorganization plan.



                   IV. Conclusion
        Every year, firms become financially distressed. Some of these firms are affected by transitory
shocks: to get back on their feet, they need new funding and a reduction of legacy leverage. Other firms are

facing more existential threats: their products or markets are disappearing, their technology is obsolete.

Usually, a financial and legal infrastructure helps route firms to the correct outcome. But this process is

expensive; most distressed smaller firms simply shut down.

        This paper addresses the question of whether this system is going to work as it should when, in the

coming year, we encounter a potentially unprecedented surge of distress. Much depends on the length of
the pandemic and what structural shifts in the economy it engenders. The longer is the crisis and the greater

the amount of reallocation needed, the more that some form of restructuring and liquidation will be

inevitable. Viewed from this perspective, interventions that can reduce the costs of financial distress and

ease the burden on the court system are low hanging fruit. Especially promising are interventions that
encourage out-of-court restructuring. Meanwhile, our analysis suggests that the financial system generally

has enough liquidity to support restructuring, but this should be monitored closely as the pandemic

lengthens.

        Our focus has been on firm-specific inefficiencies related to restructuring. But there may be

additional spillovers as well, which combine to have long-lasting economic effects, including aggregate

demand externalities from failing businesses to the deadweight losses from firm-worker separations. For

example, Bernstein, Iverson, Colonnelli, and Giroud (2019) show that forced liquidation has a strong

negative effect on employment at other firms located in the same block as the liquidated business, and this

effect lasts for at least five years. Moreira (2016) shows that firms born during recessions begin smaller and
remain smaller throughout their lifecycles. All of these forms of economic scarring reinforce our conclusion

that policy should focus on smaller firms.




                                                     28
References

Al man, Ed ard I., 2020, Co id-19 and he Credi C cle, Journal of Credit Risk 16, 67-94.
Andrade, Gregor and S e en N. Kaplan, 1998, Ho Cos l is Financial (No Economic) Dis ress?
     E idence from Highl Le eraged Transac ions Tha Became Dis ressed, Journal of Finance 53,
     1443-1493.
An ill, Sam el, 2020, Do he Righ Firms S r i e Bankr p c ? S anford Uni ersi      Working Paper.
Bankruptcy and COVID-19 Working Group, 2020, Letter to Congress RE: DIP Lending, July 10, 2020.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nick Bloom, and S e en J. Da is, 2020, COVID-19 Is Also a Realloca ion Shock,
      BFI Working Paper No. 2020-59.
Bartik, Alexander, Marianne Bertrand, Zoe Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher
      S an on, 2020, Ho are Small B sinesses Adj s ing o COVID-19? Early Evidence from a
      S r e , NBER Working Paper No. 26989.
Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, and Benjamin I erson, 2019, Asse Alloca ion in Bankr p c ,
      Journal of Finance 74, 5-53.
Berns ein, Shai, Eman ele Colonnelli, Xa ier Giro d, and Benjamin I erson, 2019, Bankr p c
      Spillo ers, Journal of Financial Economics 133 (3), 608-633.
Blanchard, Olivier, Thomas Philippon and Jean Pisani-Ferr , 2020, A Ne Polic Toolki is needed as
     Countries Exit COVID-19 Lockdo ns, PIIE Polic Brief 20-8.
Blank, Michael, Sam el Hanson, Jerem S ein, and Adi S nderam, 2020, Ho Sho ld U.S. Bank
      Regulators Respond to the COVID-19 Crisis? H chins Cen er Working Paper #63.
Bris, Ar ro, I o Welch, and Ning Zh , 2006, The Cos s of Bankr p c : Chap er 7 Liq ida ion ers s
       Chap er 11 Reorgani a ion, Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1253-1303.
Brunnermeier, Mark s and Ar ind Krishnam r h , 2020, Corpora e Deb O erhang and Credi Polic ,
     Brookings Papers of Economic Activity (forthcoming).
Carletti, Elena, Oliviero Tommaso, Pagano, Marco, Pelizzon, Loriana, and Subrahmanyam, Marti, 2020,
        The COVID19 Shock and Equity Shortfall: Evidence from I al , CEPR DP 14831
Chen, Brian S., Sam el G. Hanson, and Jerem C. S ein, 2017, The Decline of Big-Bank Lending to
      Small Business: Dynamic Impacts on Local Credit and Labor Markets , Working paper.
Coelho, Rodrigo and Raihan Zamil, 2020, Pa men Holida s in he Age of Co id: Implica ions for Loan
     Val a ions Marke Tr s and Financial S abili , Presen a ion, Bank for In erna ional Se lemen s,
     FSI Briefs No. 8.
Cro e , Nicolas and Fran ois Go rio, Financial Posi ions of U.S. P blic Corpora ions, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago Fed Insights Blog Posts, May-June 2020.
Da is, S e e and Von Wach er, Till, 2011, Recessions and he Cos of Job Losses , Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity
Elkamhi, Redo ane, Jan Ericsson and Chris opher A. Parsons, 2012, The Cos and Timing of Financial
     Dis ress, Journal of Financial Economics 105 (1), 62-81.
DeMar o, Pe er M., Ar ind Krishnam r h and Josh a Ra h, 2020, Deb or-in-Possession Financing
    Facili , Stanford University Working Paper.
Djanko , Simeon, Oli er Har , Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, Deb Enforcemen aro nd
      he World, Journal of Political Economy 116, 1105-1150.

                                                 29
Do , Wins on, L cien Ta lor, Wei Wang, and Wen        Wang, 2020, Dissec ing Bankr p c Fric ions,
     SSRN Working Paper,
Eisfeld , Andrea L. and Adriano A. Rampini, 2006, Capi al Realloca ion and Liq idi , Journal of
      Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.
Gilson, S ar C., Edi h S. Ho chkiss, and Ma he G. Osborn, Cashing o : The rise of M&A in
      Bankr p c , SSRN Working paper a ailable a http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2547168.
Gopal, Manasa and Philipp Schnabl, 2020, The Rise of Finance Companies and FinTech Lenders in
     Small B siness Lending, SSRN Working Paper.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Penciakova, Veronika and Nikc Sander, 2020,
      COVID-19 and SME fail res , NBER WP No 27877
Graham, John, and Kim, H nseob and Qi , Jiaping, 2019, Emplo ee Cos s of Corpora e Bankr p cies ,
     NBER WP 25922
Green ood, Robin and Da id Thesmar, 2020, Sharing he Economic Pain of he Corona ir s, Har ard
     Business School Working Paper.
Hanson, Sam el, Jerem S ein, Adi S nderam, and Eric Z ick, 2020, B siness Continuity Insurance:
     Keeping America s Ligh s on D ring he Pandemic, Becker Friedman Ins i e Whi e Paper.
Ho chkiss, Edi h, 1995, Pos bankr p c Performance and Managemen T rno er, Journal of Finance
     50 (1), 3-21.
I erson, Benjamin, 2018, Ge in Line: Chap er 11 Res r c ring in Cro ded Bankr p c Co r s,
      Management Science 64 (11), 4967-5460.
I erson, Benjamin, Jared Ellias, and Mark Roe, Es ima ing he Need for Addi ional Bankr p c J dges
      in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic 11 Har ard B siness La Re ie Online Jo rnal,
      Forthcoming.
Jaimo i ch, Nir and Henr Si , 2020, The Trend is he C cle: Job Polari a ion and Jobless Reco eries,
     Review of Economics and Statistics, (forthcoming).
Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar, 2020, Earnings E pec a ions in he COVID Crisis, Review of
      Asset Pricing Studies (forthcoming).
Ma, Angela, 2020, Forecas ing Corpora e Do ngrades and Defa l s, Unp blished Working Paper.
Miller, Marc s and Joseph S igli , 1999, Bankr p c Protection against Macro-Economic Shocks: The
      Case for a S per Chap er 11 , World Bank Conference on Capital Flows, Financial Crises, and
      Policies, Volume 15.
Moreira, Sara, 2016, Firm D namics, Persis en Effec s of En r Condi ions, and B siness C cles,
     Northwestern University Working Paper.
Sae , Emman el and Gabriel Z cman, 2020, Keeping B sinesses Ali e: The Go ernmen Will Pa ,
      Economics for Inclusive Prosperity Research Brief.
Skeel, Da id, 2020, Bankr p c and he Corona ir s, Brookings Working Paper.
Wang, Jialan, Jeyul Yang, Benjamin Iverson, and Raymond Kluender, 2020, Bankruptcy and the
     COVID-19 Crisis, Working Paper.




                                                 30
Figure 1. Impact of Pandemic on US Businesses
This figure displays various measures of how the pandemic has affected revenues and earnings of U.S.
businesses. In Panel A, we display the share of small businesses who report a severe negative impact of the
pandemic on their business, as reported in the Cens s B rea s Small B siness P lse S r e of 6/27/2020.
Panel B shows the average percentage change in revenues from 2019Q2 to 2020Q2 by two-digit NAICS
industry, weighted by 2019 revenues, from Compustat. Panel C displays a histogram of these same year-
over-year percent change in revenues across all firms in Compustat. Panel D shows the percentage of
public firms with negative EPS in that quarter. For Panel C and Panel D, we exclude financials.

       Panel A: % of small businesses in a sector reporting severe impact of pandemic on business




                       Panel B: YOY % change in revenues across industries




                                                    31
                        Panel C: YOY % change in revenues for public firms




Panel D. Time series of % of public firms with negative quarterly EPS (all firms=solid; large firms=dashed)




                                                    32
Figure 2 Where does the burden of the Covid-19 shock fall?
Panel A plots sector-level unemployment in July 2020 against the small business share of employment.
Panel B plots the national unemployment rate (solid) alongside the unemployment rate weighted by the
small business share of employment in that sector (dashed). Small business employment shares on 2015
data reported in the 2018 Small Business Profile by the US Small Business Administration.

                 Panel A. Sector Unemployment vs. Small Business Employment Share




                      Panel B. Unemployment vs. Small Business Unemployment




                                                 33
Figure 3 Business bankruptcy filings as a function of economic conditions
This figure displays time series plots of the U.S unemployment rate (all panels) against total business
Chapter 7 filings (Panel A), Chapter 11 filings (Panel B), and Chapter 11 filings by public firms with greater
than $100M in assets in constant 1980 dollars (Panel C). Unemployment rate comes from BLS, Chapter 7
and Chapter 11 filings are from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, and large business filings are
from the LoPucki-UCLA Bankruptcy Research Database.


                                         Panel A. Chapter 7 filings




                                        Panel B. Chapter 11 filings.




                                                     34
Figure 4. The triage process of bankruptcy
This figure displays a schematic of how firms deal with financial distress. Percentages listed under the
bankruptcy branch represent the number of firms that go through each process, based on data from the
Federal J dicial Cen er s (FJC) Bankr p c Pe i ion Da abase. We classif as liq ida ed all firms ha
enter Chapter 11 and are either converted to Chapter 7 or dismissed from court. Percentages listed at the
bottom of the diagram are estimates of the share of firm closures that occur in- and out-of-court. We
comp e hese fig res sing he o al n mber of firm e i s from he Cens s B rea s B siness D namics
Statistics reports from 2000-2016 and comparing this number in each year to the number of firms that
liquidate in bankruptcy from the FJC database.




                                                   35
Figure 5: Expected Reallocation during the COVID crisis
This Figure plots an index of industry reallocation based on the earnings forecasts the largest 1000 firms
by stock market capitalization as of December of year 2019. We further require that these firms have
positive earnings in 2019, and December fiscal year ends. Every day t, we calculate horizon h expected
reallocation as:

                              ,      ,         ,   , with ,   ,         , /,201                   1

     We compute  as he firm s share in 2019 earnings. We plot lines for h=2020, 2021 and 2022.




Figure 6. Liquidation vs. Reorganization as a function of Firm size
This figure displays the share of firms that liquidate directly in Chapter 7, liquidate after filing for Chapter
11, or reorganize in Chapter 11, separated by the size of the firm, as measured by reported total liabilities
a he ime of he bankr p c filing. Da a is from he Federal J dicial Cen er s (FJC) Bankr p c Pe i ion
Da abase. We classif as Chap er 11 liq ida ed all firms ha en er Chap er 11 and are ei her con er ed
to Chapter 7 or dismissed from court.

                     $1B +

               $500M - $1B

            $100M - $500M

              $50M - $100M

               $10M - $50M

                $1M - $10M

                   $0 - $1M

                              0%   10%   20%   30%     40%    50%      60%     70%    80%    90% 100%

                      Chapter 7 Liquidated     Chapter 11 Liquidated         Chapter 11 Reorganized




                                                        36
Table 1. Impact of COVID-19 on Earnings of Public Firms

Industry forecasts of impact of COVID-19 on earnings, contrasted with Great Recesssion. For each industry, we
compute the unweighted average of the growth in earnings forecasts between the beginning and the end of the period.
We exclude firms for which the beginning of period forecast of earnings is negative.

                                         % Growth in Expected Earnings         % Growth in Expected Earnings
                                         between Jun 2008 and Mar 2009         between Feb 2020 and May 2020
 Forecast horizon:                         FY 2009            FY 2011            FY 2020             FY 2022

 Revision of industry forecasts:
 Communication                                -50                -35                -19                -13
 Consumer Discretionary                       -75                -47                -25                -17
 Consumer Staples                             -13                -15                -10                 -7
 Energy                                       -40                -24                -19                -20
 Financials                                   -16                -21                -25                -13
 Health Care                                  -18                -31                -15                 -5
 Industrials                                  -37                -32                -24                -15
 IT                                           -44                -19                -12                 -9
 Materials                                    -47                -28                -19                 -9
 Real Estate                                  -71                -32                -33                 -7
 Utilities                                    -17                -13                -03                  0

 Aggregate Statistics:
 Mean:                                        -39                -27                -19                -10
 Cross-sectional dispersion:                   22                 10                 8                  6




                                                        37
Table 2. Forecasting the impact of COVID-19 on Balance Sheet Health

Based on a hors comp a ion sing he 2013 S a is ics of Income Da a from he IRS. The las line sho s
the simulated debt-to-assets ratio if firms in the group were in aggregate to experience a 30% revenue drop
but hold their fixed (non-COGS) expenses fixed over the same interval. We exclude businesses with under
$500,000 of total assets. E refers to Equity, A to total assets, D to A-E, and COGS to Cost of Goods Sold.
Other expenses equals total expenses minus COGS. The last column shows the same exercise for all public
nonfinancial firms with US headquarters in Compustat based on data for the end of 2019.

                                                            Firm Assets:
                               0.5-$1 M     <$5 M        <$10 M       <$25 M       <$50 M      <$100 M
 E ($ billions)                      264      881          497              755       667           828
 A ($ billions)                       78      305          183              304       250           366
 E/A                                 30%     35%           37%             40%        37%          44%


 Revenues/A                      252%       208%          194%             181%     140%          106%
 COGS/Revenues                       51%     59%           66%             70%        69%          67%
 Other Expenses/Revenues             45%     37%           31%             27%        28%          30%


 D/A                                 70%     65%           63%             60%        63%          56%
 Forecasts After 30% Revenue Drop:
 D/A (After)                         97%     84%           77%             71%        72%          63%
   [D/A] (After   Before)        +27%       +19%          +14%             +11%      +9%           +7%




                                                    38
Table 3. Impact of Firm Failure on Bank Balance Sheets.
This table shows the impact of firm failure on bank balance sheets. Data on all bank variables come from
call reports. Small business secured loans are secured business loans (loans secured by nonfarm
nonresidential properties) with original amounts of $1 million or less. Small business C&I loans are
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans with original amounts of $1 million or less. The charge-off rate of
small business secured loans is proxied by the charge-off rate of secured business loans. The charge-off
rate of small business C&I loans is proxied by the charge-off rate of C&I loans. Forecasts of charge-off
rates are based on historical unemployment rate (BLS) and unemployment rate forecasts (SPF), using the
regression:            1  -1 2                                            (see Figure 7). We calculate the
ratios of outstanding balance of loans in 2019, pre-provision revenue in 2019 and dividends in 2019 to total
bank equity capital in 2019. Predicted charge-off rate for 2020 and loan balance in 2019 are used to calculate
the amount of charge-offs in 2020, and its ratio to total bank equity capital in 2019 is calculated. Panel A
shows the results for all banks, Panel B for top 20 banks ranked by total assets, and Panel C for banks not
in the top 20.



                                Corporate         Predicted          Predicted     Pre-provision
                           loans/Equity in    chargeoff rate   chargeoffs/Equi   revenue/Equity       Dividends/
                                    2019           for 2020         ty in 2019           in 2019   Equity in 2019


                                               Panel A. All banks
 Total loans                        638%             2.38%            15.15%            54.81%           26.41%
 SME secured loans                16.51%             2.10%             0.35%
 SME C&I loans                    22.15%             2.57%             0.57%
 Secured business loans           89.42%             2.10%             1.88%
 C&I loans                       124.05%             2.57%             3.19%
                                             Panel B. Top 20 Banks
 Total loans                        342%             2.58%             8.82%            39.02%           21.44%
 SME secured loans                 2.75%             1.55%             0.04%
 SME C&I loans                     9.38%             2.34%             0.22%
 Secured business loans           26.42%             1.55%             0.41%
 C&I loans                        95.14%             2.34%             2.23%
                                             Panel C. Smaller banks
 Total loans                      1,473%             2.32%            34.22%            99.35%           40.43%
 SME secured loans                55.32%             2.06%             1.14%
 SME C&I loans                    58.20%             2.91%             1.69%
 Secured business loans          267.14%             2.06%             5.50%
 C&I loans                       205.59%             2.91%             5.98%




                                                     39
Table 4. Policy Options to fight financial distress


Policy/Proposal                      Friction                       Instruments

Panel A: Straight-out grants to fund firms

Hanson, Stein, Sunderam and          Financial constraints          Grants to cover fixed obligations only (rents,
Zwick (2020)                         Input reallocation frictions   utility bills)
Saez and Zucman (2020)               All reallocation frictions     Grants to cover all firm expenses

Panel B: Non-Bankruptcy financing policies

Payment deferral schemes             Financing constraints,         Moratoria/Forbearance (no accrued interest)
(already implemented in several      Credit supply shock            Payment deferrals (accrued interest)
countries)                                                          State guarantees of payment deferrals by banks
                                                                    Voluntary vs mandatory participation
                                                                    SME targeting
Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy       Financing constraints          Fed to set up a SME loan refinancing facility at
(2020)                               Credit Supply shock            subsidized rates
                                                                    Regulators to actively encourage evergreening
                                                                    loans
Greenwood and Thesmar (2020)         Debt overhang                  Tax credit to haircut-consenting claimants
                                     Lack of out-of-court
                                     negotiation

Panel C: Bankruptcy-specific policies

Iverson, Ellias, and Roe (2020)      Bankruptcy court               Recall retired judges
                                     congestion                     Create new temporary posts
Skeel (2020)                         Fixed cost of restructuring    Crea e a s andard prepacked res r c ring
                                                                    process
Subchapter V of Chapter 11           Fixed cost of restructuring    Expedited procedure to restructure small firms
(already enacted as part of SBRA)                                   No need for a creditor vote, easy to cram down
Blanchard, Philippon and Pisani      Wedge between private          Government takes higher haircut than other
(2020)                               and social value of            creditors
                                     restructuring in bankruptcy
DeMarzo, Krishnamurthy and           Undersupply of DIP             Government to set up a DIP funding SPV, with
Rauh (2020)                          funding                        equity from the treasury and Fed backing, to
                                                                    lend senior at Fed discount rate (0%).
Bankruptcy and COVID-19              Uncertainty of viability of    Extend deadlines for all small businesses that
Working Group                        bankrupt firms                 enter Chapter 11 by six months.




                                                         40
