                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SEARCH AND INFORMATION FRICTIONS ON GLOBAL E-COMMERCE PLATFORMS:
                     EVIDENCE FROM ALIEXPRESS

                                            Jie Bai
                                          Maggie Chen
                                            Jin Liu
                                          Daniel Yi Xu

                                      Working Paper 28100
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28100


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Chang-tai Hsieh, Costas Akolakis, David Atkin, Lauren Bergquist, Ben Faber, Gordon
Hanson, Asim Khwaja, Pete Klenow, Meredith Startz, Tianshu Sun, and seminar and conference
participants at the Berkeley Economics, BREAD/CEPR/STICERD/TCD, Uni-versity of Chicago,
Conference, Harvard Kennedy School, IPA SME Working Group Meeting, Michigan Economics,
and USC for helpful comments. We thank Chengdai Huang, Haoran Zhang, and Qiang Zheng for
excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jie Bai, Maggie Chen, Jin Liu, and Daniel Yi Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Search and Information Frictions on Global E-Commerce Platforms: Evidence from AliExpress
Jie Bai, Maggie Chen, Jin Liu, and Daniel Yi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 28100
November 2020
JEL No. F14,L15,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Global e-commerce platforms present new export opportunities for small and medium-sized
enterprises in developing countries by significantly lowering the entry barriers of exporting.
However, the lack of market selection can lead to a large number of online firms competing for
consumers' attention, resulting in severe congestion in consumers' search process. When firms'
intrinsic quality is not perfectly observed, these search frictions can further slow down the
resolution of the information problem and hinder market allocation towards better firms. In this
paper, we investigate how search and information frictions shape firm dynamics and market
evolution in global e-commerce. Using detailed data from AliEpxress as well as a rich set of self-
collected objective quality measures, we provide stylized facts that are consistent with the
presence of search and information frictions. Moreover, using a randomized experiment that
offers exogenous demand and information shocks to small prospective exporters, we establish
that firms with larger past sales have an advantage in overcoming the search friction and
generating future orders. This indicates that initial demand shocks could confound firms' true
quality in determining firm growth and the long-run market structure. We construct and estimate
an empirical model of the online market that are consistent with our descriptive and experimental
findings and use the model to quantify the extent of demand-side frictions. Counterfactual
analyses show that alleviating information frictions and reducing the number of firms can help to
improve allocative efficiency and raise consumer welfare.

Jie Bai                                         Jin Liu
Harvard Kennedy School                          Department of Economics
79 JFK Street                                   New York University
Cambridge, MA 02138                             jl7767@nyu.edu
and NBER
jie_bai@hks.harvard.edu                         Daniel Yi Xu
                                                Department of Economics
Maggie Chen                                     Duke University
Dept. of Economics                              213 Social Science Bldg
George Washington University                    419 Chapel Drive
2115 G ST, NW, #367                             Box 90097
Washington, DC 20052                            Durham, NC 27708-0097
xchen@gwu.edu                                   and NBER
                                                daniel.xu@duke.edu
1        Introduction

E-commerce sales have grown tremendously in recent years, reaching $2.9 trillion in 2018 and 12 percent
of the total global retail sales (Lipsman, 2019). Within e-commerce, cross-border sales have grown
two times faster than domestic sales, and nearly 40 percent of online buyers completed a cross-border
transaction in 2016 (Pitney Bowes, 2016). By extending market access beyond geographical boundaries,
global e-commerce platforms present a promising avenue for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
in developing countries to enter into export markets. Furthermore, online exporting lowers many of
the traditional barriers of offline exporting, including the needs of building export relationships and
setting up distributional channels in destination countries.1 Given these promises and the large market
potential, numerous policy initiatives have been adopted worldwide to foster e-commerce growth (e.g,
UNCTAD, 2016), with a specific policy target to onboard SMEs in developing countries to e-commerce
platforms and allow them to tap into the global market.
        Despite the rapid growth of global e-commerce, there is a lack of empirical evidence on the impact of
such increased export opportunity on firm growth and market dynamics. While e-commerce platforms
potentially expose prospective exporters to buyers around the world, the sheer number of firms operating
on these platforms can create substantial congestion in consumer search. When firms' intrinsic quality
is not perfectly observed, these search frictions can further slow down the resolution of the information
problem and hinder market allocation towards better firms. In such an environment, initial demand
shocks (or "luck")--as opposed to economic fundamentals such as firm productivity or product quality--
can have a persistent impact on firms' long-run growth and market allocation. Understanding the role
of these demand-side forces in firm growth and welfare can lead to important policy implications.
        In this study, we investigate how search and information frictions shape firm dynamics and market
evolution in global e-commerce. We first document descriptive evidence that is consistent with the
existence of sizable search and information frictions in global online marketplaces. Next, we experi-
mentally identify and demonstrate the role of accumulating demand in helping firms to overcome these
frictions and generating future demand. Finally, we combine these elements to build and estimate a rich
empirical model of the online export market. We use the model estimates to quantify the distinctive
impacts of search and information frictions on firm growth, market allocation, and consumer welfare.
Finally, we apply our model to shed light on policies that could facilitate the growth of promising export
businesses beyond the initial onboarding stage and improve the overall market efficiency.
        Our study is grounded in the context of AliExpress, a world-leading B2C cross-border e-commerce
platform owned by Alibaba. We focus on the industry of children's t-shirts and collect comprehensive
    1
     For example, AliExpress, one of the leading cross-border e-commerce platform that we study in this project, states on
its website (https://sell.aliexpress.com/__pc/4DYTFsSkV0.htm): "Set up your e-commerce store in a flash, it's easy
and free! Millions of shoppers are waiting to visit your store!"




                                                            1
data about sellers operating in this industry, including detailed seller-product-level characteristics and
transaction-level sales records. We complement the platform data with a novel set of objective, multi-
dimensional measures of quality, ranging from detailed product quality metrics to shipping and service
quality indicators. These measures are collected by the research team based on actual online purchases
and direct interactions with the sellers, as well as third-party assessments.
   We begin by documenting a set of new stylized facts about the online exporters. First, we compare
sales distribution within "identical-looking" product varieties. Interestingly, even after controlling for
horizontal taste differences, meaningful dispersion in sales remains within identical variety groups, as
opposed to "winner-takes-all". This finding is indicative of search frictions: buyers, upon arriving
at the platform, face thousands of product offerings but can only sample a limited finite subset of
all seller-listings. The relatively low fixed costs of operating in the online marketplace weakens the
market selection mechanism and exacerbates congestion in consumer search, resulting in an excessive
number of firms and product offerings in the online marketplace competing for consumers' attention.
This raises the question of who gets to grow in the presence of the search problem. Next, we dive
further into the potential determinants of growth and find that quality only weakly predicts sales. The
"superstars", which we define as the largest seller in each product variety, do not necessarily have the
highest quality (nor the lowest price). Intuitively, search friction introduces a random component in
firm growth due to the consumer sampling process. Furthermore, when firms' intrinsic quality is not
perfectly observed, such friction can further slow down the revelation of true quality, leading to potential
market misallocation. Finally, we find robust evidence that current sales predict the speed of arrival for
future sales. This implies that firms with larger past sales, hence higher visibility, have an advantage in
overcoming the consumer's search friction and generating future orders. However, if information friction
prevents a firm's visibility from being aligned with its fundamentals, such as quality or productivity,
the same force could lead to allocative inefficiency. In particular, random demand shocks (or "luck"),
as opposed to firm fundamentals, can have a persistent impact on firms' long-run growth. Over time,
firm performance diverges; market allocation and consumer welfare depend crucially on the interactions
of these demand-side forces.
   Our interpretation of the stylized facts centers around a demand driven mechanism where each
additional consumer order makes the selling firm more visible and hence helps the firm to overcome the
search frictions faced by subsequent buyers. However, important unobserved supply-side actions (such as
web positioning and advertising) could also exist and lead to similar reduced-form relationships between
current sales and future sales. To further establish the empirical validity of the demand mechanism, we
conduct an experiment in which we generate exogenous demand shocks to a set of small exporters via
randomly-placed online purchase orders. The treatment allows us to isolate the impact of demand from
unobserved supply-side confounding factors. Since how effectively the additional demand conveys the



                                                     2
firm's true fundamentals depends critically on the severity of information friction, we further interact
the order treatment with a review treatment about firms' product and shipping quality to examine the
role of information provision. We track these firms over four months and collect high-frequency data
on sales and prices as well as objective measures of quality. We find that the order treatment leads to
a small but significantly positive impact on firms' subsequent sales. This demonstrates that indeed a
key channel for firms to improve their visibility and grow in the online marketplace is by accumulating
sales. Quantile analysis reveals, however, that the effect is mainly concentrated at the top: only a
small fraction of sellers are able to take advantage of the initial demand shock and grow while the vast
majority stay small. The size of the average treatment effect suggests that these demand-side frictions
cannot be easily overcome by individual sellers' private efforts. In the meantime, we do not find any
significant treatment effect from the reviews, suggesting that the online reputation mechanism may not
function very effectively in the presence of large search friction. Intuitively, reviews only matter when
a seller's listing is discovered by consumers, which is a rare event for small businesses due to their low
visibility. Finally, we do not find significant heterogeneous treatment effect based on quality. This
echoes the stylized fact that quality does not strongly predict growth in this market due to the search
and information problems, which, combined, make it difficult for high-quality sellers to stand out.
       All together, the descriptive and experimental findings are consistent with the presence of large
search and information frictions and show that in such an environment demand shocks, as opposed to
firm fundamentals, can affect the firm's future growth. Motivated by the reduced-form evidence, we
next build a structural model of the online market incorporating these realistic frictions of the market.
Our model features consumers' finite sample search to capture search frictions and the online review
mechanism to capture information frictions. Our estimates imply that a consumer can sample only
0.2% of all seller-listings on the e-commerce platform.2 . However, once a seller starts to make sales,
the initial success in receiving orders substantially increases a seller's visibility. Compared with sellers
who have made zero sales, striking a first order makes a seller 3.4 times more likely to end up in
a subsequent consumer's search sample. On the other hand, the estimate of the review signal noise
indicates substantial information frictions. The posterior uncertainty is only reduced by 7.5% after the
first order. This implies that the reputation mechanism takes time to play its role: even if a seller gets
sampled and successfully makes a sale, uncertainty regarding quality still remains and only resolves
slowly. Combined, these findings highlight that search friction, interacted with information friction,
can constitute an important hurdle for the growth of small prospective exporters. When we simulate a
one-time demand treatment through the lens of the model, we find a smaller but quantitatively similar
average treatment effect compared to what we obtain from the experiment.
       We end with several counterfactual exercises to examine the distinctive roles of search and infor-
   2
    We have close to 20, 000 seller-listings that sell children's t-shirt in our data sample. This implies a search sample size
of 40 sellers


                                                              3
mation frictions in firm growth and market allocation and evaluate potential policy interventions using
the estimated structural model. First, to shed light on information frictions, we remove the noise of
the review signals. We find that doing so significantly shifts market share to high-quality sellers. The
resulting consumer surplus is 12.7% higher compared to the baseline. Second, to examine the role of
initial demand, we compare the baseline case in which initial demand is determined purely by luck
versus a case where it is determined by quality. Remarkably, we find that just a ten-period difference
in initial demand allocation generates a persistent long-run difference in market outcomes: the market
share for sellers in the top quality quartile is 7.6 percentage points higher and consumer surplus is 7.4%
higher. Finally, we investigate the impact of reducing search frictions by reducing the number of sellers
operating on the platform. The results show that reducing the number of sellers can help mitigate the
congestion in consumer search, thereby improving allocative efficiency and consumer welfare.3 This
result points out that just giving firms easy access to foreign markets alone may not be sufficient for
generating sustained growth and can in fact exacerbate the search problem, resulting in market misal-
location. Policies should be designed to help firms, especially new businesses, overcome the additional
demand-side frictions. In the context of e-commerce, regulating entry, creating a premium market
segment, and directing demand to promising newcomers could help facilitate growth and improve the
overall market efficiency.
       Our work contributes to several strands of the existing literature. Extensive work in international
trade has studied the empirical patterns of new exporter dynamics in the offline setting. A common
empirical pattern that emerges from micro data is that young exporting firms start small and have high
turnover rates and those that survive experience rapid growth. Various theories have been proposed
to explain these facts. They include firm learning (Arkolakis, Papageorgiou, and Timoshenko, 2018;
Ruhl and Willis, 2017), demand accumulation(Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2016; Piveteau, 2016;
Fitzgerald, Haller, and Yedid-Levi, 2020), and seller search (Eaton et al., 2016). In contrast to these
studies, our paper focuses on demand-side frictions and shocks, rather than the exporter's own decision,
as the key driving force of firm and market dynamics in the online setting. In particular, unlike the offline
export market, the fixed costs of operating are substantially lower in online marketplaces, significantly
weakening the role of market selection. Our work shows how the lack of selection reduces consumer
search efficiency and endogenously slows down the growth of high-quality exporters. Methodologically,
we bring in new sources of variations to first experimentally identify the mechanisms underlying new
   3
     Given the extensive numbers of varieties usually available in the online marketplace, our model and counterfactual
analysis abstract from consumer welfare gains from additional varieties and focus instead on the implications of excessive
entry for search friction. The potential adverse effect of excessive choices on individuals' decisions and utilities, albeit
less explored in the economics literature, has been documented in studies of social psychology, often termed as "choice
overload." Evidence from field and laboratory experiments (Scheibehenne, Greifeneder, and Todd, 2010; Chernev and
Hamilton, 2009; McShane and B¨     ockenholt, 2018) suggests that having too many options to choose from could lead to
decision paralysis and negative psychological and behavioral effects. The literature emphasizes the importance of building
a better choice architecture including helping individuals structure their search and assisting them in streamlining choices.



                                                             4
exporter's demand accumulation process and then formally model the realistic frictions of the market.
Our findings also connect to the existing literature in trade that examines the roles of search and
information frictions on market demand and seller reliability in explaining price variations and trade
patterns (Allen, 2014; Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015; Steinwender, 2018; Startz, 2018).4
       Another complementary literature explaining exporter performance highlights the role of quality
(see Verhoogen, 2020, for an excellent review). Since product or service quality is rarely observed in
standard firm surveys, most of the earlier literature has focused on indirect measures of quality estimated
based on market shares and prices, for instance, (Verhoogen, 2008; Khandelwal, 2010). We build on a
growing body of development research that collects detailed information on quality for specific industries
(e.g, Bai, 2016; Atkin, Khandelwal, and Osman, 2017; Hansman et al., 2020). Similar to these earlier
works in offline settings, we document large variations in firm-product quality online. However, we find
quality plays a less pronounced role in explaining exporter growth and long-run market shares. Our
paper explains the disintegration of the customer accumulation process and firm fundamentals, such as
quality, and underscores the potential sources of market share misallocation in the e-commerce context.
       Last but not least, findings from our study also speak broadly to the development literature on
interventions to help micro, small, and medium enterprises. Echoing the literature on productivity
differences across firms, most of the earlier work has emphasized supply-side interventions, including
providing credit access, quality inputs, and managerial training (e.g, De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff,
2008; Kugler and Verhoogen, 2012; Banerjee, 2013; Bloom et al., 2013). More recently, a growing set
of work has begun to look at demand-side interventions. A closely related study to ours is Atkin,
Khandelwal, and Osman (2017), which also studies the impact of foreign demand shocks on exporters,
showing that firms respond to these demand shocks by improving quality through learning by doing.
Rather than focusing on firms' own actions, we explore the impact of foreign demand shocks on search
and information about the firm.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical setting and
data. Section 3 presents a set of stylized facts about online exporters and motivates the experiment.
Section 4 describes the experiment design and main findings. Sections 5 and 6 build and estimate an
empirical model of the online market. Section 7 performs counterfactual analyses. Section 8 concludes.
   4
    Despite the growing importance of e-commerce in international trade, empirical work on the online setting has remained
scarce and has so far primarily focused on patterns of online trade and the role of geographic distance (Horta¸
                                                                                                              csu, Mart´
                                                                                                                       inez-
Jerez, and Douglas, 2009; Lendle et al., 2016). In this paper, we examine exporter growth dynamics in online trade and
study the roles of search and information frictions. We establish a set of new stylized facts about e-commerce exporters.
These facts point to new trade models that extend the standard heterogeneous firm and trade framework to incorporate
important features of the online marketplace. Our work, by taking into account information frictions in the online market,
relates to the extensive literature on online reputation mechanisms. We refer interested readers to Tadelis (2016) for an
excellent review.




                                                             5
2        Empirical Setting and Data

In this section, we introduce the setting of the study, the market of children's t-shirts on AliExpress,
and describe the data collection.


2.1       The Market of Children's T-shirts on AliExpress

AliExpress, a subsidiary of Alibaba, was founded in April 2010 to specialize in international trade. As a
global leading platform for cross-border B2C trade, AliExpress serves over 150 million consumers from
190 countries and regions, attracting over 200 million monthly visits.5 Over 100 million products, rang-
ing from clothes and shoes to electronics and home appliances, and 1.1 million active sellers, primarily
retailers located in China, are listed on the platform.6 Most sellers on the platform are retailers rather
than manufacturers, and they source products from factories all over the country to export through
the platform. Therefore, quality, in this context, captures firms' sourcing ability (i.e., ability to source
high-quality products from manufacturers) as well as the quality of marketing and shipping services.7
        For this study, we focus on the industry of children's t-shirts. As the largest textile and garment
exporting country in the world, China accounted for over a third of the world's total textile and garment
exports in 2019 (WTO, 2020). In the world of e-commerce, textile and apparel amount to 20 percent of
China's total online retail, including sales on Alibaba's platforms.8 In the category of children's t-shirts,
AliExpress hosted over 1,800 sellers with close to 20,000 listings by 2017, fostering a vibrant market
environment with substantial entry and growth dynamics. Therefore, it provides an ideal setting to study
exporter dynamics. In addition, the t-shirt product category features well-specified quality dimensions,
making it possible to construct direct quality measures to study quality-size distributions and allocative
efficiency.
        Two features of the platform are worth highlighting. First, AliExpress does not require a sign-up
fee to set up a store and list a product, thereby essentially eliminating the entry and fixed operation
costs of exporting and allowing sellers, large and small, to tap into the export markets.9 While this
does help to bring many SMEs onto the platform, the lack of market selection can create important
congestion in consumer search, resulting in an excessive number of firms and product offerings in the
online marketplace competing for consumers' attention. The resulting welfare implication of having an
    5
     Sources: https://sell.aliexpress.com/ and https://sell.aliexpress.com/__pc/4DYTFsSkV0.htm.
    6
     During our sample period, Aliexpress hosted only sellers from mainland China; starting in 2018, the platform also
became available to sellers in Russia, Spain, Italy, Turkey, and France.
   7
     While most of the sellers on the e-commerce platform are retailers instead of manufacturers, quality may still vary
significantly depending on where the sellers choose to source from, high-quality versus low-quality factories, and how much
quality inspection effort the sellers put in. We document this formally using detailed quality measures we collect from the
study (see Section 2.2).
   8
     "E-Commerce of Textile and Apparel," China Commercial Circulation Association of Textile and Apparel, 2019
   9
     AliExpress charges sellers 5-8 percent of the sales revenue as a commission fee for each successful transaction. Source:
https://sell.aliexpress.com/


                                                             6
increasing number of market participants on firms and consumers is far less clear in the presence of
search and information frictions. This forms the key trade-off we seek to examine in this study.
    Second, AliExpress allows us to group product listings into different varieties. A single variety
group (hereafter referred to as "group" ) may contain multiple listings, sold by different sellers, that
share identical product design. This is illustrated in Figure 1. This unique feature allows us to compare
listings with the same observable product attributes, thereby controlling for consumers' horizontal taste
differences. We leverage this feature in our empirical analyses as described below.


2.2    Data

We collect comprehensive data from the platform, including detailed firm-product level characteristics
and transaction-level sales records. We complement the platform data with objective quality measures
obtained from actual purchases, direct interactions with the sellers, and third-party assessment. Below
we describe the sample and the key variables used in the analyses.
(1) Census in 2017. We scraped all product listings in the industry of children's t-shirt in June 2017.
We collected all the information that a buyer can view on the listings' pages, including total cumulative
orders (quantity sold), current prices, discounts (if any), ratings, buyer protection schemes (if any),
and detailed product specifications. We further collected information about the stores that carry these
products, including the year of opening and all other products the stores carry.
(2) Transaction Records. For each product listing, we take advantage of a unique feature of AliEx-
press during our sample period that allows us to keep track of a listing's most recent 6-month transaction
history. For each transaction, we observe information on sales quantities, ratings, and previous buyers'
countries of origin. In contrast, most existing e-commerce platforms report only customer reviews and
the total volume of transactions without the full transaction history (e.g., Amazon and eBay). The
availability of the real-time transaction records enables us to closely track each product listing's sales
activities over time.10
(3) Measures of Quality Finally, we complement the platform data with a rich set of objective quality
measures we collected for the study, covering quality of products measured in 8 dimensions, quality of
shipping, and quality of seller service. These quality measures were collected through three channels:
(i) actual purchase of the products, (ii) direct communications with the sellers, and (iii) third-party
assessment. Appendix B.1 provides a detailed discussion of the quality measurement process. Table 1
  10
     The transaction level data was collected twice, once in June 2017 for the universe of listings in the census data and
once in August 2018 for the experimental sample (see Section 4). Each round covers six months prior to the date of the
data collection. In Section 3, we use the 2017 data, together with the census data described above, to establish stylized
facts about the online market. We use the August 2018 transaction history data to closely track the experimental sample
and study the treatment effects, which we describe in detail in Section 4. Since the transaction data omits information on
price, we further conducted a weekly data scraping from May to August 2018 for listings in the experimental sample to
track price dynamics.


                                                            7
presents summary statistics of the various quality measures.11
       To measure product quality, we placed actual orders of children's t-shirts on AliExpress.12 After
receiving and cataloging the orders, we worked with a large local consignment store of children's clothing
in North Carolina to inspect and grade the quality of each t-shirt. The grading was done on a rich set
of metrics, following standard grading criteria used in the textile and garment industry. Specifically,
quality was assessed along 8 dimensions: durability, fabric softness, wrinkle test, seams (straightness
and neatness), outside stray threads, inside loose stitches, pattern smoothness, and trendiness. Figure
2 Panel A shows a picture of the grading process and the criteria used. Quality along each dimension
was scored on a 1 to 5 scale, with higher numbers denoting higher quality. Most of the quality metrics,
except trendiness, capture vertical quality differentiation. For example, at equal prices, consumers would
prefer t-shirts with more durable fabric, straighter seams and fewer loose stray threads. Exploiting the
grouping function, we can further compare quality across t-shirts of the exact same design but sold
by different sellers. As shown in Panel B of Figure 2, there exists considerable quality difference both
across and within groups.13
       To measure shipping quality, we recorded the date of each purchase, the date of shipment, the date
of delivery, carrier name, and the condition of the package upon arrival. The information is used to
construct four measures of shipping quality: (i) the time lag between order placement and shipping, (ii)
the time lag between shipping and delivery, (iii) whether the package is delivered, and (iv) whether the
package is damaged.
       To measure service quality, we visited the homepage of each store and sent a message to the seller
via the platform to inquire about a particular product. Appendix B.1 describes the messages. We rate
service quality based on whether the message received a reply, the time it took to receive a reply, and
whether the questions were acknowledged and properly addressed.
       In Table A.2, we find all three quality indices -- product, shipping and service -- to be positively
correlated with the online star ratings, although the correlations are relatively weak and only statistically
significant for shipping and service qualities.


2.3      Summary Statistics

Table 2 summarizes the product level (Panel A) and store level (Panel B) characteristics. There are
close to 20,000 product listings in the sector of children's t-shirt. The average price is $10. About
  11
     To construct the quality indices, we first standardize the quality metric in each dimension and then average across all
dimensions. Table A.1 decomposes the variation of the overall quality index to that explained by each individual quality
metric.
  12
     We placed an order on each listing in our experimental sample as well as their medium-size and superstar peers in the
same variety group (see Section 4 for details on the sampling procedure).
  13
     To cross-validate the quality measures, we asked the owner of the consignment store to report a bid price (willingness
to pay) and a resell price for each t-shirt. Reassuringly, the objective quality metrics are strongly correlated with the
subjective price evaluations.


                                                             8
70 percent of the listings offer free shipping, and the average shipping price to the US is $0.50. At
the store level, there are over 1,800 stores operating in this sector. Most exporters are young with an
average age of two years. The average cumulative sales is 7,220 with a standard deviation of 16,618,
indicating large performance heterogeneity. We observe similar patterns of performance heterogeneity
at the listing level. At a given point in time, more than 40% of the listings have zero sales and the
median listing has 1 order, whereas the largest listings have accumulated more than 2000 orders.
    Interestingly, when we compare the market share distributions of the online export market with the
traditional offline trade, we find similar concentration in sales at the top. For the offline market, we use
the Chinese Customs data in 2013, the most recent year we have, and focus on firms exporting the same
product category of t-shirts (HS code 6109). Table A.3 Panel A shows the market shares of the top
listings in the online export market. We see that sales are heavily concentrated at the top: for example,
the top 1% of the listings account for 53% of the total sales (in terms of order number) and the top 10%
accounts for more than 90% of the sales. Panel B shows that at the firm level, the online distribution
looks almost as skewed as the offline distribution. The top 10% of the exporters, for example, account
for roughly 80% of the total sales in both the online and offline markets. This is true even when we
restrict the online sample to stores that are active in the past six months: the top 10% of these active
stores account for 74% of the total sales.
    When it comes to life-cycle growth trajectories, the online market appears more stagnant than the
offline market. For the online market, we define age as the number of years since a seller registered on
AliExpress; for the offline market, we define age as the number of years since a firm started exporting
in the Customs data. Figure A.1 shows that a 3-year old store on AliExpress is only, on average, 7.8
percent larger than a newborn store. In contrast, a 3-year old offline exporter is, on average, 1.5 times
larger than a new offline exporter.One potential explanation for the differential growth trajectories is
that firm turnover is slower online compared to offline due to the relatively low costs of operating
an e-commerce business. Such inefficient exit can exacerbate the search problem: when buyers face
thousands of product offerings, it is not clear who will get to grow. In the next section, we document
a set of novel stylized facts about online exporters that will enable us to better understand the factors
shaping firm performance and growth in e-commerce.


3    New Stylized Facts of Online Exporters

Fact 1. Sales performance varies within identical variety groups.

    First, we exploit the unique feature of AliExpress during our study period that allowed us group
product listings into different "identical-looking" varieties. Leveraging this unique feature, we first look
at how sales performance varies within a single variety group. We focus on popular variety groups with


                                                     9
more than 10 listings. As shown in Figure 3, we see that sales are quite concentrated at the top within
each group. The group's superstar, defined as the listing with the highest cumulative orders within the
group, accounts for about 50% of the total sales of the group; the top 10% of listings in each group
captures more than 75% of the group's total orders, and the top 25% captures nearly all.
   Nonetheless, looking at the distribution of the superstar sales across groups, it is also clear that this
is not a case of winner-takes-all; some amount of dispersion still remains. Given that we are comparing
products with the almost identical design, we are controlling for unobserved consumer horizontal taste.
In a friction-less world, one may expect that the listing with the highest quality, relative to price, would
win the market. The fact that some dispersion remains indicates that frictions exist in this marketplace.
This raises the question of who gets to grow in the presence of these frictions. To delve more into that,
we next ask who gets to become superstars.

Fact 2. Superstars do not necessarily have the highest quality and quality only weakly predicts sales.

   We compare the quality of the superstar listings and small listings in each variety group. Superstar is
defined to be the listing with the highest sales in the group and small listings are those with fewer than 5
cumulative orders. Figure 4 plots the distribution of quality difference between the group superstar and
the average of the small listings in each group. We observe a substantial fraction below zero: superstars
actually have lower quality than the small listings in 45% of the variety groups we sampled. Consistent
with this, Figure 5 looks at how quality predicts sales. We see that the average market share of a listing
only weakly increases with quality. The difference is not significant except at the top.
   These observations are indicative of potential misallocation in this market due to search and in-
formation frictions. Intuitively, search friction introduces a random component in firm growth due to
the consumer sampling process. When firms' intrinsic quality is not perfectly observed, such friction
can further slow down the resolution of the information problem and hinder market allocation towards
better firms. The result highlights the important interaction between search and information frictions
and underscores the potential sources of market misallocation.
   It is worth noting that the evidence is only suggestive because we have to take into account price
differences. Interestingly, we find that superstars do not always charge the lowest price: within an
identical variety group, the listing with the highest sales only charges the lowest price for 14% of the
time. On the other hand, we do observe a positive relationship between price and quality, which
corroborates our quality measures but could mean that this relatively flat relationship between quality
and sales can be partly driven by price. Therefore, to isolate the role of information friction and quantify
the degree of misallocation, we rely on a structural model in Section 5.

Fact 3. On average, it takes 64 days for the first order to arrive; after that, subsequent orders arrive
much faster.


                                                    10
         Finally, we delve more into the growth dynamics and examine how superstars emerge. Using the
transaction-level data over a period of six months from January to June 2017, we explore the dynamics
of order arrivals. Figure 6 plots the number of days it takes to receive the n-th order. Panel A shows
the order arrival dynamics for the full unbalanced sample of all listings; Panel B restricts to listings that
accumulated more than 10 orders during the six-month period. A striking pattern emerges: on average
it takes 44-64 days for the first order to arrive; however, conditioning on having one order, subsequent
orders arrive much faster. For example, on average the second order arrives 3-5 days after the first order,
and the third order arrives 3-4 days after the second. Table A.4 regresses the dummy of receiving an
order in a given week on log of past cumulative orders of a product listing, with and without store fixed
effect. The results show that past sales influence future sales: firms with larger past sales, hence higher
visibility, have an advantage in overcoming the search friction and generating future orders. However,
the same force can lead to allocative inefficiency in the presence of information friction. In particular,
the demand accumulation process implies that initial demand shocks (or "luck") can have a persistent
impact on firms' long-run growth, as opposed to firm fundamentals, such as quality or productivity.
Over time, firm performance diverges; market allocation and consumer welfare depend crucially on the
interactions of these demand-side forces.
         However, a key empirical challenge of identifying the role of the demand-side effects is to control for
unobserved supply-side actions. For example, it could be that after some initial period of preparation,
sellers start to invest in some costly actions, such as paying for advertising or participating in sales and
promotion events organized by the platform, which then lead to the first order as well as subsequent
orders. From the observational data, it is difficult to tease apart the demand- and supply-side channels.
This motivates us to conduct an experiment to identify the role of demand.


4         Experiment and Findings

To demonstrate the role of demand in helping firms to overcome search and information frictions in
e-commerce, we conduct an experiment in which we generate exogenous demand and information shocks
to a set of small sellers via randomly placed online orders and reviews. We describe the experiment
design and present the main findings below.


4.1        Experiment Design

Sampling: Prior to the start of the experiment, a baseline data collection was conducted in May 2018
that covers the majority of the product listings in the sector of children's t-shirts on AliExpress.14
    14
    Unfortunately, due to an important redesign of the platform algorithm, only the first 100 pages were accessible. This
excludes a large number of small and new listings. Therefore, we rely on the 2017 data for establishing the stylized facts in
Section 2. We use the May 2018 data for selecting the experimental sample and constructing baseline controls. Table A.5



                                                             11
We group the product listings into 4,640 distinct variety groups using the grouping function described
above. We focus on the "popular" varieties with greater than 100 orders, aggregated across all stores,
and sold by at least two "small" stores with fewer than 5 cumulative orders. This screening procedure
enables us to create a treatment and control group of "identical" product listings. In total, 133 varieties
satisfy the above criteria, containing 1,265 product listings from 638 stores.
Randomization: Of the 1,265 product listings, 790 are small listings with fewer than 5 orders. We
randomize the 790 small listings into three groups of different order and review treatments: a control
group C without any order and review treatment, T1 which receives 1 order randomly generated by
the research team and a star rating, and T2, which, in addition to receiving an order and a star rating,
further receives a detailed review on product and shipping quality.
    Given that ratings are highly inflated on AliExpress (out of the 737,000 reviews we observe over
a 6-month window, 87% are five stars), for all the treatment groups we leave a five-star rating to the
order unless there is any obvious quality defect or shipping problem. This is to mimic the behavior
of actual buyers. To generate the contents of the shipping and product reviews, we use the Latent
Dirichlet Allocation topic model in natural language processing to analyze past reviews and construct
the review messages based on the identified key words. Appendix B.2 describes the reviews in detail.
    The difference between T1 and C identifies the impact of demand. The difference between T1
and T2 identifies any additional impact of alleviating information frictions. To allow for comparisons
across otherwise "identical" listings, we leverage the grouping function and stratify the randomization
by variety group. For varieties sold by two small sellers (and other big sellers), we assign 1/2 to control
and 1/2 to treatment. The latter is randomly split into T1 and T2 with equal probabilities. For varieties
sold by more than two small sellers (and other big sellers), we assign 1/3 to each of C, T1, and T2.
This randomization procedure is powered to identify the impact of receiving an order, followed by the
impact of reviews. In the end, we have 303 listings in C, 259 in T1, and 228 in T2. Table A.6 presents
the balance checks and shows that the randomization was balanced across baseline characteristics.15


4.2    Treatment Effects of Demand and Information Shocks

We define a dummy variable "Order", which equals to 1 if a listing received the order treatment
regardless of the review treatment (i.e., in T1 or T2). Figure A.2 plots the distribution of cumulative

presents the same summary statistics at the listing, store, and group level for the baseline sample. Compared to Table 2,
the number of observations is much smaller, due to the page limit issue described above. In particular, the sample captures
some but not all of the small listings with close-to-zero sales.
  15
     We leverage the experiment design to collect information on quality. Measuring product and shipping quality involves
making actual purchases. In addition to the 487 small listings in the two treatment groups, we also purchased from the
largest listings in the 133 variety groups as well as all the medium-size listings with cumulative orders between 6 and 50
in the same variety groups. This allows us to examine the relationship between quality and size. For service quality, we
reached out to all 638 stores in the 133 variety groups and directly communicated with the sellers via the platform. For
those with multiple listings included in the 133 groups, we randomly selected one listing for inquiry.


                                                            12
net orders (subtracting our own order) 3 months after the intervention. We see a small shift to the
right among the treated listings, especially from the 0 to 1 margin. Overall, most listings remain small
except for a few outliers that managed to grow.16
       Next, we estimate the following regression to examine the impact of the order and review treatments
on weekly cumulative orders after the initial order treatment:


                WeeklyOrdersit =  +  Orderi + 1 Reviewi × PostReviewt + t + g(i) +                      it            (1)


where the dependent variable is the total number of orders (excluding our own order) for listing i in
week t. Order is a dummy variable for receiving the order treatment (which equals 1 for T1 and T2).
Review is an indicator for receiving additional shipping and product reviews (T2). PostReview is a time
dummy variable that equals 1 after the reviews were provided in week 7. The specification leverages
the panel structure of our data since the reviews were only given upon receiving the orders.17 t and
g(i) are week and group fixed effects. In addition, all regressions control for baseline sales, both at the
store level and the listing level. Standard errors are clustered at the listing level.
       The results are shown in Table 3. We include baseline controls of cumulative orders at the store
level and product level in the regressions. Results without these baseline controls are very similar
and are shown in Table A.7. We see that the order treatment has a small but significantly positive
impact on subsequent orders. This demonstrates that indeed a key channel for firms to grow in the online
marketplace is by accumulating demand. On the other hand, the impact of the reviews are insignificant,
suggesting that the online reputation mechanism may not function effectively in the presence of large
search friction. Intuitively, reviews only matter when consumers click and visit a seller's product listing
page, which is a rare event for small sellers due to their low visibility.
       Table 4 examines the dynamic effects of the order treatment and shows that the effect is salient in
the short run (i.e., the first month) but decays quickly afterwards. This is consistent with the fact that
only a small number of sellers are able to take advantage of the short-term boost in visibility generated
from the order treatment to overcome the initial hurdle of growth.18 Quantile regression results in Table
5 further show that the impact of the order treatment concentrates in the very top quantiles while the
majority of the listings experience no significant impact, consistent with the endline cumulative net
orders distribution in Figure A.2. At the same time, heterogeneous treatment effect analyses in Table
A.9 show that these rising new stars are not necessarily those with high quality.19 This echoes the
  16
     We focus on the impact on orders instead of revenue since we observe very little price adjustment during the study
period. In the 13 weeks following the initial treatment, only 6.5% of the listings have experienced any price adjustment.
  17
     Most of the orders, 801 out 826, arrived within the first 7 weeks. 2 orders arrived later and 23 orders went missing.
We left the online reviews in week 7 after the initial order placement when we had received majority of the orders.
  18
     In Table A.8, we examine the treatment effect on listings' relative ranking and find that receiving one order indeed
leads to a small, short-term improvement in listing visibility.
  19
     Here we interact the treatment variable with service quality and listing ratings because product quality and shipping


                                                           13
stylized fact in Section 2 that quality does not strongly predict growth in this market. In this market
environment, search and information frictions combined can make it difficult for high-quality sellers to
stand out.20
    All together, the experimental findings are consistent with the presence of search and information
frictions, and show that in such an environment accumulating initial demand acts as a crucial force
in shaping firms' subsequent growth. Having said that, the size of the estimated average treatment
effect ranges from 0.11 to 0.25, as shown in Table 5. The magnitude is much smaller than 1, which
explains why individual sellers would not replicate the order treatment themselves and suggests that the
demand-side frictions cannot be easily overcome by individual sellers' private efforts.21 Next, motivated
by the reduced form evidence, we build a structural model of the online market incorporating these
realistic frictions of the market.


5     Model

Our model focuses on demand-side mechanisms to highlight the role of the search friction due to limited
sample search and the information friction due to noisy signals. Importantly, we allow the visibility of
the seller to increase in its cumulative orders, reflecting the fact that products sold by larger sellers are
often positioned more saliently on the platform. We incorporate seller-side heterogeneity in both quality
and cost and model sellers' pricing decisions. In this model, buyers do not directly observe quality at
the point of transaction, but observe imperfect signals based on past reviews and form their beliefs. In a
given period, buyers conduct a non-sequential search and randomly sample a set of sellers of different size
and review history. We structurally estimate the model and perform counterfactual analysis examining
the impact of initial demand, search and information frictions on firm growth, consumer welfare, and
market allocation.22


5.1     Demand

Search

    We assume that consumers conduct a fixed sample search for children's t-shirts upon their arrival.
quality are not measured for the control-group listings.
   20
      We also examine the treatment effect on seller effort and business strategy. We find in Table A.10 that receiving a
small order does not lead to any noticeable adjustment in pricing, shipping service, listing description (reflecting advertising
effort), and introduction of new listings.
   21
      In addition, the cost of manipulating orders on Aliexpress (an exclusively cross-border platform) is fairly significant
and greater than that on domestic platforms. It requires recruiting people overseas and gaining access to a foreign address,
foreign bank account, and foreign IP. If a buyer account or credit card is found to be repeatedly placing orders on listings
carried by the same store, the account is at risk of being blocked.
   22
      We have also constructed a simple baseline model that features limited sample search and flexible functional form for
the visibility. Theoretical results on the limiting market share distribution can be found in the Appendix C.



                                                              14
Their search sample size K is exogenously given and will be estimated later. The search procedure is
a weighted random sampling without replacement, and the weight for seller i  I depends on his/her
                         vi
relative visibility     N            (0, 1). Specifically, consider a sample  = {1 , 2 , . . . , K } of size K , where
                        j =1   vj
each element k  I, k = 1, 2, ..., K . The probability that this sample is selected by the consumer is

                                             v(1)             v(2)                                  v(K )
                   P (|v) =                             ·                    ·   ···   ·                                   ,   (2)
                                             j I   vj       j I \{(1) } vj                 j I \{(1) ,(2) ,...,(K ) } vj
                                    P ()


where P () is the set of all permutations of  and {(1) , (2) , . . . , (K ) } denotes one specific permutation.
       We assume that each seller's visibility is increasing in their cumulative orders si such that vi = s0 + si .
We allow for a basic level of visibility s0 for sellers who have never made a sale on the platform.23 While
a more general functional form can be assumed for the visibility function vi = v (s0 + si ), in appendix
C, we show that the curvature of v (.) has important implications for the long-run limiting distribution
of cumulative orders. We choose the linear functional form such that there exists a non-degenerate and
non-uniform limiting market share distribution. This is consistent with our data observations.

Belief of Quality

       Consumers observe the posted price pi , the previous cumulative orders si , and the ratings ri of each
seller i in its search sample. However, they do not observe the true quality qi of seller i. If the seller
has never made any sale on the platform, i.e. si = 0, then by definition, price is the only observable.
                                                                                                     2)
We assume, in this case, consumers have a common prior belief of the seller's quality as qi  N (µ0 , 0
              2 = 1. Later we will standardize our empirical quality measures to be consistent with
where µ0 = 0, 0
this assumption. For the sellers who have already made sales (si > 0), consumers will combine the
sellers' previous rating information and the prior belief to form their quality expectation. We assume
the Bayesian updating rule, such that

                                                                                               -1
                                                                si ri / 2          1   si
                                           qi |ri , si  N        2 + s / 2 ,        2 + 2
                                                              1/0      i           0   

where ri is the average rating of the consumers from the previous si orders. As we will explain later,
these ratings convey information of the true quality of seller i .  governs the noisiness of these signals.

Purchase and Review

       Consumers maximizes expected utility given their search sample , i.e.


                                            max E [ui |ri , si ] =  + E [qi |ri , si ] - pi + i
                                           i{0}

  23
   Appendix C shows that only the relative magnitude of s0 and N matters for the limiting market share distribution.
Therefore, we fix the number of sellers to be N = 1000 and only estimate s0 as a parameter.


                                                                       15
where i is consumer's idiosyncratic preference for seller i assumed to be type I extreme value and
I.I.D. We denote the no-purchase option by i = 0 and normalize this option to provide zero utility.
If a consumer ends up with purchasing from seller i, his/her shopping experience generates a noisy
signal of quality qi . After purchase, this signal is realized and the consumer leaves a noisy review as
                                                                             1    si
~(si )  N (qi ,  2 ). The average rating at this point becomes ri =
r                                                                            si   n=1 r
                                                                                      ~(n).


5.2    Supply

On the supply side, each seller is characterized with exogenous cost ci and fundamental quality qi .
They are drawn from a random distribution upon the firm's entry into the online platform. As is often
assumed in the trade and quality literature, we allow for correlation between ci and qi . However, we
assume that neither individual sellers nor consumers are sophisticated enough to dissect the population
correlation of c and q , such that there is little room to use product price as a signal for unobserved
quality.24

Seller's Price Adjustment Problem

    Since the consumer's search depends on each seller's previous cumulative orders, one might naturally
think that sellers would have incentive to compete for future demand by dynamic pricing. However,
in our sample, we observe very infrequent price adjustment.25 More importantly, we do not observe
systematic pattern of price increase as sellers grow their cumulative orders.
    As a result, we assume that each seller has an exogenous probability of adjusting its price after a
certain period of time. The frequency is directly matched to the empirical frequency of price adjustment.
When sellers adjust their prices, they do recognize that they will be competing with a small set of rivals
if they end up in a consumer's search sample. Their perceived demand is denoted as Di . Di depends
on the rich set of public information p, r, s, which are the prices, ratings, and cumulative orders of all
sellers at the time of price adjustment:

                                                  ~ (|s)        exp[Eqi (ri ) - pi ]
                             Di (p, r, s) =       P                                                                  (3)
                                              i
                                                           1+    j  exp[Eqj (rj ) - pj ]


where i is all possible size K samples that includes seller i,  is one specific realization of such a
            ~ (|s) is the probability that  is drawn conditioning on seller i entering the search
sample, and P
sample. Specifically,
                                        ~ (|s)         P (|s)
                                        P                       ,   i .
                                                       i P (|s)

In practice, this weighted summation is approximated by simulation.
 24
    We found little empirical evidence of the life-cycle price dynamics for sellers, in particular, for those with higher
measured quality.
 25
    In our study sample, with 1265 listings, only 82 adjusted their prices during the 13 week post-treatment periods.


                                                           16
    Given Di , seller i solves the following problem:


                                                 max Di · (pi - ci )
                                                   pi


where the first order condition reads

                                                           Di (p, r, s)
                                            pi - ci = -                                                         (4)
                                                          Di /pi (p, r, s)

Given the additive structure of Di based on the realized samples , we can easily define the key piece
of demand elasticity with

          Di                     ~ (|s)       exp[Eqi (ri ) - pi ]                    exp[Eqi (ri ) - pi ]
             (p, r, s) = -       P                                           1-                                 (5)
          pi                              1 + j  exp[Eqj (rj ) - pj ]             1 + j  exp[Eqj (rj ) - pj ]
                             i


This formula makes it clear that, similar to a standard discrete choice model, a seller's own elasticity is
decreasing in its market share, conditioning on being in the consumer's search sample . However, this
strategic consideration becomes less pronounced as              i   P (|s) decreases. When the market share is
highly concentrated and the probability of a small seller being chosen is close enough to zero (i.e., Di
does not depend on pi ), we assume these sellers will set their price based on a constant markup added
to ci .

Entry

    Sellers enter at the same time by paying a lump sum entry cost. Upon entry, each seller gets a
random draw of quality q and cost c. Sellers then set their initial prices accordingly. We can recover
the entry cost from the standard free entry condition by computing the discounted future payoff of an
average entrant.


6     Estimation

6.1       Parametrization and Model Identification

Our model has six structural parameters. The consumer demand depends on the constant and price
coefficient in mean utility,  and  ; the review signal noise  ; the search sample size K ; and the initial
visibility parameter s0 . To allow for flexible correlation between each seller's quality q and cost c, we use
a Gaussian Copula to model the dependence of their respective marginal distributions. The dependence
is governed by parameter .
    Despite the richness of our data on sellers' online sales history, it provides relatively little information
of the overtime variation in their cost. So we start by calibrating  to the average price elasticity of



                                                           17
6.7 (in align with the estimates in Broda and Weinstein (2006)). Given  , the rest of the structural
parameters are estimated using the Method of Simulated Moments. We use the following data moments:

   1. The distribution of cumulative sales for the sellers

   2. The dependence of new order on cumulative orders

   3. The regression coefficient of log price and the measured quality

   4. The conditional distribution of cumulative orders for each measured quality segment

We simulate our model from the start until the sellers' average cumulative orders reach the level in
our data (32 per listing). All the moments are jointly determined by the structural parameters in our
model. However, some data moments are more informative about a specific parameter than others. The
distribution of cumulative sales is tightly related to the initial visibility parameter s0 and the search
sample size K . Intuitively, a small initial visibility s0 increases the relative importance of early orders
in a seller's life cycle. The amplification effect of cumulative orders is more pronounced in this case, and
it increases the skewness of market distribution. On the other hand, a larger sampling size K dampens
this force by effectively allowing more sellers to compete for consumer attention in each period. The
dependence of a seller's new order on cumulative orders plays a similar role in disciplining the parameters
s0 and K . Conditioning on K , the correlation between a seller's cumulative orders and measured quality
identifies the review signal noise  . If the review was very precise, then higher quality sellers would
grow their orders rapidly once they end up in consumer's search sample. In contrast, a larger  results
in a flattened relationship between quality and the cumulative orders. Finally, a competing force that
could result in a low correlation between cumulative order and quality is the cost-quality dependence .
Hence we also require our simulated data to be consistent with the observed correlation between price
and quality.26
       We bootstrap the weighting matrix using our data sample. We describe the detailed simulation and
estimation procedures in Appendix D.


6.2      Estimation Results
                                                                                                ^ is
Table 6 presents the parameter estimates with standard errors. The estimated search sample size K
2, implying that each consumer ends his/her fixed sample search with 0.2% of all sellers in the market.
Since the actual number of listings in the market is about 20, 000, each search sample consists of about
40 listings.27 The estimate for  is 0.42. Given the empirical marginal distribution of cost and the
  26
     This empirical strategy does rely on the fact that we take a stand on  . We will conduct robustness checks on a broad
range of  to make sure our results are not sensitive to the specific calibrated value we used in our baseline.
  27
     Our model abstracts away from multiple listings within a store and treats each listing as an independent entity. This
simplification does not capture across-product spillovers within a store, which is likely to matter for large sellers but
relatively less so for small sellers.


                                                           18
standard normal quality distribution, this translates into a coefficient of correlation between quality
and cost of 0.32. The review noise  is estimated to be 3.6. To intuitively understand the magnitude of
this estimate, recall that the standard deviation of the prior belief for quality is 1. Under our estimate
for  , the standard deviation of the posterior belief is reduced only by 7.5% after one order is made.
Overall, our estimate suggests that reviews are very noisy signals about sellers' quality and that the
uncertainty about each seller's quality is resolved very slowly, i.e. only after a substantial amount of
orders. This indicates that the reputation mechanism takes time to play a role even if a seller emerged
in a consumer's choice set and successfully made a sale. As a result, the search friction, interacting with
the information friction, constitutes the major hurdle of seller's initial growth. Lastly, the parameter s0
that governs the initial visibility is estimated to be 0.41, suggesting a large visibility advantage brought
by an early order. Specifically, consider at the initial stage of a market where one seller makes his/her
first sales while all other sellers have made zero sales; the visibility for the former is about 3.4 (calculated
as (s0 + 1)/s0 ) times larger than the latter.
   Table 7 demonstrates how well our model matches the moments. Our model is over-identified.
With essentially four parameters, we are able to match the market concentration, the dependence of
new orders on cumulative orders, the correlations between price and quality, and the cumulative orders
versus quality relationship all very well.


6.3    Treatment as Model Validation

In this section, we conduct simulation exercises using our estimated model to evaluate its ability of
validating the experimental findings in Section 4.
   Table 8 presents the model predicted treatment effects for various one-time demand shocks, with
different group size of treated sellers and size of purchase orders. Recall that in our experiment, 2%
of the sellers received our orders. Since the overall market is growing, we conduct the treatment in
our model at the point when average cumulative orders per seller is the same as that in the data (32
t-shirts). As in the experiment, the size of the purchase is 1. It takes time for the new purchase to
generate future orders for treated sellers. In our experiment, we evaluate the impact after 13 weeks
of the treatment (during which period the total market orders grew by 48.7%). This number guides
our choice of the number of post-treatment periods in the model to evaluate the result. In our baseline
experiment simulation (P = 2%, O = 1), we find that our model estimates result in a treatment effect of
0.058 ­ an average seller receiving a random purchase would grow his/her orders by around 0.06 pieces.
It is slightly below but quantitatively comparable to the range of the average treatment effect shown in
Table 5, which is between 0.115 and 0.257. We also show that when the size of orders increases from
1 to 2 and 5, the average treatment effect will go up more than proportionately. However, notice that
they are always lower than the size of our treated purchase, which indicates that the market frictions


                                                      19
are not easily overcome by the private effort of the sellers.


7     Counterfactual Analyses

We conduct counterfactual exercises to examine the role of information and search frictions on firm
growth and consumer welfare. We evaluate potential policy interventions through the lens of our
estimated structural model. The results are reported in Table 9.


7.1    The Role of Information Friction: Reducing the Review Signal Noise

In our model, since the seller's quality is unknown to the consumers, the review from past purchases is
a crucial source of information spillover for subsequent consumers. Our estimate implies a quite noisy
review signal, with a standard deviation of 3.6. In Panel A, Table 9, we compare our baseline with a
case where we reduce  to zero. In other words, we investigate a case that a seller-listing's true quality
is immediately revealed when it accumulates its first order. We find that in this case, the cumulative
order share significantly shifts towards the higher quality sellers. As illustrated in Figure 7, when we
compare the blue bar (baseline) vs the purple bar ( = 0), the share of the top quality quartile increases
substantially to 55%. Since the current sales lead to more advantage in future consumer's search, the
reduction in information friction allows the high quality sellers to accumulate orders much faster in this
counterfactual case. As a consequence, we also find that average consumer welfare improved by 12.7%.
Note that this takes into account the fact that higher quality charges higher price and highlight the
sizable welfare gain from reallocation.


7.2    The Role of Initial Demand

To demonstrate the important role of initial demand in determining the market outcomes and welfare
in the presence of search and information frictions, we compare our baseline case in which the visibility
of sellers is proportional to the sum of s0 and cumulative sales (vi = s0 + si ) to a case where the
initial visibility of sellers is set to be proportional to their true quality28 in the first ten periods and
then revert to the same baseline search protocol right afterward. In the first case (our baseline), initial
demand is determined purely by random formulation of consumers' search sample while in the second it
is determined by seller quality. Contrasting these two cases will shed light on the role of initial demand
on long-run market outcomes.
    In Figure 7, we can read again the cumulative market share of sellers in each of the four quality bins,
contrasting the blue bar (baseline) and the red bar (initial visibility from quality). It is remarkable that
  28
     We maintain the total amount of seller initial visibility at the same level as in our baseline, while assign it to each
seller i based on exp (qi )
                    exp(qj )
                   j




                                                            20
only ten-period differences in demand allocation generates a persistent long-run difference in market
outcomes. Panel B of Table 9 reports a few summary statistics that connect market structure to
allocation and welfare. In the case of quality-based initial demand, we find that the sales weighted
quality is 13.2% higher than the baseline case, resulting in a gain in expected consumer surplus of
7.4%.29


7.3    The Role of Search Friction: Reducing the Number of Sellers

Finally, we investigate the impact of changing the number of sellers operating in the online marketplace
(for example, by raising the entry costs or the costs of maintaining an active listing). Our model
estimate implies that consumers only explore 0.2% of the sellers when they make a purchase. This
implies that the large number of sellers could generate congestion in the buyer search process, thereby
affecting the long-run dynamics of market outcomes. Figure 7 reports an alternative scenario of 500
sellers in the yellow bar. Despite starting from exactly the same market structure, higher quality sellers
are discovered sooner and obtain more orders when the total number of sellers is smaller at 500. Panel
C of Table 9 reports that the top quartile quality seller gains 11.2% cumulative market share when the
number of sellers is reduced from 1000 to 500. As a result, the sales-weighted quality is 22% higher
and the expected consumer surplus increases by 10.6%. This counterfactual exercise speaks to policies
targeting at the creation of new marketplaces. For existing platforms, which already host a large number
of sellers and listings, one can imagine an analogous exercise by screening out inactive seller-listings.
We hope to investigate that further in the next step.


8     Conclusion

In this paper, we study exporter dynamics on global e-commerce platforms. Leveraging comprehensive
data about the online businesses from AliExpress and combining that with unique objective measures
of quality covering multiple product and service dimensions, we document sizable variation in firm-
product quality in the online marketplace. However, we find that quality only weakly predicts firm
performance and growth. Our paper highlights the role of search and information frictions in explaining
the disintegration of the demand accumulation process and firm fundamentals and underscores the
potential source of market misallocation in e-commerce.
    Our findings speak to effective policies on facilitating small business growth via e-commerce. While
global e-commerce platforms present a promising avenue for small and medium-sized enterprises in
  29
     Consumer welfare is calculated as the expected sum of inclusive values from the searched sample, before and after the
actual purchase decision:
                              CS = E0       IV (i  {0}) = E0      log          exp(qj - pj ),
                                        i                       i    j i {0}

where E0 stands for the average across simulations.


                                                           21
developing countries to tap into the global market, simply bringing firms to these platforms may not
be sufficient to generate sustained growth due to the large demand-side frictions. In fact, doing so can
exacerbate the search and information problems, resulting in market misallocation. Policies should be
designed to help firms, especially new businesses, to overcome the additional demand-side frictions. In
the context of e-commerce, regulating entry, creating a premium market segment, and directing demand
to promising newcomers could help to facilitate growth and improve the overall market efficiency.




                                                  22
References
Allen, Treb. 2014. "Information frictions in trade." Econometrica 82 (6):2041­2083.

Arkolakis, Costas, Theodore Papageorgiou, and Olga A Timoshenko. 2018. "Firm learning and growth."
  Review of Economic Dynamics 27:146­168.

Atkin, David, Amit K Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. 2017. "Exporting and firm performance: evidence
  from a randomized experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):551­615.

Bai, Jie. 2016. "Melons as Lemons: Asymmetric Information, Consumer Learning and Seller Reputa-
  tion." .

Banerjee, Abhijit Vinayak. 2013. "Microcredit under the Microscope: What Have We Learned in the
  Past Two Decades, and What Do We Need to Know?" Annu. Rev. Econ. 5 (1):487­519.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2013. "Does
  Management Matter? Evidence from India*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1).

Broda, Christian and David E Weinstein. 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Variety." The
  Quarterly journal of economics 121 (2):541­585.

Chernev, Alexander and Ryan Hamilton. 2009. "Assortment size and option attractiveness in consumer
  choice among retailers." Journal of Marketing Research 46 (3):410­420.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. "Returns to Capital in Microenter-
  prises: Evidence from a Field Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4):1329­1372.

Drinea, Eleni, Alan Frieze, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Michael Mitzenmacher. 2002. "Balls and bins
  models with feedback." In Proceedings of the thirteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete
  algorithms. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 308­315.

Eaton, Jonathan, David Jinkins, James Tybout, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2016. "Two-sided Search in Inter-
  national Markets." In 2016 Annual Meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics.

Fitzgerald, Doireann, Stefanie Haller, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi. 2020. "How Exporters Grow." .

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2016. "The slow growth of new plants: Learning
  about demand?" Economica 83 (329):91­129.

Hansman, Christopher, Jonas Hjort, Gianmarco Le´    on-Ciliotta, and Matthieu Teachout. 2020. "Vertical
  integration, supplier behavior, and quality upgrading among exporters." Journal of Political Economy
  128 (9):3570­3625.

Horta¸csu, Ali, F Mart´
                      inez-Jerez, and Jason Douglas. 2009. "The geography of trade in online trans-
  actions: Evidence from eBay and mercadolibre." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
  1 (1):53­74.

Khandelwal, Amit. 2010. "The long and short (of) quality ladders." The Review of Economic Studies
 77 (4):1450­1476.

Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen. 2012. "Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality." The Review of
 Economic Studies 79 (1):307­339.


                                                  23
Lendle, Andreas, Marcelo Olarreaga, Simon Schropp, and Pierre-Louis V´  ezina. 2016. "There goes
  gravity: eBay and the death of distance." The Economic Journal 126 (591):406­441.

Lipsman, A. 2019. "Global Ecommerce 2019: Ecommerce Continues Strong Gains Amid Global
  Economic Uncertainty. eMarketer." Saatavissa (viitattu 8.4. 2020): https://www. emarketer.
  com/content/global-ecommerce-2019 .

Macchiavello, Rocco and Ameet Morjaria. 2015. "The value of relationships: evidence from a supply
 shock to Kenyan rose exports." American Economic Review 105 (9):2911­45.

McShane, Blakeley B and Ulf B¨
                             ockenholt. 2018. "Multilevel multivariate meta-analysis with application
 to choice overload." psychometrika 83 (1):255­271.

Mitzenmacher, Michael, Roberto Oliveira, and Joel Spencer. 2004. "A scaling result for explosive
 processes." the electronic journal of combinatorics 11 (1):R31.

Pitney    Bowes,  Inc.  2016.       "2016   Pitney  Bowes    Global    Online   Shopping
  Study."                http://www.pitneybowes.com/us/global-ecommerce/case-studies/
  the-growing-importance-of-international-ecommerce.html. Accessed: 2020-07-20.

Piveteau, Paul. 2016. "An empirical dynamic model of trade with consumer accumulation." Tech. rep.,
  Working Paper.

Ruhl, Kim J and Jonathan L Willis. 2017. "New exporter dynamics." International Economic Review
 58 (3):703­726.

Scheibehenne, Benjamin, Rainer Greifeneder, and Peter M Todd. 2010. "Can there ever be too many
  options? A meta-analytic review of choice overload." Journal of consumer research 37 (3):409­425.

Startz, Meredith. 2018. "The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting problems in Nigerian trade."
  .

Steinwender, Claudia. 2018. "Real effects of information frictions: When the states and the kingdom
  became united." American Economic Review 108 (3):657­96.

Tadelis, Steven. 2016. "Reputation and feedback systems in online platform markets." Annual Review
  of Economics 8:321­340.

UNCTAD, Torbj¨
             orn, Fredriksson. 2016. "Unlocking the Potential of E-Commerce for Developing Coun-
 tries." .

Verhoogen, Eric. 2020. "Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries." Tech. rep.

Verhoogen, Eric A. 2008. "Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the Mexican manufacturing
  sector." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2):489­530.

WTO, World Trade Organization. 2020. "World trade statistical review 2020." .




                                                  24
      Figure 1: AliExpress: Search Results with and without Grouping

           Panel A. Search Results without the Grouping Function




             Panel B. Search Results with the Grouping Function




Note: This figure presents examples of search results on AliExpress. Panel A displays
the search results using "children's t-shirts" as keywords, without applying the grouping
function provided by the website. Panel B displays the same search results while applying
the grouping function.




                                           25
                                   Figure 2: Quality Assessment
                                    Panel A. Quality Assessment




                                                          Quality Metrics:

                                                           Obvious Quality Defect (dummy)

                                                           Fabric/Materials (1-5 Rating) :
                                                              Durability/ Strength(tightly woven?)
                                                              Softness
                                                              Wrinkle test

                                                           Seam (1-5 Rating):
                                                              Straight and neat (e.g. armpit)
                                                              Outside stray threads
                                                              Inside multiple unnecessary/loose stitches

                                                           Pattern Printing (1-5 Rating):
                                                             Smoothness
                                                             Trendiness (subjective)



                                    Panel B. Variation in Quality



                                                 Varying
                                                 degrees of
                                                 Durability




                                                                                            Stray threads

                   Failed wrinkle test

    Varying
    quality
    within a
    variety
    group




                                                      Poor softness


Note: Panel A displays the purchased t-shirts, sorted by groups, from our experiment; the quality
assessment agent located in Durham, North Carolina; and the quality metrics used in the assess-
ment process. Panel B shows examples of the t-shirts that receive low scores in specific quality
metrics.


                                                 26
                                 Figure 3: Sales Performance Within Identical Variety
                  1         .8
         Total Order Shares
        .4         .6
                  .2




                                         Superstar            Top 10%                Top 25%


Note: This figure plots the distribution of the total share of cumulative orders for top listings across groups
using the census sample in 2017 (see Section 2.2 for details on the census data). "Superstar" indicates listings
that have the highest cumulative orders within its group variety. "Top 10%" ("top 25%") indicates listings
that have the top 10% (25%) cumulative orders within its group variety.




                                                         27
          Figure 4: Quality Comparison Between Group Superstar and Small Listings
                  2
                  1.5
        Density

                  1
                  .5
                  0




                        -.5                    0                         .5                         1

                         Mean Quality of Group Superstar - Mean Quality of Group Small Listings

Note: This figure plots the distribution of the quality differences between group superstars and group small
listings using the experiment sample with quality measures (see Section 4 for details on the experiment sample).
Quality is measured by the Overall Quality Index (see Section 2.2 for details on the construction of quality
indices). Group superstar is defined to be the listing with the largest number of cumulative orders in each
group. Small listings is defined to be the listings with fewer than 5 cumulative orders. The sample consists of
the 133 groups in our experimental sample.




                                                      28
                                    Figure 5: Average Market Share over Quality Bins
                            .0025
                            .002
     Average Market Share

                            .0015
                            .001
                            .0005




                                    Bottom Bin            Middle Bin              Top Bin

Note: This figure plots the regression coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals from regressing the
listings' shares based on cumulative orders on the quality bins they belong to. The data used for the
regression is the experiment sample with quality measures (see Section 4 for details on the experiment
sample and Section 2.2 for the construction of quality measures).




                                                          29
                                              Figure 6: Dynamics of Order Arrival
                                           Panel A. Unbalanced Panel of All Listings



                                100
                                80
           Days to N-th Order

                                60
                                40
                                20
                                0




                                      0          20         40            60        80       100

                                                          Cumulative N-th Order


                                      Panel B. Listings with More than 10 Cumulative Sales
                                100
                                80
           Days to N-th Order

                                60
                                40
                                20
                                0




                                      0          20         40            60        80       100

                                                          Cumulative N-th Order

Note: This figure describes the order arrival dynamics. The x-axis indicates the n-th order and the y-axis
shows the number of days till receiving the n-th order. The bold line in the middle plots the average and
the other two dotted lines plot the 95% confidence interval. We use the six-month transaction history
data described in Section 2.2. Panel A include the full unbalanced panel of all listings appeared in the
transaction data. Panel B restrict the sample to listings that accumulated more than 10 orders during
the six-month period.




                                                                 30
   Figure 7: Counterfactual Market Share Distributions Over Quality Quartiles




Note: This figure plots the total shares of cumulative orders for different quality quartiles under
the baseline and three counterfactual cases.




                                                31
                                                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics of Quality Measures

                                              Observations               Mean              Std Dev               Median              Intra-Group Corr                  Within-Group SD                  Between-Group SD

                                                                                                  Panel A: Product Quality

     NoObviousQualityDefect                         796                   .93                 .26                    1                         .08                             .25                                .07
     Durability                                     791                   2.63                 .79                   3                         .91                             .24                                 .75
     MaterialSoftness                               791                   3.21                .72                    3                         .94                             .17                                .71
     WrinkleTest                                    791                   3.08                 .48                   3                         .91                             .15                                 .46
     SeamStraight                                   791                   4.22                 .47                   4                          .2                             .42                                 .21
     OutsideString                                  791                    2.8                1.56                   3                          .4                             1.22                                .99
     InsideString                                   791                    .78                1.18                   0                         .46                              .87                                 .8
     PatternSmoothness                              773                   3.43                1.53                   4                         .87                             .55                                1.44
     Trendiness                                     791                   3.13                1.35                   3                         .91                               .4                                1.3
32




                                                                                          Panel B: Service and Shipping Quality

     BuyShipTimeLag                                823                   3.66                 3.24                  3                          .32                             2.67                               1.85
     ShipDeliveryTimeLag                           802                   12.92                4.15                  12                         .19                             3.73                               1.83
     LostPackage                                   820                    .02                  .14                   0                         .09                             .13                                .04
     PackageDamage                                  795                    0                   .05                   0                          0                              .05                                  .
     ReplyWithinTwoDays                            1258                   .69                  .46                   1                         .08                              .44                                .13

                                                                                                     Panel C: Quality Indices

     ProductQualityIndex                           769                      0                  .41                 -.02                         .7                              .22                                .34
     ShippingQualityIndex                          793                     .04                 .43                  .12                        .09                              .41                                .13
     ServiceQualityIndex                           1258                     0                   1                   .67                        .08                              .96                                .28
     OverallQualityIndex                            763                    .01                 .29                  .01                        .54                               .2                                .22
       Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of the various quality measures. Sections 2.2 and B.2 provide details on the measurement process and each of the quality metrics. Panel C reports the aggregate quality
       indices constructed by standardizing scores of individual quality metrics and taking their average within each quality category. The number of observations changes slightly across quality measures because some items were
       lost in the shipping process and in the quality assessment process.
               Table 2: Summary Statistics of the Children's T-shirts Market on AliExpress

                                             Observations           Mean         Std Dev        Median        5th Pctile      95th Pctile

                                                       Panel A. Listing Level

Orders                                            19855             32.21         199.7             1              0                91
Price (Discounted)                                18681              7.63         19.65           5.85            2.62            14.22
Revenue (Discounted)                              18681            164.48        1040.85          7.02             0              454.1
Total Feedback                                    19855            26.49         195.67             0              0                66
Star Rating                                       8960              3.87          1.96            4.9              0                 5
Free Shipping Indicator                           19855               .72          .45              1               0                1
Shipping Cost to US                               19854               .51          4.3              0               0              2.61

                                                        Panel B. Store Level

Num of Variety                                     1816            159.42         193.88           93              19              514
Total Orders                                       1816            7219.52      16617.96        1923.5             73            32847
Total Revenue (Discounted)                         1816           35687.67      77427.83       14072.43         628.55          144612.8
Total Revenue (Not Discounted)                     1816           46999.66      95827.14       17750.11         822.73          189711.1
T-shirts Orders                                    1816            343.21        1240.35           14               0             1814
T-shirts Revenue (Discounted)                      1816           1645.85       5788.11         83.59              0            8622.65
Zero T-shirts Sales Indicator                      1816               .2             .4            0               0                1
Age                                                1816             2.32           1.76             2              0                5
Total Feedback                                     1816           6042.97       11254.08         1651              22            29853
Perc of Positive Feedback                          1803              .97            .03           .98             .94               1
Description                                        1771             4.68            .15           4.7             4.5              4.8
Communication                                      1771             4.69            .15           4.7             4.5              4.8
Shipping Speed                                     1771             4.57            .18           4.6             4.3              4.8
Num of Positive Feedback                           1816            6241.28      11652.19        1686.5             23            30954
Num of Neutral Feedback                            1816            227.32        483.12            51               0             1252
Num of Negative Feedback                           1816            191.17        426.18            41               0             1067
Num of Negative Feedback                           1805              .97           .02            .98             .94               1
  Note: This table reports the summary statistics for the census data in 2017 of the children's t-shirts market on AliExpress. See Section
  2.2 for details on the census data. Panel A reports the summary statistics for all children' t-shirts listings on Aliexpress. Panel B reports
  the summary statistics for the stores selling these listings.




                                                                    33
                                    Table 3: Treatment Effects of Order and Review

                                            All Destinations         English-speaking Countries                 United States

     Order                                   0.024      0.027*       0.015***           0.016***            0.017***      0.018***
                                            (0.020)     (0.014)       (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.003)       (0.003)
     ReviewXPostReview                       0.001       -0.017        0.020              0.016               0.016         0.014
                                            (0.023)     (0.027)       (0.019)            (0.017)             (0.017)       (0.016)
     Observations                            10270       10270         10270              10270               10270         10270
     Group FE                                 No          Yes           No                 Yes                 No            Yes
34




     Week FE                                  Yes         Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
     Baseline Controls                        Yes         Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
     Clustered SE at listing level            Yes         Yes           Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
       Note: This table reports the treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders and reviews. Section 4 provides more
       details on the sample and procedures of the experiment. The dependent variable is the weekly number of orders, calculated
       using the transaction data collected in August 2018. The baseline controls include the baseline total number of cumulative
       orders of the store and of the particular product listing. "Order" is a dummy variable that equals one for all products in the
       treatment groups (T1 and T2) and zero for the control group. "Review" is a dummy that equals one for all products in T2,
       where we place one order and leave a review on shipping and product quality. "PostReview" is a dummy that equals one for the
       weeks after the reviews were given (i.e., from week 7 onward). Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** indicates significance
       at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                                        Table 4: Dynamic Treatment Effects

                                         All Destinations            English-speaking Countries                 United States

OrderXMonth1                           0.063***       0.064***       0.037***           0.037***            0.038***      0.038***
                                        (0.024)        (0.021)        (0.008)            (0.008)             (0.007)       (0.007)
OrderXMonth2                              0.019          0.019          0.007              0.008             0.008**       0.008**
                                        (0.032)        (0.027)        (0.010)            (0.009)             (0.003)       (0.004)
OrderXMonth3                              0.009          0.009        0.015*             0.015**             0.012*        0.013**
                                        (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.008)            (0.008)             (0.007)       (0.006)
OrderXMonth4                             -0.044         -0.044         -0.009             -0.008              0.011         0.011
                                        (0.031)        (0.029)        (0.018)            (0.018)             (0.007)       (0.007)
Observations                             10270          10270          10270              10270               10270         10270
Group FE                                   No             Yes            No                 Yes                No            Yes
Week FE                                    Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes
Baseline Controls                          Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes
Clustered SE at listing level              Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes           Yes
  Note: This table reports the dynamic treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders and reviews. The dependent variable
  is the weekly number of orders, calculated using the transaction data collected in August 2018. The baseline controls include the
  baseline total number of cumulative orders of the store and of the particular product listing. "MonthX" is a dummy variable that
  equals one for the X-th month after treatment. Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5,
  * 0.1.




                                                                35
                                Table 5: Average and Quantile Treatment Effects Measured at the Endline

                                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)              (6)
                                                              Average            10th %          50th %           90th %             95th %           99th %
     Orders from the US                                       0.248***            0.010           0.032*         0.673***           0.931***           3.856
                                                               (0.063)           (0.019)         (0.019)          (0.198)            (0.263)          (2.447)
     Orders from English-Speaking Countries                   0.190**             0.020          0.050**         0.637***           1.080**           3.625*
                                                               (0.093)           (0.025)         (0.022)          (0.239)            (0.464)          (1.962)
     Orders from All Countries                                  0.110             0.096           0.149*           0.593              0.977            3.394
36




                                                               (0.308)           (0.110)         (0.077)          (0.652)            (1.216)          (4.973)
     Observations                                                790               790             790              790                790              790
     Baseline Controls                                           Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes
       Note: This table reports the average and quantile treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders and reviews. Each cell in the table reports a
       regression coefficient. The dependent variable is the endline number of cumulative orders, calculated using the transaction data collected in August 2018.
       The independent variable is the order treatment dummy that equals one for all products in the treatment groups (T1 and T2) and zero for the control
       group. The baseline controls include the baseline total number of cumulative orders of the store and of the particular product listing. Column 1 reports
       the average treatment effect, and Columns 2 to 6 report the quantile treatment effects. Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** indicates significance
       at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.
                     Table 6: Estimated Parameters of the Empirical Model

        Parameters              s0           K                                                      
        Value                 0.41           2            3.6          0.42           1.2          4.2
                             (0.004)      (0.119)       (0.007)       (0.014)       (0.002)      (0.007)
           Note: s0 governs the initial visibility;  is the review noise;  is the parameter that maps to
           the correlation between cost and quality; K is the search sample size; and the price coefficient 
           is calibrated by choosing a reasonable average markup;  is calibrated to match outside option
           share (see discussion in Section 5). Standard errors are reported in the parentheses.




                                       Table 7: Matching Moments

        Moments                                                              Data                Model
        Top 1% cumulative revenue share                                      0.424               0.394
        Top 5% cumulative revenue share                                      0.742               0.661
        Top 10% cumulative revenue share                                     0.841               0.775
        Top 25% cumulative revenue share                                     0.939               0.906
        Top 50% cumulative revenue share                                     0.983               0.974
        Dependence of new order on cumulative orders                         0.023               0.066
        Cumulative orders share: 1st quality bin                             0.434               0.460
        Cumulative orders share: 2nd quality bin                             0.311               0.322
        Reg. coef. of log price and quality                                  0.125               0.130
           Note: This table reports the data moments and the model moments evaluated at the parameter
           estimates. See Section 5 for more discussion on the choice of moments.




                         Table 8: Model Validation Using the Experiment


Percent of Sellers Purchased           Size of Purchase           Average Effect on Sales: Treated - Control

              P                                O                                  M = 48.7%
              2                                1                                   0.058
              2                                2                                   0.166
              2                                5                                   0.465
  Note: This table shows the simulated treatment effect based on the estimated model. The first two columns are
  the coverage and size of the simulated treatment, and the last column reports the increase in orders averaged over
  treated sellers after the total number of cumulative orders in the market increases by 48.7%.




                                                       37
                                                     Table 9: Counterfactual Analyses

                                              Total Share for Top                 Sales-Weighted                 Average Consumer
                                               Quality Quartile                       Quality                         Surplus

                                                                        Panel A: Information Friction

     Baseline ( = 3.6)                                 0.367                            0.252                            100.0
     =0                                                0.550                            0.681                            112.7


                                                                       Panel B: Search and Initial Luck

     Baseline Search Protocol                          0.367                            0.252                            100.0
38




     Quality-Based Search                              0.443                            0.384                            107.4


                                                                          Panel C: Number of Sellers

     Baseline (1000 Sellers)                           0.367                            0.252                            100.0
     500 Sellers                                       0.471                            0.474                            110.6

       Note: This table reports the results of several counterfactual analyses using the estimated model. Panel A compares market outcomes
       using sales-based versus quality-based initial visibility. Specifically, in the former case, visibility is proportional to the sum of s0 and
       sales. In the latter case, visibility is proportional to exponential quality in the first period and revert to be proportional to the sum of s0
       and sales afterward. Panel B compares market outcomes with different numbers of sellers under the sales-based search protocol. Panel
       C compares the long-run average market outcomes in the baseline case with 1000 sellers versus in a premium market where sellers with
       zero sale are screened out.
Appendices. For Online Publication Only

A   Figures and Tables

                                              Figure A.1: Life Cycle Growth Dynamics




                                            Online
                                   .6




                                            Offline
        Log T-Shirts Revenue Ratio
           (relative to new firms)
      0         .2         .4




                                        1             2             3                  4                     5
                                                          Age (Experience) of Firm




    Note: This figure plots the life cycle dynamics of online and offline exporters. For the online exporting firms,
    we use the census data collected in 2017 (see Section 2.2 for more details on the census data). For the offline
    exporting firms, we use the Chinese Customs data in 2013 for the corresponding HS category of t-shirts (code
    6109). We calculate firm sizes as their revenue from selling t-shirts.




                                                                A-1
                        Figure A.2: Endline Net Sales Distribution
     .8
     .6
  Fraction
     .4
     .2
     0




             0                 20                  40                     60                   80
                                                Net Sales

                                      Order Treatment                   Control




Note: This figure plots the endline distribution of cumulative orders (net of our own orders) for the
listings in the experiment sample. The blue bars indicate the control group; the red bars indicate
the treatment groups, i.e. T1 and T2.




                                                A-2
    Table A.1: Decomposition of the Overall Quality Index

Quality Metrics                                                Explained R2
OverallQualityIndex                                                100

ProductQualityIndex                                                 76.0
NoObviousQualityDefect                                               9.3
Durability                                                          13.5
MaterialSoftness                                                     8.8
WrinkleTest                                                          7.1
SeamsSraight                                                         6.6
OutsideString                                                        8.3
InsideString                                                         8.4
PatternSmoothness                                                    9.7
Trendiness                                                           4.3

ShippingQualityIndex                                                18.2
BuyShipTimeLag                                                       3.4
LostPackage                                                          0.0
NoPackageDamage                                                      8.0
ShipDeliveryTimeLag                                                  6.8

ServiceQualityIndex                                                  5.8
ReplyWithinTwoDays                                                   5.8
  Note: This table decomposes the variation of the overall quality index to that
  explained by each individual quality subindices and metrics. For the subindices
  (i.e. ProductQualityIndex, ServiceQualityIndex, and ShippingQualityIndex), the
  Shapley value is reported. For other metrics, the Owen value is reported. We use
  the quality measures collected for the experiment sample. See Section 2.2 for a
  detailed description of the quality collection process.




                                     A-3
                 Table A.2: Correlation between Quality and Star Rating

                                                                 Dependent: Star Rating
                                    (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)                     (5)              (6)
ProductQualityIndex                0.029            0.170
                                  (0.048)          (0.114)
ShippingQualityIndex                                                0.082*           0.098*
                                                                    (0.044)          (0.055)
ServiceQualityIndex                                                                                  0.034**            0.036*
                                                                                                      (0.017)           (0.020)
Constant                         4.803***         4.804***         4.795***         4.793***         4.793***          4.793***
                                  (0.019)          (0.020)          (0.019)          (0.019)          (0.016)           (0.017)
Observations                        409              409              422              422              624               624
Rsquare                            0.001            0.317            0.008            0.319            0.006             0.210
Group FE                            No               Yes              No               Yes              No                Yes

  Note: This table presents results from regressing listing star ratings on their quality indices. We use the experiment sample with
  detailed quality measures. See Section 4 for more details on the experiment sample and Table 1 for the summary statistics of
  quality measures. Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** indicates significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                             A-4
                                   Table A.3: Market Share Distributions at the Top

                                    Number of Exporters at the Top                         Market Share of Exporters at the Top
                                   Online            Offline                              Online               Offline

                                                         Panel A. Listing Level

Top   1%                             198                          .                         52.5                             .
Top   5%                             992                          .                         81.3                             .
Top   10%                           1985                          .                         89.8                             .
Top   25%                           4963                          .                         97.3                             .
Top   50%                           9927                          .                         99.9                             .

                                                          Panel B. Firm Level

Top   1%                             18                         120                         27.7                           38.2
Top   5%                             90                         602                         62.7                           65.2
Top   10%                            181                        1205                        79.7                           78.4
Top   25%                            453                        3012                        95.0                           92.7
Top   50%                            907                        6025                        99.5                           98.6

Total Num of Listings              19855                         .                            .
Total Num of Firms                  1816                       12052                          .                              .
Total Revenue                      2989                        14110                          .                              .
  Note: This table reports the market share distributions based on cumulative orders at the top for the online and offline export markets. For
  the online market, we use the census data collected in 2017 (see Section 2.2 for more details on the census data). For the offline market, we use
  the Chinese Customs data in 2013 for the corresponding HS category of t-shirts (code 6109). We calculate offline firm sizes as their revenue
  from selling t-shirts. Panel A shows the numbers and market revenue shares of the top listings (products) in children's t-shirts category on
  AliExpress. The revenue is calculated by multiplying total cumulative orders with current price after discount. Panel B presents the firm-level
  statistics and compares the online and offline markets. The units for the total revenue is 1000 RMB for the online sales and in million USD
  for the offline sales.




                                                                      A-5
Table A.4: The Dependence of New Orders on Current Cumulative Orders

Dummy=1 if having an order in the following week                          (1)            (2)
Log Orders                                                             0.023***       0.023***
                                                                        (0.001)        (0.001)
Constant                                                              -0.009***      -0.010***
                                                                        (0.001)        (0.002)
Observations                                                             19855          19680
Store FE                                                                  No             Yes
  Note: This table reports the results from regressing a dummy variable that equals one for listings
  that receive orders in the following week on the log number of cumulative orders in the current
  week. We use the census data at the listing level collected in 2018. See Section 2.2 for more
  details on the census data.




                                              A-6
Table A.5: Summary Statistics of the Children's T-shirts Market on AliExpress: the Baseline Sample

                                              Observations            Mean          Std Dev         Median          5th Pctile       95th Pctile

                                                           Panel A. Listing Level

Price                                              10089               6.14           8.46              5              2.78              11.59
Orders                                             10089              31.07          189.19             2                0                110
Revenue                                            10089              163.7          891.68             9                0               636.4
Total Feedback                                     10089              19.69           127               1                0                 67
Rating                                             5050               96.66           7.4              100             82.9               100
Free Shipping Indicator                            10089                .54            .5               1                0                  1
Shipping Cost to US                                10089                .63           1.44              0                0                2.18

                                                            Panel B. Store Level

Num of Variety                                      610              1092.68         1054.38           596             101                3064
Total Orders                                        610              9287.93        18478.68         3653.5             51               30894
Total Revenue (Discounted)                          610             42714.57        82530.27        17946.47          445.56           152587.1
Total Revenue (Undiscounted)                        610             50360.67        101736.1        19353.02             0             185653.1
T-shirts Orders                                     610               286.46          711.96            47               0               1336
T-shirts Revenue (Discounted)                       610              1408.14         3932.4          220.27              0              6583.07
T-shirts Zero Sales Indicator                       610                 .12             .32             0                0                  1
Age                                                 610                1.27            1.68             0                0                  5
Total Feedback                                      604                 .97             .02            .98             .94                  1
Rating                                              583                4.72             .13            4.7             4.5                 4.9
Perc of Positive Feedback                           604                  .97            .02            .98              .94                  1
Communication                                       583                 4.73            .14            4.8             4.5                 4.9
Shipping Speed                                      583                4.64             .17            4.7             4.3                 4.8
Positive Feedback in 1 Month                        602               806.92         1335.18          389.5             11               2588
Positive Feedback in 3 Months                       603              2325.82        3888.12           1063              15                8161
Positive Feedback in 6 Months                       604              3857.98        6240.83           1826              16               12959
Neutral Feedback in 1 Month                         530                21.37          29.45             12               1                  74
Neutral Feedback in 3 Months                        550               59.26           85.42             32               2                 205
Neutral Feedback in 6 Months                        557              102.83          143.85             55               2                 368
Negative Feedback in 1 Month                        521                22.59          30.44             13               1                 79
Negative Feedback in 3 Months                       543               59.49           81.81             34               1                208
Negative Feedback in 6 Months                       552              104.11          139.34           54.5               2                389
% Positive Feedback in 1 Month                      602                 .97            .03             .98             .93                  1
% Positive Feedback in 3 Months                     603                 .98             .02            .98             .94                  1
% Positive Feedback in 6 Months                     604                 .97             .02            .98             .94                   1
  Note: This table reports the same summary statistics as in Table 2 but using the baseline sample collected in May 2018 (see Section 4) for details.




                                                                      A-7
                                                            Table A.6: Balance Check

                                           (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)         (7)
                                        Control            T1              T2            T1-Control        T2-Control        T2-T1      Joint Test
                                       mean/(sd)        mean/(sd)       mean/(sd)          b/(se)            b/(se)          b/(se)       F/(p)
      Price After Discount                5.95            5.46            5.63              -0.48             -0.32            0.16        1.28
                                         (4.10)          (2.57)          (3.72)            (0.29)            (0.35)          (0.29)       (0.26)
      Cumulative Orders                   0.90            0.73            0.81             -0.18              -0.09            0.09        0.91
                                         (1.26)          (1.18)          (1.20)            (0.10)            (0.11)          (0.11)       (0.34)
      Total Feedback                      0.46            0.38            0.65              -0.08             0.19           0.27          1.88
A-8




                                         (1.21)          (1.37)          (1.88)            (0.11)            (0.13)          (0.15)       (0.17)
      Positive Rating Rate                0.95            0.96            0.91               0.01             -0.04           -0.05        0.83
                                         (0.21)          (0.17)          (0.28)            (0.04)            (0.04)          (0.05)       (0.36)
      Free Shipping Dummy                 0.50            0.45            0.48              -0.05             -0.02           0.03         0.21
                                         (0.50)          (0.50)          (0.50)            (0.04)            (0.04)          (0.05)       (0.65)
      Shipping Price                      0.74            0.76            0.69               0.02             -0.05           -0.06        0.25
                                         (1.01)          (0.89)          (1.03)            (0.08)            (0.09)          (0.09)       (0.61)
      Note: This table checks whether the order and review treatments are correlated with listing characteristics collected prior to the treatment. See
      Section 4 for discussion of the experiment sample. The first three columns report the mean and standard deviation of the variables for each treatment
      group. Columns (4)-(6) show the difference between the two groups and the standard errors of the difference. The column heading indicates which
      groups are being compared. The last column tests whether the three treatment groups have the same mean.   : p ¡ 0.01; : p ¡ 0.05; : p ¡ 0.1.
      Table A.7: Treatment Effects of Order and Review: Without Baseline Controls

                                       All Destinations           English-speaking              United      States
Order                                   0.023    0.026*          0.014** 0.015***            0.016***       0.017***
                                       (0.020) (0.015)           (0.005)    (0.005)           (0.003)        (0.003)
ReviewXPostReview                       0.005    -0.014           0.021      0.016             0.017          0.014
                                       (0.024) (0.027)           (0.019)    (0.018)           (0.017)        (0.016)
Observations                            10270    10270            10270      10270             10270          10270
Group FE                                 No       Yes              No         Yes               No             Yes
Week FE                                  Yes      Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes            Yes
Baseline Controls                        No        No              No         No                No             No
Clustered SE at listing level            Yes      Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes            Yes
  Note: This table reports the treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders and reviews. The dependent
  variable is the endline number of cumulative orders, calculated using the transaction data collected in August 2018.
  The independent variable is the order treatment dummy that equals one for all products in the treatment groups
  (T1 and T2) and zero for the control group. Column 1 reports the average treatment effect, and Columns 2 to 6
  report the quantile treatment effects. Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** indicates significance at 0.01 level,
  ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                        A-9
                  Table A.8: Treatment Effects on Ranking

                                       EnterFirst100Pages           EnterFirst15Pages

OrderXMonth1                             0.012        0.013*        0.004*        0.003*
                                       (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.002)       (0.002)
OrderXMonth2                             0.002          0.003         0.002        0.002
                                       (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.001)
OrderXMonth3                            -0.003         -0.003        -0.000        -0.000
                                       (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.002)       (0.002)
OrderXMonth4                            -0.003         -0.002         0.002        0.002
                                       (0.009)        (0.008)       (0.002)       (0.002)
Observations                            10270          10270         10270         10270
Group FE                                  No             Yes           No           Yes
Week FE                                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Baseline Controls                         Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Clustered SE at listing level             Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
  Note: This table reports the treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders and
  reviews on listing ranks using the 13-week panel of the experiment sample. The dependent
  variable in column 1-2 (3-4) is a dummy variable that equals one if the listing enters the
  first 100 (15) pages in the no-group search. The baseline controls include the baseline total
  number of cumulative orders of the store and of the particular product listing. "Order" is
  a dummy variable that equals one for all products in the treatment groups (T1 and T2)
  and zero for the control group. "Review" is a dummy that equals one for all products
  in T2, where we place one order and leave a review on shipping and product quality.
  "PostReview" is a dummy that equals one for the weeks after the reviews were given (i.e.,
  from week 7 onward). "MonthX" is a dummy variable that equals one for the X-th month
  after treatment. Standard errors are in the parentheses. *** indicates significance at 0.01
  level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                          A-10
                        Table A.9: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect: Quality

                                                    (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Order                                              0.301                  0.327*                   0.479                  0.797
                                                 (0.236)                  (0.180)                 (0.392)                (0.635)
OrderXServiceQualityIndex                         -0.157                   -0.075
                                                 (0.228)                  (0.203)
ServiceQualityIndex                              0.290**                    0.093
                                                 (0.119)                  (0.125)
OrderXStdStar                                                                                     -0.041                  0.132
                                                                                                 (0.160)                 (0.329)
StdStarRating                                                                                    0.172**                  0.050
                                                                                                 (0.068)                 (0.179)
Constant                                        0.978***                 0.889***                 0.759                   0.002
                                                 (0.320)                  (0.230)                (0.542)                 (0.758)
Observations                                       784                      784                    168                     168
Baseline Controls                                  Yes                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes
Group FE                                           No                       Yes                     No                     Yes
Clustered SE at listing level                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes                     Yes
  Note: This table reports the heterogeneous treatment effects of the experimentally generated orders based on quality measures.
  The dependent variable is the total number of orders net of our own, calculated using the transaction data collected in August
  2018. The baseline controls include the baseline total number of cumulative orders of the store and of the particular product
  listing. "Order" is a dummy variable that equals one for all products in the treatment groups (T1 and T2) and zero for the
  control group. The standardized quality measures are constructed by standardizing individual quality metrics first and taking
  their average within each quality type. See 2.2 for details about the quality metrics. Standard errors are in the parentheses. ***
  indicates significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                            A-11
                                     Table A.10: Seller Actions After Treatment


                                                                     Panel A: Price

                         AdjustPrice                     CutPrice                      RaisePrice                    LogPrice

Treatment            0.009          0.008           0.013          0.013           -0.004         -0.005         -0.000          -0.001
                    (0.018)        (0.016)         (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.015)        (0.012)        (0.007)         (0.006)
Constant           0.055***       0.056***          0.015          0.015         0.040***       0.041***         0.009          0.009*
                    (0.014)        (0.013)         (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.012)        (0.010)        (0.006)         (0.005)
Observations          711            711             711            711             711            711            711             711
Group FE              No             Yes             No             Yes              No            Yes             No             Yes


                                                               Panel B: Shipping Cost

                   AdjustShippingCost               CutShippingCost              RaiseShippingCost              LogShippingCost

Treatment            -0.016         -0.019          0.004          -0.001          -0.020         -0.020         -0.020          -0.019
                    (0.032)        (0.028)         (0.026)        (0.024)         (0.023)        (0.022)        (0.036)         (0.037)
Constant           0.264***       0.266***        0.137***       0.140***        0.116***       0.116***          0.016           0.015
                    (0.026)        (0.022)         (0.020)        (0.019)         (0.018)        (0.017)        (0.029)         (0.029)
Observations          768            768             768            768             768            768             768             768
Group FE               No            Yes             No             Yes              No            Yes             No              Yes


                                   Panel C: Product Description and Introduction of New Listings

                        ChangeTitle                ChangeDescription              HaveNewListings                 LogNewListings

Treatment            0.001          0.000           -0.007         -0.010          -0.005         -0.004         -0.092         -0.092
                    (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.080)        (0.067)
Constant            0.020**        0.021**        0.078***       0.080***        0.973***       0.972***       3.043***       3.043***
                    (0.008)        (0.009)         (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.063)        (0.052)
Observations          769            769             769            769             764            764            764            764
Group FE              No             Yes              No            Yes              No            Yes             No            Yes

  Note: This table presents regression results on sellers' responses after treatment using the experiment sample. AdjustPrice is
  a dummy that equals one for listings that have adjusted their prices within 13 weeks after treatment. CutPrice, RaisePrice,
  AdjustShippingCost, CutShipingCost, RaiseShippingCost are dummy variables defined in a similar way. ChangeTitle is a dummy
  that equals one for listings that have updated their product titles within the 13 weeks after treatment. ChangeDescription is a
  dummy that equals one for listings that have updated their product descriptions within the 13 weeks after treatment; and a set
  of descriptions include website pictures, pattern type, material, fit, gender, sleeve length, collar, clothing length, item type, color,
  etc. HaveNewListings is dummy that equals one for a listing if the store to which it belongs has introduced new listings within
  13 weeks after treatment; and LogNewListings is the log number of those new listings. Standard errors are in the parentheses.
  *** indicates significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.




                                                                A-12
B     Details on Data and the Experiment
B.1    Measuring Service, Shipping and Product Quality
In order to examine the relationship between quality and growth dynamics in the presence of search and
information frictions, we collect a rich set of quality measures on service, shipping and product via (i)
direct communication with the sellers and (ii) actual purchases of the products. For each t-shirt variety
(of the same design), our quality grading is conducted on all small listings, all medium-size listings with
sales between 6 and 50, and the superstar listing (with the largest sales quantity of the variety).
Service Quality. First, we visited the homepage of each store and sent the following message via the
platform to engage in pre-transaction service (i.e., inquiry about a particular product):
"Hi, I am wondering if you could help me choose a size that fits my kid, who is 5 years old, 45lbs and
about 4 feet. I would also like to know a bit more about the quality of the t-shirt. Are the colors as
shown in the picture? Will it fade after washing? What is the material content by the way? Does
it contain 100% cotton? The order is a little urgent; how soon can you send the good? Would it be
possible to expedite the shipping and how much would that cost? Thanks in advance!"
We then constructed a measure of service quality based on whether the message was replied to within
two days, which was true for 69% of the listings.
Shipping Quality. To capture the quality of shipping, we recorded the date of purchase, the date
of shipment, the date of delivery, carrier name, and the condition of package. The numbers of days
between the date of purchase and the date of shipping, the number of days between the date of shipping
and the date of delivery, whether the package was delivered successfully, and whether the package was
broken upon delivery are used as alternative measures of shipping quality. The medium numbers of days
between purchase and shipping and between shipping and delivery are 3 and 12, respectively. Again,
there are considerable variations, especially in sellers' turnaround to ship the products.
Product Quality. We worked with a large local consignment store of children's clothing in North
Carolina to inspect and grade the quality of each t-shirt. The owner has over 30 years of experience in
the clothing retail business and was invited to grade the quality of the t-shirts.
    Each t-shirt was given an anonymous identification number and the owner was asked to grade the
t-shirt on 9 quality dimensions, following standard grading criteria used in the textile and garment
industry as shown in Panel A of Figure 2. These dimensions include obvious quality defect, fabric
durability, fabric softness, wrinkle test, seams (straightness and neatness), outside stray threads, inside
loose stitches, pattern smoothness, and trendiness. Most of these metrics, except trendiness, capture
differences across t-shirts that are vertical in nature. For example, at equal prices, consumers would
prefer T-shirts with more durable fabric, straight seams, and no loose stray threats. The quality
examiner grades each t-shirt along the first dimension based on a 0 or 1 scale, and along the other eight
dimensions based on a 1 to 5 scale, with higher numbers denoting higher quality. The identification
system ensured that the examiner had no information on the purchase price, popularity, and retailer of
the t-shirts and whether the t-shirts belonged to our treatment or control group.


                                                    B-13
      In addition, the examiner was asked to price each t-shirt based on her willingness to pay and
willingness to sell, respectively. These two additional metrics would reflect not only product quality but
also local consumer preferences assessed based on the examiner's retail experience.
      T-shirts within the same variety were grouped together for assessment to make sure the grading
could better capture within-variety variations. The examiner also conducted two rounds of evaluation
that took place several weeks apart to ensure consistency in grading. Panel B of Figure 2 shows examples
of the grading and variations across different quality dimensions.
      The mean scores vary from 2.6 to 4.2 across different quality metrics. On average, t-shirts scored
the worst on inside stray threads and the best on straight seams. Dimensions that record the greatest
variations in scores are outside and inside stray threads and pattern smoothness within t-shirt varieties,
and pattern smoothness, trendiness, and outside stray threads across varieties.


B.2      The Review Treatments
In our randomized experiment, we group small listings into three groups of different order and review
treatments: a control group C without any order and review treatment, T1 which receives 1 order
randomly generated by the research team and a star rating, T2 which receives 1 order and 1 detailed
review on shipping and product quality in addition to the star rating.
      To generate the content of the product and shipping reviews, we use the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
topic model in natural language processing to analyze past reviews and construct the messages based
on the identified key words. Specifically, the following reviews were provided (randomly) to listings in
T2:
Product Quality:

      · "Great shirt! Soft, dense material, quality is good; color matching the picture exactly, and I am
        happy with the design; no problem after washing. My kid really likes it. Thank you!"

      · "Well-made shirt. It was true to size. The material was very soft and smooth. My kid really likes
        the design. I am overall satisfied with it."

      · "This shirt is nice and as seen in the photo. It fits my kid pretty well. The material is quite
        sturdy and colorfast after washing."

Shipping Quality:

      · "The shipping was pretty good. Package arrived within the estimated amount of time and ap-
        peared intact on my porch."

      · "I am pleased with the shipping. It was fast and easily trackable online. The delivery was right
        on time and the package appeared without any scratches."

      · "Fast delivery and convenient pickup, everything is smooth, shirt came in a neat package, not
        wrinkled. Thank you!"

                                                       B-14
   We leave positive reviews to all listings unless there are obvious quality defect or shipping problems,
in which case no review is provided. Of all the orders placed, about 8 percent have obvious quality
defect or shipping issue.




                                                  B-15
C        Baseline Model
We focus on a single product segment (e.g., children's t-shirts). On the supplier side, we assume that
the platform features N single-product sellers in the market, without entry or exit. Seller i is endowed
with an initial visibility v (s0                             0
                               i ), where cumulative orders si is assumed to be zero for all sellers in our
baseline setup.30
                                                  v0 = (v 0 , ..., v 0 ),

we restrict the function v (.) such that v 0  R++ for all i  N . We denote the cumulative orders vector
at the beginning of period t by st = (st         t
                                       1 , ..., sN ).
       On the consumer side, we assume that there is one consumer arriving at the market each period t
and purchase from one seller. The probability that the consumer buys from seller i depends on seller
i's visibility relative to those of other sellers at the beginning of period t. Specifically,
                                                                             t
                                                                            vi
                                          P st+1 = st + et
                                                         n =                N
                                                                                      .
                                                                                  t
                                                                            j =1 vj


We follow Drinea et al. (2002) and Mitzenmacher, Oliveira, and Spencer (2004) to assume that the
visibility takes the functional form
                                                 v (st            t 
                                                     i ) = (s0 + si )

where s0 can be an arbitrarily small positive number, and  governs the sensitivity of each seller's
visibility to its cumulative orders.
       Given each seller's cumulative orders, it is straightforward to define their corresponding market
share vector at the beginning of each period t as

                                                mt = (mt         t
                                                       1 , ..., mN ),

                  st
where mt
       i =       N
                   i
                      t   . Drinea et al. (2002) and Mitzenmacher, Oliveira, and Spencer (2004) show that 
                 i=1 si
impacts the limiting distribution of seller's market share. First, when  < 1, the probability of a seller
making a sales increases less than proportionally with the seller's cumulative orders and the seller's
visibility advantage dissipates over time. As a result, the limiting market share distribution tends to be
uniform.
       Second, when  > 1, the probability of a seller making a sales increases more than proportionally
with its cumulative orders. This amplifies its initial advantage in visibility over time. Thus, one seller
will eventually obtain monopoly; that is, there exists a time after which all subsequent consumers buy
from just one seller.
       Finally, when  = 1, the process of cumulative orders st              t=1,2,...
                                                                                          follows a Polya urn process. When t
goes to infinity, the limiting distribution of market shares is a Dirichlet distribution where the parameters
  30
    More generally, we can allow for any positive number of s0
                                                             i to accommodate potential spillovers from a seller's other
previous platform activities.




                                                          C-16
only depend on s0 . Specifically,

                                         d
                                    mt  Dir. (s0 , ..., s0 ), as t  .

The above comparison suggests that the case  = 1 is the most aligned with the market share distribution
observed in our sample. This is further confirmed by the experimental evidence which suggests that
initial demand shocks can play a significant role in sellers' future performance.
   Define the vector of order statistics of market shares mt as

                                         ~ t  mt
                                         m                    t
                                               (1) , . . . , m(N ) ,


where mt  (i) is the i-th largest value among all the sellers' market shares in period t. Assuming that the
initial visibility s0 is small and that the total number of sellers N is fairly large, m~ t can be showed to
converge to a Poisson-Dirichlet distribution that is completely determined by   N · s0 . Intuitively,
this result suggests that only the relative magnitude of N and s0 matters for the limiting market share
distribution. Therefore, we fix the number of sellers at N = 1000 and estimate s0 as a model parameter.




                                                   C-17
D      Details on the Simulation Procedure
We implement the Method of Simulated Moments according to the following procedure.

D.1     Recover Marginal Cost
In the first step, We use the data distributions of price, review, and cumulative orders to recover the
distribution of costs, Fc , relying on the set of first order conditions from the sellers' static pricing problem
                                                                                              Di
that is described in section 5.2. We simulate demand Di (p, r, s) and demand derivative       pi (p, r, s)   based
on equation (3) and (5).

D.2     Initialize Sellers in the Market
We initialize the market by setting the cumulative orders of sellers at 0 and the visibility of sellers at v0 =
s0 > 0. In addition to the marginal distribution of costs FC obtained in step D.1 and the standard normal
marginal distribution of quality, we use the Gaussian Copula to model their dependence. Specifically,
we draw the tuple (q, c) for each seller according to the following steps:

    1. Draw a vector Z from the multivariate standard normal distribution with correlation ,

                                          Z1                 0      1 
                                                   N                          .
                                          Z2                 0       1

    2. Calculate the standard normal CDF of Z:

                                            U1 = (Z1 ),      U2 = (Z2 ).


    3. Transform the CDF to quality and cost values using their marginal distributions:

                                     -1
                            cdraw = FC  (U1 ),   qdraw = -1 (U2 ) = -1 ((Z2 )) = Z2 .


    After drawing the cost and quality for each seller, we solve their static pricing problem to set the
initial prices.

D.3     Simulate One Period
In each period, we use the weighted sampling without replacement to generate the consumer's search
sample of size K and draw idiosyncratic preference  from the I.I.D. type I extreme value distribution.
Based on the average reviews, we calculate the expected quality and the expected utility of purchasing
from each seller in the search sample. Then, we simulate the purchasing decision, the realized experience
for the consumer, and the review he/she leaves. At the end of each period, we update the cumulative
orders and the average review for the seller that has made a new sales. In addition, we allow the sellers


                                                     D-18
to update their prices by solving the static pricing problem at the frequency that matches with the
observed frequency of price adjustment.

D.4    Simulate Moments
Starting from the initialized market, we repeat step D.3 for T = 10000 times so that the market share
based on cumulative orders reaches an invariant distribution. Then, we simulate forward for another
T periods to produce moments from a stabilized market. Specifically, we calculate the distribution of
cumulative revenue for the sellers, the regression coefficient of log price and quality, and the regression
coefficient of the market share of cumulative orders on quality in the final period, i.e. t = T + T .
And we calculate the dependence of seller's new order on cumulative orders using simulated data from
period T + 1 to T + T .

D.5    Weighting Matrix and Objective Function
We bootstrap our data sample moments 1000 times and construct the weighting matrix W . The
objective function used for optimization is

                                      1
                               Q() = - (g0 - m ()) W (g0 - m ()) ,
                                      2

where g0 is the data moments vector, m () is the simulated moments vector based on m = 100
simulations, and  = (s0 , , , K,  ) is the vector of parameters.




                                                  D-19
