                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE COMPARATIVE IMPACT OF CASH TRANSFERS AND A PSYCHOTHERAPY
         PROGRAM ON PSYCHOLOGICAL AND ECONOMIC WELL-BEING

                                      Johannes Haushofer
                                         Robert Mudida
                                       Jeremy P. Shapiro

                                      Working Paper 28106
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28106


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank the participants for their time; Tilman Graff, Magdalena Larreboure, Esther Owelle,
and Michala Riis-Vestergaard for excellent research assistance; the staff of the Busara Center for
Behavioral Economics; and the staff of the NGO delivering the intervention, for fruitful
collaboration and comments. We thank Victoria Baranov, Barbara Biasi, Chris Blattman,
Michelle Craske, Julian Jamison, Crick Lund, Joanna Maselko, Petra Moser, Robert Östling,
Miranda Wolpert, and seminar and conference participants at the World Bank, BREAD, St.
Andrews, LSE, Tilburg, Michigan, University of Pennsylvania, University of Connecticut,
Northeastern University, UCLA, and Bocconi, for comments. This study was funded by grants to
Jeremy Shapiro by the Gates Foundation and an Anonymous Donor, and by Princeton University.
IRB approval was obtained from Princeton University (protocol no. 7375) and the Kenya Medical
Research Institute (Non-KEMRI protocol no. 531). The study was pre-registered at https://
www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3928. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Johannes Haushofer, Robert Mudida, and Jeremy P. Shapiro. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Comparative Impact of Cash Transfers and a Psychotherapy Program on Psychological
and Economic Well-being
Johannes Haushofer, Robert Mudida, and Jeremy P. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 28106
November 2020
JEL No. C93,D90,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the economic and psychological effects of a USD 1076 PPP unconditional cash
transfer, a five-week psychotherapy program, and the combination of both interventions among
5,756 individuals in rural Kenya. One year after the interventions, cash transfer recipients had
higher consumption, asset holdings, and revenue, as well as higher levels of psychological well-
being than control households. In contrast, the psychotherapy program had no measurable effects
on either psychological or economic outcomes, both for individuals with poor mental health at
baseline and others. The effects of the combined treatment are similar to those of the cash transfer
alone.

Johannes Haushofer                               Jeremy P. Shapiro
School of Public and International Affairs       Busara Center for Behavioral Economics
Princeton University                             Daykio Plaza
427 Peretsman-Scully Hall                        Nairobi, Kenya
Princeton, NJ 08540                              jeremy.shapiro@busaracenter.org
and Busara Center for Behavioral Economics,
Nairobi, Kenya
and also NBER
haushofer@princeton.edu

Robert Mudida
Strathmore Business School
Nairobi
Kenya
rmudida@strathmore.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28106
    Recent work in economics and psychology has suggested that poverty and
low psychological well-being may mutually reinforce each other (Ridley et al.
2020; Lund et al. 2011). For example, poverty may lead to stress, which
over time can cause mental illness (Hammen 2005; Haushofer and Fehr 2014).
Conversely, poor mental health may affect labor market participation and pro-
ductivity, and thus may exacerbate poverty (Schoenbaum et al. 2002; Biasi,
Dahl, and Moser 2019; Ravensteijn and Schachar 2018). This potential feed-
back loop suggests that interventions that alleviate poverty may be effective
in both reducing poverty and improving mental health. Conversely, interven-
tions that target mental health may improve both mental health itself, and
poverty. In addition, if mental health and poverty are strong complements,
interventions that address both poverty and mental health may be particularly
effective in improving both outcomes.
    Here we compare the individual and joint impact of an unconditional cash
transfer and a psychotherapy program on measures of both economic and psy-
chological well-being. We randomly assigned 5,756 low-income households in
rural Kenya to one of four treatment conditions. 540 households in 60 villages
received an unconditional cash transfer of USD 1,076 PPP (USD 485 nomi-
nal; "CT").1 525 households in 60 different villages were treated with Problem
Management Plus ("PM+"), a mental health intervention delivered by trained
community health workers (CHWs). This program was developed specifically
for low-resource settings by the World Health Organization (WHO), and is
generally considered a flagship psychotherapy intervention for these contexts.
Importantly, it has previously been shown to be effective in improving men-
tal health in Kenya (Bryant et al. 2017).2 A third group of 493 households
in another 53 villages received both cash transfers and PM+ ("CT&PM+").
Comparing outcomes of these groups with a pure control group of 1703 house-
holds in another group of 60 villages allows us to determine the causal impact of

   1
      The PPP rate for Kenya at the time of the study was 46.49. The transfer corresponds
to about 20 months of per capita control group consumption.
    2
      Bryant et al. (2017) report a 0.57 standard deviation (SD) improvement in the General
Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12) among women who had been exposed to gender-based vio-
lence 3 months after they participated in the program as part of a randomized experiment.

                                            2
these interventions. In villages receiving the CT-only and PM+-only interven-
tions, we also surveyed 1,237 and 1,219 non-recipient households, respectively,
allowing us to estimate spillover effects of these interventions at the village
level. In CT&PM+ villages and CT villages, we randomly allocated half of
cash transfer recipients to receiving a lump sum transfer, and the other half a
sequence of 5 weekly transfers, to study the impact of transfer frequency.
    We administered a detailed survey both before the interventions, and about
a year after they ended. The cash transfer was effective in improving both psy-
chological and economic well-being: we find a 20 percent increase in monthly
consumption in cash transfer recipients relative to the control group about a
year after the intervention; a 47 percent increase in asset holdings; and a 26
percent increase in household revenue. An index of psychological well-being
increases by 0.23 standard deviations (SD), and scores on the GHQ-12 men-
tal health questionnaire--a widely used screening instrument for psychiatric
morbidity--improve by 0.16 standard deviations. In contrast, the PM+ in-
tervention affects neither economic nor psychological outcomes after one year:
consumption and asset holdings both increase by 5 percent, and revenue by 9
percent, but these effects are not statistically significant. Similarly, the psy-
chological well-being index is not affected by the PM+ treatment, showing
a non-significant effect of -0.01 SD. The components of the index, such as
psychological distress, happiness, and life satisfaction, also show no treatment
effect.3 Importantly, the PM+ treatment also has no effects on psychological
well-being or mental health amongst those participants who had high psy-
chological distress at baseline. We also find no evidence that PM+ has early
positive effects that dissipate quickly over time: even those participants who
received the program most recently relative to the endline survey (about 7
months prior) show no improvement in psychological well-being at endline.
    Outcomes in the group that received both the cash transfer and the PM+
intervention are similar to those in the group that received only the cash

   3
     We observe a 0.24 SD increase in intimate partner violence (IPV) reports among female
PM+ recipients, but this effect is not significant after adjusting for multiple comparisons,
and is not observed in more alternative measures of IPV that minimize response bias.

                                             3
treatment: asset holdings increase by 41 percent, revenue by 17 percent, and
psychological well-being by 0.27 SD. Consumption shows a somewhat smaller
treatment effect than in the cash-only group, with a non-significant 7 percent
increase, but the 95 percent confidence interval includes increases up to 18
percent. Weekly cash transfers are somewhat more effective in improving
economic outcomes compared to lump-sum transfers, and have similar impacts
as lump-sum transfers on psychological well-being. We find little evidence of
spillovers of either intervention to non-recipient households.
    Thus, our main finding is that after one year, cash transfers have larger
effects on economic and psychological well-being than the PM+ mental health
intervention, which itself produces no improvements relative to control. Impor-
tantly, the per-household cost of the cash transfers was lower than that of the
PM+ intervention. The PM+ intervention is therefore both more expensive
and less effective in affecting our outcomes of interest.4
    What explains the negligible impacts of PM+, even on outcomes which it
specifically targets, such as psychological well-being? First, we were powered
to detect PM+ treatment effects of 0.17 SD on psychological well-being. This
compares favorably to typical effect sizes of psychotherapy on psychological
outcomes, which are around 0.6­0.7 SD (Cuijpers et al. 2010; Cuijpers et al.
2013), and to the previously reported effect of PM+ of 0.57 SD (Bryant et al.
2017). Thus, lack of power is unlikely to explain our findings. To further
confirm this claim, we use an approach based on Bayesian statistics which is
not commonly employed in field experiments, but which can provide useful
information. We ask: What is the probability that the observed null effect of
PM+ reflects a true underlying null effect? This probability is given by the
negative predictive value (NPV), defined as the share of null observations that
reflect true null effects, rather than false negatives. We show that even with
a 90 percent prior in favor of its effectiveness, the post-study probability that
PM+ produces effects larger than 0.40 SD in our setting is only 10 percent.
   4
      If only marginal costs of the PM+ program are considered, i.e. per-session payments
to the CHWs without any administrative costs, the PM+ intervention may be more cost-
effective for some outcomes if the positive but non-significant point estimates of PM+ are
taken seriously.

                                            4
    Second, we largely rule out experimenter demand effects (i.e. a desire by
participants to give responses that conform to the expectations of the survey-
ors), using an approach proposed by De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth (2018):
when we present participants with explicit hypotheses about what we expect
them to respond to self-report questions about depression, their responses do
not change measurably relative to when they do not receive this information,
suggesting that demand effects do not play an important role in our self-report
measures. Note also that in our setting, demand effects would be likely to in-
crease rather than reduce observe treatment effects.
    Third, notice that the success of the PM+ intervention in a previous study
in Kenya (Bryant et al. 2017) limits the explanatory power of several other
explanations. Bryant et al. (2017) delivered PM+ to urban women who had
experienced gender-based violence, and found improvements in psychological
distress 3 months later. Importantly, the short (5 week) duration of the pro-
gram; its content; and the fact that it is delivered by laypeople were the same
in this previous study, arguing against these variables as explanations for our
null effect. In addition, the implementation of the program in our study was
done by the same NGO as in this previous study in Kenya. Thus, implemen-
tation differences are unlikely to explain the lack of impact.
    The previous study differed in four ways from the present one: it was con-
ducted in an urban rather than a rural setting; impacts were measured after
3 months rather than 1 year; it was delivered to women who had experienced
gender-based violence, rather than a general population sample; and it em-
ployed 23 CHWs to deliver PM+ to 209 participants, while the present study
employed 72 CHWs to deliver PM+ to 1018 participants, possibly resulting
in a loss of fidelity due to scale.5 We find it unlikely that the urban setting
accounts for the positive effects in the earlier study. As mentioned above, the
delay between intervention and endline is also unlikely to explain our null re-
sults, as we observe no detectable effects even for participants who received the
   5
      In a trial of a layperson-delivered psychotherapy for perinatal depression in South
Africa, Lund et al. (2020) attribute their null results to a combination of lack of fidelity of
intervention delivery and lack of competence of non-specialist, inexperienced CHW counsel-
lors.

                                              5
intervention 7 months prior.6 Heterogeneity analysis in our study shows that
PM+ has no effects even for female participants, and for female participants
who experienced high levels of intimate partner violence. Finally, we consider
it unlikely that the intervention was low-fidelity in our setting, because the
same NGO used the same extensive training and supervision protocols they
had developed during the previous study.
    A possible remaining explanation is that the program in the previous study,
even though it was nominally the same as in our study, was delivered with the
explicit goal of addressing gender-based violence. It is conceivable that the
same program may be more effective when it is deployed to solve a specific
problem. This mechanism would also explain the large positive effects of a
similar program after seven years found by Baranov et al. (2020): this program
was geared to alleviate post-partum depression. Similarly, Ghosal et al. (2016)
find an increase in savings and health behavior 15 months after a self-esteem
training for sex workers in India. Here, too, the stigma associated with sex
work provided a clear target for the intervention. Thus, a likely explanation
for the lack of lasting PM+ impacts in this study, despite successes in other
studies, is that the program was delivered as a general-purpose intervention
without a pre-defined problem to address.
    It should be noted that the programs studied by Baranov et al. (2020)
and Ghosal et al. (2016) were also more intensive, with 16 and 8 sessions,
respectively, compared to 5 in PM+. Intensity alone is unlikely to explain
our null effects, because the five sessions of the PM+ program did produce
short-term effects in Bryant et al. (2017). But intensity may combine with
circumscribed intervention goals to produce lasting effects. Thus, the most
successful interventions may be those that are high-intensity and have specific
goals.
    This explanation is also consistent with the results of several other recent
studies which find positive effects of psychological interventions on psycholog-

   6
     It remains possible that the PM+ program had positive effects after 3 months, but that
they had dissipated after 7 months. However, this would have to be a very steep decline,
which we find somewhat implausible.

                                            6
ical and economic outcomes: they either target more circumscribed problems,
or, when they do not, are either more intensive or measure impacts over a
shorter time horizon. For example, McKelway (2020) shows that a nine-session
self-efficacy training in India increases women's labor market participation four
months later; Bernard et al. (2014) find that a single "aspirations" video in-
creases human capital investment in Ethiopia after six months; and Haushofer,
John, and Orkin (2019) show that two short trainings aimed at time prefer-
ences and executive function in Kenya increase drinking water chlorination 3
months later.
    A caveat to this explanation is the closely related study by Blattman, Jami-
son, and Sheridan (2017), who use a similar design as ours to study the effects
of a USD 200 cash transfer and a psychotherapy intervention in Liberia, both
alone and in combination. At short time horizons (several weeks), they find im-
pacts of both interventions on economic and psychological outcomes, including
depression and distress. At a time horizon of one year, neither of the individ-
ual treatments has effects on economic outcomes or depression and distress,
although the combined treatment does. These findings are similar to ours in
that we also find that the psychotherapy program has limited effectiveness af-
ter one year. However, the psychotherapy intervention in Blattman, Jamison,
and Sheridan (2017) was much more intensive than ours, with 3 weekly ses-
sions over 8 weeks; and it aimed to address a specific problem, namely crime
and violence. This study therefore suggests that an even intensive intervention
that targets a specific problem may not be sufficient on its own to generate
lasting psychological and economic effects.7 It therefore remains an open ques-
tion precisely how program intensity and specificity combine to create lasting
impacts.
    Our study also contributes to literatures in economics and psychology that
study the effect of cash transfers on economic and psychological well-being.
In particular, a number of studies have shown that unconditional cash trans-

   7
     The fact that Blattman, Jamison, and Sheridan (2017) find little impact of the cash
transfer after one year may result from the smaller magnitude of the transfers, or differences
in study population and context.

                                              7
fers improve both economic and psychological outcomes in developing coun-
tries, such as Blattman et al. (2016) in Uganda and Baird, De Hoop, and
Özler (2013) in Malawi.8 More generally, economic interventions such as as-
set transfer and ultra-poor graduation programs often have positive impacts
on both economic and psychological outcomes (Bandiera et al. 2017; Baner-
jee et al. 2015; Bedoya et al. 2019). Our study confirms these results, and
suggests that the impact of cash transfers is rather robust across studies and
settings. In fact, with a few exceptions, the impacts of cash transfers on both
economic and psychological outcomes in this study are remarkably similar to
those we reported previously for a similar program in a different region in
Kenya (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). Even within the present study, the
effects of the cash-only treatment arm and the combined cash and PM+ treat-
ment are remarkably similar across most outcomes. Cash therefore appears
to be a robust intervention that reliably improves economic and psychological
well-being.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section I describes the
design and methods of the study. Section II summarizes the analytic approach.
Section III presents results. Section IV concludes.


I.         Design and methods
The design and methods were specified in a pre-analysis plan available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3928 (Haushofer, Riis-Vestergaard,
and Shapiro 2019). An overview of the design is shown in Figure 1, and details
on timing are given in Online Appendix Table A.1.


I.A         Village selection and village randomization
The study was conducted in partnership with the a large international NGO
in Nakuru County in Central Kenya. Nakuru County was selected due to high
levels of poverty, high baseline rates of poor mental health (at baseline, 33

     8
         See Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez (2020) for evidence on limited long-term effects.

                                                8
percent of our sample were classified as suffering from psychological distress;
see Section II.C), and because the NGO already had established an infrastruc-
ture there. They provided a list of villages in the region in which they were
prepared to work. 233 villages were chosen randomly for the study from this
list.9 A map of the treatment area is shown in Figure 2.
     In these 233 villages, we conducted a two-stage randomization: at the vil-
lage level, and at the household level. In the first stage, each village was
assigned to one of four villages types: cash transfers only (CT); PM+ only
(PM+); cash transfers and PM+ (CT&PM+); and pure control (PC). For the
53 CT&PM+ villages, this happened before baseline data collection, and for
the village types, after baseline data collection, with equal numbers among
the remaining 180 villages randomized into each remaining group.10 This ran-
domization was stratified on dichotomized village-level indices of assets, psy-
chological well-being, and prevalence of IPV, as well as on number of surveys,
proportion female, and proportion registered on M-Pesa, a digital payments
platform operated by the mobile provider Safaricom and commonly used in
Kenya.




   9
      The village classifications generally followed Kenyan administrative boundaries. Fol-
lowing internal procedures, the NGO further subdivided larger official village boundaries
into smaller units to ease the logistics of intervention delivery. This affected around 25
percent of villages. The villages were delivered on two different lists: one in October 2016,
and one in January 2017. The first list contained 202 villages. One village from this list was
found to not exist, and one was identified to be overlapping entirely with another village on
the list. These villages were excluded, and the remaining 200 villages were retained. The
second list contained 100 villages. 37 villages from this list were chosen so as to maximize
the geographical distance between them. Among these 237 villages, 4 were randomly se-
lected to be training villages for the community health workers who were to deliver PM+
and excluded from the remainder of the study, leaving us with 233 villages.
   10
      The reason for the selection of CT&PM+ villages before baseline data collection was
that a different number of households was targeted for surveying in these villages compared
to the other village types; we therefore needed to know even before baseline which villages
these would be. More detail follows in the next section. One village was assigned to
the CT&PM+ treatment group after baseline data collection to ensure a total number of
CT&PM+ treatment recipients of approximately 500. This village was selected at random
before the remaining randomization was conducted.

                                              9
I.B     Household selection and household randomization
After village selection and randomization of the 53 villages to the CT&PM+
condition, we conducted a baseline survey. Our target was to survey 10 house-
holds in each of the 53 CT&PM+ villages, which would later all receive treat-
ment; and 30 households in each of the other villages. In the PM+ and CT
villages, these 30 households would later be randomized into 10 treatment and
20 control ("spillover") households; in the PC villages, all 30 would be control
households. As mentioned above, the different number of households targeted
during baseline in the CT&PM+ villages relative to the other village types
explains why these villages were chosen before baseline data collection.
    Household selection within villages proceeded as follows. A community
entry meeting was conducted with village elders, in which they were provided
information about the study. A team of field officers (FOs) was then sent to
each village (3 FOs per village for the CT&PM+ villages, 10 per village for
the other village types). With the help of local guides assigned by the village
elder, the FOs drew up a list of households which met our targeting criterion,
which consisted of living in a house without brick, stone, or metal walls. They
then randomly chose 10 of these households. In all villages except CT&PM+
villages, the FO additionally selected the two eligible households that were
geographically closest to each initial household, for a total of 30 households per
village. This geographical approach to sampling ensured that treatment and
spillover households in each village were in close geographical proximity to each
other. One person in each selected household was chosen as the respondent
and surveyed. If only one person was home, this person was surveyed, and if
more than one person was home the FO surveyed the household head, or if the
household head was not available, whoever greeted the FO at the door (unless
they insisted that another household member was surveyed).11 The survey
respondent in each household later became the recipient of the intervention if
  11
     For 20 percent of households, respondents were coded as belonging to different villages
by village elders vs. the NGO's data. We resolved such cases by assigning such respondents
to the village which was closest to their GPS location. Because this decision was determined
solely by GPS coordinates, it was independent of any other variables, including treatment
status.

                                            10
the household was randomized into treatment. Thus, household, respondent,
and recipient refer to the same person (except for the IPV survey, detailed
below). The FOs were unaware of the village type assigned to each village,
and baseline data is therefore independent of treatment status.
    The respondents surveyed in the baseline survey were then considered for
randomization as follows. We first removed 10 percent of all respondents, strat-
ified by village, to be used as the treatment group in another study on digital
financial services (DFS). This study tested the effects of assisting respondents
with setting up an M-Pesa account, relative to no intervention. Thus, only
respondents who were not already registered on M-Pesa, 28 percent of the
entire sample, were eligible for the DFS study. In total, 514 respondents were
removed from the 233 study villages in this way (523 from the initial sample of
237 villages that includes the four PM+ training villages). Among the remain-
ing respondents, 21 percent were not registered on M-Pesa at baseline; these
households serve as the control group for the DFS study, and form part of
the control group for the present study. In light of this design, we overweight
respondents without M-Pesa accounts in the analysis; details are given below.
    Among the remaining households, we randomly assigned one third in each
of the CT and PM+ villages to "treatment" status, and two thirds to "spillover"
status. This randomization was done within village, and independently of
whether households were chosen with the first 10 households in a village, or as
part of the 20 neighboring households. The randomization was stratified on
dichotomized individual-level indices of assets, psychological well-being, and
prevalence of IPV, as well as on dummies for whether the respondent was
female and whether he/she was registered on M-Pesa. The 10 households in
each CT&PM+ village were all assigned to treatment, and the 30 households
in each PC village were all assigned to control.
    Finally, all CT and CT&PM+ households were randomized into receiving
the CT as either a lump-sum transfer of KES 50,000, or in installments of
KES 10,000 each week for five weeks to match the delivery of PM+. This
randomization was done at the village level, but without further stratification.



                                      11
I.C     Interventions
The interventions were delivered between May 2017 and January 2018 (with
one month's pause in August 2017 due to the Kenyan national elections, and
two weeks' pause in October/November 2017 due to re-election after the first
election results were contested). In each treatment household, the person tar-
geted for the intervention was the main survey respondent, chosen as described
above.

I.C.1   Problem Management Plus (PM+)

Intervention structure PM+ is a psychotherapy intervention based on
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), developed by the WHO for resource-poor
contexts (World Health Organization 2018). It was previously adapted to the
Kenyan context, and a previous randomized experiment in Kenya confirmed
that it reduced psychological distress (Bryant et al. 2017). The intervention
consists of five 90-minute one-on-one sessions over five weeks, with one ses-
sion per week delivered by a CHW. PM+ aims to help the participants reduce
problems that they identify as being of concern to them. The program teaches
five strategies aimed at reducing psychological distress and improving psy-
chological well-being: problem-solving, managing stress, managing problems,
behavioral activation ("get going, keep doing"), and strengthening social sup-
port. Each session has one primary focus: Session 1 orients the client to the
intervention so as to improve engagement, provides education about common
reactions to adversity, and teaches the participant a simple stress management
strategy consisting of breathing exercises. Session 2 addresses a participant-
selected problem through problem-solving techniques, and introduces behav-
ioral activation. Sessions 3 and 4 continue to support participants' application
of problem-solving, behavioral activation, and relaxation exercises, and intro-
duce strategies to strengthen social support. Session 5 reviews the learned
strategies, provides education about retaining treatment gains, and the inter-
vention ends. Each session concludes with 10­20 minutes of the "managing
stress" exercise.


                                      12
Training and supervision The delivery of PM+ was run by a large inter-
national NGO. They hired and trained 2 clinical supervisors and 10 community
health assistants (CHAs), who in turn hired and trained 72 community health
workers. The clinical supervisors were psychologists with Bachelors degrees
in Psychology. The CHAs were level-one staff in Kenya's health care system,
paid by the county government, and trained in medical schools as nutritionists,
pharmacists, public health officers, nurses, or lab technicians.
    The CHWs delivered the PM+ intervention to respondents. They were
volunteers who on average had completed secondary school; their typical oc-
cupations were farming, business, teaching, and casual work. Each CHW
received 9 full days of classroom training by clinical supervisors or CHAs. In
the first training, the 2 clinical supervisors trained 38 CHWs. In the second
training, the CHAs trained 34 CHWs under close supervision by the clinical
supervisors. Classroom training included: information about common mental
health problems (i.e. depression, anxiety, stress); training on the strategies
employed by PM+ for treating psychological distress; basic helping skills; and
role-play. It followed a manual provided by the WHO (World Health Organi-
zation 2018). Following classroom training, each CHW saw at least one client
for five fully supervised training sessions. All of these sessions were attended
by both a clinical supervisor and CHAs. Because there were 72 CHWs, there
were 72 × 5 = 360 such in-field supervised training sessions. These "training
clients" were not included in our study. CHWs were paid KES 700 for each
session of PM+ delivered to one respondent.
    During intervention delivery, quality monitoring was done through super-
visions and fidelity checks. Supervisions were structured as follows: CHWs
met with a clinical supervisor or a CHA for about 2 hours in groups of 4­12
to discuss progress and challenges. 25 percent of the supervisions that were
run by a CHA were also attended by a clinical supervisor to ensure quality.
In the first three months after PM+ training, CHWs participated in weekly
supervisions. In the following three months, supervisions took place biweekly,
followed by monthly supervision in the last three months. Clinical supervisors
also provided supervisions to the CHAs after each cohort (see next section


                                      13
for the definition of cohort), and on occasion when supervision was needed at
other times. They were also available to be consulted in difficult cases, e.g.
when a CHW faced difficulties in the field that surpassed their ability to assist,
such as imminent risk of suicide.
    Fidelity checks were structured as follows: The clinical supervisors ran-
domly attended PM+ sessions 2, 3, and 4 to perform fidelity checks, i.e. en-
sure the PM+ guidelines were followed by the CHWs. Each CHW received
one such check during each cohort, on rare occasions more than one. Dur-
ing fidelity checks, a score was assigned to the CHW; if the score was low,
the supervisor followed up with the CHW, and if no improvement was found
over several rounds, the CHW's contract was terminated. A 2­3 day refresher
training was conducted by the clinical supervisors, with the assistance of the
CHAs, for all CHWs after each cohort, with the length determined by the need
observed during supervisions and fidelity checks.

    Intervention delivery and compliance The program was rolled out
in cohorts, constrained by the number of CHWs available at a given time in
each of the two sub-locations of Nakuru County in which the study took place
(Naivasha and GilGil). Each CHW treated 3­4 respondents at a time for
a total of five weeks (one session per respondent per week; 3­4 sessions per
CHW per week). All treatment households within a village were treated at the
same time, and the order of villages was randomized. PM+ respondents were
contacted either by phone or at home by the CHW and informed about the
details of the PM+ program. If the respondent consented to enter the program,
the CHW either continued immediately to Session 1 (if contact was in-person
and the respondent was available), or scheduled a start-date. Participation in
the PM+ intervention was voluntary, and participants were free to withdraw
at any time.
    According to the NGO's data, of the 1018 participants randomized into the
PM+ treatment across the PM+ and CT&PM+ treatment arms, 968 (95.1
percent) attended all five sessions of the program. 3 (0.3 percent) attended 3
sessions, 8 (0.8 percent) attended one session, and 39 (3.8 percent) attended no


                                       14
sessions. All of these participants are considered treated for analysis purposes
(intent-to-treat).
    We independently verified these attendance numbers 18 months later by
calling recipients of the PM+ and CT&PM+ treatments and asking them to
recall the intervention. We tried to call all 525 PM+ and all 493 CT&PM+
recipients, and reached 369 PM+ (70 percent) and 400 CT&PM+ participants
(81 percent). Among these, 90 percent of PM+ and 87 percent of CT&PM+
recipients confirmed they received some PM+ sessions. Our phone resurvey
could not confirm the high rates of participants receiving the entire schedule,
with only 35 percent (20 percent) of PM+ (CT&PM+) subjects remembering
having received all five sessions. The median reported number of sessions
received was 4 and 3 for PM+ and CT&PM+ recipients, respectively.

I.C.2   Cash transfers (CT)

Cash transfers were delivered and overseen by Busara Center for Behavioral
Economics. In the CT&PM+ treatment group, cash transfers were made one
month after the beginning of the PM+ program on average (Online Appendix
Table A.1 and Figure A.1). Before sending the respondents a cash transfer,
they were contacted over the phone or in person by a Busara field officer,
and informed that they had been entered into a lottery and their name had
been selected to receive KES 50,000 (USD 485 nominal, USD 1076 PPP at
the time of the study). This transfer corresponded to about 20 months of per
capita consumption (using the monthly per capita control group consumption
of USD 52.49 PPP at endline; we did not collect detailed consumption data
at baseline). The field officer emphasized that the cash transfer was entirely
unconditional ("The money is yours to do whatever you like with--we have
no preferences about what you do with the money. You should use it however
you think best."). Consent was obtained before transfers were made. Transfers
were sent using M-Pesa, a mobile money transfer system operated by the
mobile provider Safaricom which allows people to deposit and withdraw money
at numerous locations throughout the country. The majority of respondents
in our sample had personal M-Pesa accounts. Respondents who did not have

                                      15
a personal M-Pesa account (usually due to not owning a phone) were offered
phones which were delivered to their homes, with the retail price (KES 1600)
deducted from their cash transfers. They were guided on how to set up an
M-Pesa account, and later revisited to collect the names and phone numbers
with which they had registered. This information was then cross-checked with
data from Safaricom (which allows checking with name is associated with a
given number), and recipients were told that they would receive the (first)
cash transfer within 5 weeks after this confirmation. Transfers were made
within the appropriate week, conditional on the number and names having
been confirmed before the start of that week.12 Cash transfers were yoked to
PM+ delivery to ensure that timing was matched across treatment groups.
Respondents in CT&PM+ villages were treated simultaneously with both the
CT and PM+ groups. Cash transfers were randomly delivered either as lump-
sum transfers of KES 50,000, or in 5 weekly installments of KES 10,000 each
week for 5 weeks, to match the delivery of PM+. The timing of lump-sum
transfers was randomized within the five-week period of the installments for
the same cohort (e.g. if installments for a cohort started in week 29, lump-sum
transfers within that same cohort were equally likely to happen in weeks 29,
30, 31, 32, or 33). Compliance was high, with 98.1 percent of participants in
the CT and CT&PM+ treatments receiving their transfers according to the
M-Pesa receipts sent to Busara by Safaricom.
    Again we independently verified these numbers 18 months later by call-
ing recipients. As above, we tried to call all 493 CT&PM+ recipients. We
additionally targeted a random subset of 100 households from the CT group.
We reached 400 CT&PM+ households (81 percent) and 89 CT recipients (89
percent). 94 percent of respondents reported no issues receiving their trans-
fers. The remaining 6 percent recalled receiving no transfer or less than the
promised amount. However, 82 percent of respondents who claimed they did
not receive a transfer did in fact receive it, as per Busara's M-Pesa receipts.

  12
     In case of discrepancies between the respondent names and the account names registered
with Safaricom, the respondent was contacted again and the names and numbers were
confirmed until they matched.

                                            16
Busara's records confirmed that 4 respondents did not receive their transfer,
because they either did not consent, had their M-Pesa account suspended, or
did not hold an identification document needed to register with the M-Pesa
platform. Like for PM+, we use intent-to-treat for these participants.


I.D     Data and variables
I.D.1   Survey instruments

A baseline survey was conducted between October 2016 and March 2017, and
an endline survey was conducted between August 2018 and May 2019. Online
Appendix Table A.1 and Figure A.1 show an overview of the time elapsed,
in months, between baseline and intervention start, intervention start/end
and endline, and baseline and endline. The mean delay between the end of
interventions and endline was 12.55 months, with a median of 13 months. The
mean delay between the start of interventions and endline was 13.97 months
(median: 14 months).
    Both at baseline and endline, we conducted two surveys in each house-
hold: a household survey, and an intimate partner violence (IPV) survey. The
household survey contained modules on consumption, food security, assets,
revenue, profits, labor, education, and psychological well-being. The IPV sur-
vey contained questions on the prevalence of IPV, and norms around IPV. The
household survey was given to the main respondent, as described above. At
endline, the same respondent was re-surveyed. Note that this was the same
person who received the intervention(s) in the treatment group. The IPV sur-
vey was given to female respondents who were cohabiting with or married to
a man; and to the female spouses or cohabiting partners of male respondents,
on a different day than the household survey. It was always conducted by a
female FO, who took special care to ensure privacy due to the sensitive nature
of the questions.




                                     17
I.D.2   Variables

The full list of outcome variables is shown in Online Appendix Section I.
Following our pre-analysis plan, we grouped our outcomes into four primary
categories, and five secondary categories. The primary outcome categories
were consumption, asset holdings, revenue, psychological well-being, and inti-
mate partner violence. The secondary outcome categories were food security,
profits, labor, and education. For each category, we computed a pre-specified
index variable. In the case of monetary variables, this was usually the sum
over a number of component variables, such as total household consumption
or total asset holdings. For other variables it was a standardized weighted
average following Anderson (2008). Monetary variables are winsorized at 1
percent and 99 percent.
    Our primary outcomes are the following variables:

  1. Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP): This variable
     measures total monthly expenditure on non-durables per capita, and the
     value of food consumption from own production, in USD PPP, dividing
     total household consumption by the number of household members (i.e.
     considering children as full adult equivalents). Sub-categories are food
     consumption (from own production and food bought); temptation goods;
     personal and household items; housing repair and improvement; and
     education expenditure, medical care, and social activities. The survey
     contained 134 food expenditure categories (recall horizon one week), 56
     common non-food expenditure categories, such as airtime and firewood
     (recall horizon one month), and 9 low-frequency expenditure categories,
     such as weddings and school fees (recall horizon 12 months).

  2. Total value of assets owned (USD PPP): This variable measures the total
     value in USD PPP of assets owned by the household. Sub-categories
     are productive assets, such as wheelbarrows and farming tools; vehicles,
     such as bicycles and motorbikes; furniture; household durables, such
     as cell phones and kerosene stoves; livestock; and financial assets, i.e.
     savings and debt. The survey covered a total of 30 asset categories,

                                     18
  and measures current value as estimated by the respondent (rather than
  purchase price).

3. Monthly household revenue (USD PPP): This variable measures total
   household revenue in USD PPP. Sub-categories are revenue from live-
   stock (e.g. milk and meat sales); income from crop sales; enterprise
   income (e.g. from kiosks); and wage income (e.g. from salaried jobs or
   casual labor).

4. Subjective well-being index (standard deviations): This variable is a
   standardized weighted average of several individual scales and questions:
   the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12; Goldberg and Blackwell
   1970), a 12-item screener for general psychiatric conditions; the Per-
   ceived Stress Scale (PSS; 4 items, Cohen, Kamarck, and Mermelstein
   1983); and the Happiness and Life Satisfaction questions from the World
   Values Survey (WVS). The standardized weighted average is computed
   following Anderson (2008), i.e. by overweighting variables which are less
   correlated with others and therefore presumably add more information.
   The WHODAS Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0, which measures dif-
   ficulties due to health conditions and is thus a function assessment, was
   analyzed as an additional, non-primary outcome that did not enter the
   index. The GHQ-12 has been used extensively to assess psychiatric mor-
   bidity in low- and middle-income countries, including Kenya, where it
   has been validated and used in previous randomized controlled trials,
   including that by Bryant et al. on PM+ (Abubakar and Fischer 2012;
   Getanda, Papadopoulos, and Evans 2015; Bryant et al. 2017). The PSS
   and WVS items have also been previously validated and used in Kenya
   (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016; Haushofer et al. 2020), and the same is
   true for the WHODAS (Bryant et al. 2017; Cresswell et al. 2020). The
   scales had good properties in our sample, with Cronbach's alpha values
   of 0.88 for GHQ-12, 0.60 for PSS, and 0.78 for WHODAS.

5. Intimate partner violence index (standard deviations): This variable is
   a standardized weighted average of two indices, one for physical and

                                   19
one for sexual violence. The physical violence index is a standardized
weighted average of 9 variables measuring the frequency over the pre-
ceding 6 months of various forms of violence perpetrated by the male
intimate partner (usually the husband) against the female respondent,
and against any children under 12 in the household. The sexual violence
index is a standardized weighted average of variables measuring the fre-
quency of rapes and other forced sexual acts committed by the intimate
partner against the respondent over the preceding 6 months.
In explicit self-reports of IPV, we may worry about over- or under-
reporting due to demand effects, e.g. arising from the perceived de-
sirability of a particular response. We therefore supplement the explicit
self-reports of IPV with two additional measures. First, an "envelope
task" presented participants with 3 envelopes, of which two contained
a yellow and one a red piece of paper. Participants were instructed to
shuffle the envelopes and, without the surveyor watching, choose one
and privately observe the color of the piece of paper it contained. They
were then given two yes/no questions: one which they were supposed
to answer if their envelope contained yellow paper, and another if their
envelope contained red paper. Crucially, because the surveyor did not
know the color of the paper, they did not know to which question the
participant was responding. There were two rounds of this task. In the
first round, the yellow question was: "In the past six months, have you
ever visited a hospital or clinic?" The red question was: "In the past 6
months, has your husband ever beaten you, slapped you, or acted vio-
lently against you?" In the second round, the red question was: "In the
past 6 months, have you purchased any insurance or fertilizer?" The yel-
low question was: "In the past 6 months, has your husband ever forced
you to have sexual intercourse with him even when you did not want to?"
In the analysis, we simply record the number of "yes" responses, knowing
that in expectation half of them are in response to the non-sensitive and
the other half in response to the sensitive question. Decreases in violence
would be reflected as decreases in the share of yes responses.


                                 20
     Second, in the "smiley task", participants were presented with a sheet of
     paper with a happy face and a sad face on it, and asked to point to the
     sad face if the husband had beaten, slapped, or acted violently against
     them; and if the husband ever forced them to have sexual intercourse
     with him even when they did not want to in the past 6 months. We
     record whether participants point to the sad face, separately for each of
     these two questions.
     The envelope task was presented first; the smiley task second; and the
     explicit questions last.

Our secondary outcomes were defined as follows:

  1. Food security (standard deviations): This variable is a standardized
     weighted average of 6 variables measuring food security, such as the
     frequency over the preceding month of skipping meals, borrowing food
     from others, and eating protein.

  2. Profits (USD PPP): This variable measures total household profits, i.e.
     revenue minus costs, from livestock, crops, and enterprises. Revenue
     is usually from sales, and costs include fodder, veterinary care, seeds,
     fertilizer, hired labor, etc.

  3. Labor supply (hours): This variable measures the hours spent per week
     per capita on income-generating activities, including working in agricul-
     ture and tending animals, working in a non-farm or livestock business,
     and working for others. The per capita figure is obtained by dividing
     the total number of hours supplied by the household by the number of
     adults (older than 18) in the household.

  4. Education (standard deviations): This variable is a standardized weighted
     average of the proportion of children enrolled in school; the average days
     of school missed per child in the preceding 30 days; the average spending
     on school expenses per child in the preceding 12 months; and the average
     time spent studying or in school per child in the preceding 7 days. The


                                     21
       variable is defined only for households with school-age children (between
       5 and 19 years old).

The questionnaire contained a number of additional variables which were not
pre-specified to be primary or secondary. Definitions for these variables are
shown in the Online Appendix.

I.D.3    Data quality

Surveys were administered on tablet computers using the SurveyCTO sur-
vey software. Data integrity was monitored through a series of checks: high-
frequency checks, which checked incoming data for completeness on a weekly
basis; back-checks, in which all survey respondents were re-surveyed within
a week of the original survey to confirm a subset of presumably immutable
responses, such as age or number of children; random spot checks in the field,
i.e. visits and monitoring of surveys by supervisors; GPS checks, in which
Google Earth was used to confirm the existence of a dwelling at the GPS lo-
cations recorded in the survey; and M-Pesa confirmation, which consisted of
confirming with Safaricom that the name of the respondent matched the name
of the M-Pesa account. Further details are given in Online Appendix Section
A.1.


II.     Econometric specifications
II.A     Direct and spillover effects
We use the following ANCOVA framework as our primary specification (McKen-
zie 2012):

          yvi = 0 + 1 CT vi + 2 P M Pvi + 3 CT &P M Pvi + 4 DF Svi
                                                                             (1)
             + 5 SpillCTiv + 6 SpillP M P +  Xvi + yviB + vi
   Here, yvi is an outcome for household i in village v ; CTvi , P M Pvi , and
CT &P M Pvi are indicator variables for whether household i in village v re-


                                       22
ceived a cash transfer, PM+, or both, respectively. SpillCTvi and SpillP M Pvi
are indicator variables for whether the household is a spillover household in
either cash transfer or PM+ villages. DF Svi is an indicator for whether the
household received an incentive to register for a mobile money account.13 Xvi
is a vector of stratification variables, including dummies for being female,
having M-Pesa access, and being above the median at baseline on the psy-
chological well-being index, the asset index, the IPV index, and village size.
yviB is the outcome variable at baseline; it was not collected for all outcomes,
in which case it is omitted. Where baseline data was collected but is miss-
ing for some observations, we code the missing value as zero and include a
separate dummy variable indicating such replacements. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. The omitted category is households living in
pure control villages who did not receive an incentive to register for a mo-
bile money account. Note that the DF S treatment selected only households
without M-Pesa access at baseline, and therefore including this indicator ef-
fectively removes a number of respondents without M-Pesa at baseline from
the sample. We therefore overweight respondents without M-Pesa accounts
accordingly. The coefficients 1 , 2 , and 3 identify the treatment effects of
the cash transfer, PM+, and combined intervention, respectively, relative to
control. To test whether the interventions are complements, we test whether
the sum of the treatment effects of the two individual interventions is smaller
than that of the combined intervention, 1 + 2 < 3 . The coefficients 5 and
6 test whether cash transfers and PM+, respectively, have spillover effects.
    To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we report False Discovery Rate
(FDR) adjusted standard errors, correcting across our five primary outcome
variables. We do not correct standard errors for multiple hypothesis testing for
our secondary outcomes; for the individual variables that make up the primary
and secondary outcomes; and for all other variables in the survey.




  13
       We do not report this coefficient; it is the subject of a separate study.

                                                23
II.B    Baseline balance and attrition
To test for baseline balance, we estimate our standard treatment effect equa-
tion 1 using baseline variables as outcomes (omitting baseline controls on the
right-hand side). The baseline variables are constructed as follows: The base-
line asset index is a standardized weighted average of responses to a shortened
asset module administered at baseline. This module asked respondents if their
household owns their home, land, a bed, mattresses, cell phones, cattle, oxen,
bulls, goats, sheep, and savings. The baseline psychological well-being in-
dex is a standardized weighted average of scores on the GHQ-12, stress, and
WHODAS questionnaires. The baseline indices on IPV and justifiability of
violence are constructed in the same way as their endline equivalents. Finally,
we include variables for gender, age, and M-Pesa access at baseline.
    To test for differential attrition, we estimate the following model:



    yvi = 0 + 1 CT vi + 2 P M Pvi + 3 CT &P M Pvi + X vi + yviB + vi

Here, yvi is an indicator for participant i in village v completing both surveys.
The coefficients on CTvi , P M Pvi , and CT &P M Pvi therefore measure differen-
tial attrition across these treatment groups relative to pure control. Standard
errors are clustered at the village level. To assess within-village differences
in attrition, we include village-level fixed effects and restrict the sample to
cash-only and PM+-only villages. Standard errors are not clustered.


II.C    Heterogeneous treatment effects
We test whether the effects of our treatments vary along the following pre-
specified dimensions: baseline asset holdings; baseline intimate partner vio-
lence index; gender of recipient; and baseline psychological distress. For re-
cipient gender, the dimension of heterogeneity is a dummy variable for the
main survey respondent being female. For the other dimensions, we create
an indicator variable based on a median split. We then estimate estimate the


                                       24
differential impact by including a dummy for the interactant, and interaction
terms with all treatment arms, in the main specification (see Online Appendix
Section D for details). Baseline psychological distress is measured as an in-
dex composed of the WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS) 2.0
and the GHQ-12, which are the measures used by the implementing NGO to
diagnose psychological distress. In addition to the pre-specified median split
cutoff on this measure, we also conduct an exploratory analysis in which we
use the cutoff according to which the implementing NGO diagnoses individuals
as having high distress. According to this criterion, individuals are classified
as having high distress if their WHODAS score is greater than 2, which is the
case for 40 percent of our participants at baseline; and having a GHQ-12 score
above 16, which is the case for 30 percent of baseline respondents. Together,
33 percent of participants would have been classified as distressed at baseline
according to the NGO's criteria.


II.D    Demand effects
Our questionnaires rely on self-reports to measure treatment effects. This
raises the concern that participants may alter their responses to "please" the
experimenters, potentially leading to biased treatment effect estimates. To
investigate whether such "experimenter demand effects" play a role in our
study, we use the method proposed by De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth (2018).
This method bounds demand effects by deliberately inducing them through
"demand treatments". In these treatments, participants are explicitly told
what the experimenters expect of them. We delivered such demand treatments
to all respondents in the pure control group at endline, for three questions
pertaining to physical violence, sexual violence, and depression. Each pure
control respondent was allocated to either a "positive demand" or "negative
demand" treatment. Respondents in the "positive demand" treatment are
asked the following questions:

  1. "We will now ask you questions about how your partner has acted towards
     you in the last 6 months. We hypothesize that people who participated

                                      25
       in this study and received the same treatment as you will give higher
       responses to these questions than others. How many times per month
       did your husband beat you, slap you or act violently against you?"

  2. As above, but with the final question being: "How many times per month
     did your husband physically force you to have sexual intercourse with
     him even when you did not want to?"

  3. "I will read out a list of some of the ways you may feel or behave. Please
     indicate how often you have felt this way during the past week, using the
     following scale: Rarely or none of the time (<1 day); Some or little of the
     time (1-2 days); Occasionally or a moderate amount of time (3-4 days);
     All of the time (5-7 days). We hypothesize that people who participated
     in this study and received the same treatment as you will give higher
     responses to these questions than others. I felt depressed."

Respondents in the "negative demand" treatment were asked the same ques-
tions, except that the word "higher" was replaced with "lower". The main idea
behind the method by De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth (2018) is experimenter
demand is not a major issue if the "positive demand" and "negative demand"
responses are similar. We test this by averaging the responses to the positive
and negative demand questions and testing the difference in means using a
t-test.


III.     Results
III.A     Baseline balance and attrition
We report estimates of baseline balance in Online Appendix Table A.2, and
of attrition in Online Appendix Table A.3. We find no significant differences
between these outcomes at baseline between any of our treatment groups and
the control group. For the spillover groups, two coefficients are significant
at the 10 percent level (psychological well-being was somewhat higher in the
PM+ spillover group compared to control, and the justifiability of violence

                                      26
somewhat lower in the cash spillover group compared to control). However,
these differences are weak and the number of tests conducted relatively large,
and we therefore do not regard this as evidence of imbalance. Our random-
ization thus appears to have been successful in creating comparable treatment
groups.
    Online Appendix Table A.3 shows that we had 5 percent attrition between
baseline and endline in pure control and PM+ villages, and 4 percent in cash
and "Cash & PM" villages. The average completion rate of the endline sur-
vey for participants who completed baseline was 96 percent. These levels
of attrition are low and not statistically different from each other. Compar-
ing treatment to spillover households within cash-only and PM+-only villages
(columns (2) and (3)) also shows no differential attrition within treatment
villages. Thus, we had low attrition overall, and it was not differential.


III.B     Treatment effects on primary and secondary out-
          comes
We next turn to treatment effects on our primary outcomes of interest, shown
in Table 1 and Figure 3. Detailed tables are shown in Online Appendix Section
B.1. Column (1) of Table 1 shows the pure control group mean and standard
deviation; for standardized variables, the mean is zero and the standard devia-
tion 1 by definition. The cash transfer treatment has positive and statistically
significant effects on 4 of our 5 primary outcomes, shown in column (2): con-
sumption, asset holdings, revenue, and subjective well-being. The effect on
consumption is a USD 10.51 PPP increase relative to a control group mean of
52.49, corresponding to a 20 percent increase. Similarly, the effect on assets is
an increase of USD 262.06 PPP relative to a control group mean of 553.16, or
a 47 percent increase. Revenue increases by USD 35.18 PPP per month, a 26
percent increase relative to the control group mean of USD 135.48 PPP. The
subjective well-being index increases by 0.23 standard deviations (SD). All of
these effects are significant at the 1 percent level using both naïve and FDR-
adjusted p-values. We observe no significant effect on the intimate partner


                                       27
violence index, which decreases by 0.05 SD.
    The PM+ treatment, shown in column (3), has no significant effects on
any of our primary outcomes except for intimate partner violence, where we
observe an increase (i.e. a worsening of violence) of 0.24 SD. However, two
caveats apply to this effect. First, it does not survive FDR correction. Second,
as shown in Online Appendix Table B.5, when we use the envelope and smiley
tasks to measure prevalence of IPV, we observe no significant increases in IPV.
Thus, the impacts of the PM+ program on IPV are inconclusive. Nevertheless,
future work should take seriously the possibility that PM+ might increase IPV,
and attempt to provide more robust evidence and study possible mechanisms.
    The point estimates on consumption, assets, and revenue are positive, with
a 5 percent increase in both consumption and asset holdings, and a 9 precent
increase in household revenue. However, these effects are not statistically
different from zero using both naïve and FDR-adjusted p-values. Using the 95
percent confidence intervals, we can rule out treatment effects larger than 18
percent on consumption, 21 percent on asset holdings, 24 percent on revenue,
and 0.11 SD percent on psychological well-being. Column (5) reports the p-
values testing the difference between the effects of the cash treatment and the
PM+ treatment; all tests are statistically significant, suggesting that the cash
treatment had significantly larger positive effects than the PM+ treatment.
    Column (4) reports the treatment effect of the combined cash and PM+
treatment. These treatment effects are both numerically and statistically very
similar to those of the cash-only treatment; for example, asset holdings in-
creases by USD 227.61 PPP in the cash & PM+ group, a 41 percent increase
relative to the control group mean, and similar to the USD 262.06 PPP treat-
ment effect in the cash-only treatment. Similarly, revenue increases by USD
23.00 PPP, not too dissimilar to the USD 35.18 PPP increase in the cash-only
treatment. The coefficient on the subjective well-being index is 0.27 SD, com-
pared to 0.23 SD in the cash treatment. Only consumption shows a smaller
effect, with a USD 3.62 PPP treatment effect in the combined treatment, com-
pared to a USD 10.51 PPP treatment effect in the cash-only treatment. In
the combined treatment, only the impacts on assets, revenue, and subjective


                                      28
well-being are statistically significant (using both naïve and FDR-adjusted p-
values), and the impact on revenue is only significant at the 10 percent level.
Column (6) shows the difference between the cash treatment and the com-
bined treatment, revealing that the impact on consumption is smaller in the
combined than in the cash-only treatment (significant at the 10 percent level);
the other effects are statistically similar.
    Thus, the combined treatment has similar effects to the cash-only treat-
ment, even though they are statistically somewhat less robust, and the con-
sumption effect may in fact be smaller. All impacts in the combined treatment
are numerically larger than those of the PM+ treatment, although as shown
in column (7), only asset holdings and subjective well-being show statistically
significant differences across the two treatment arms.
    Finally, column (8) shows p-values comparing the sum of the treatment
effects of the cash-only and PM+-only treatment arms to the effects of the
combined treatment. With the exception of the consumption outcome, none
of the p-values are statistically significant at conventional levels, which is not
surprising given the small effects of the PM+ treatment and the similar effects
of the cash-only and combined treatments. The summed effect on consumption
is larger than the effect in the combined treatment arm, significant at the 10
percent level.
    Table 2 reports effects on our secondary variables of interest. Mirroring the
positive treatment effect of the cash transfer on consumption, we observe a 0.13
SD improvement in the food security index in this treatment arm, significant
at the 5 percent level. We observe a 27 percent decrease in profits, but this
effect is not statistically distinguishable from zero. Together with the positive
effects on revenue, it suggests that cash transfer recipients grew their business,
rather than increasing their profits. We see a small and insignificant reduction
in labor supply, and a negligible effect on the education index. None of these
effects are statistically significant, even with naïve p-values.
    The PM+ treatment also has small and insignificant treatment effects on
the secondary outcome variables, with numerically small reductions in food
security, profits and working hours, and a small increase in the education


                                       29
index. Again no result is statistically significant.
    The combined cash and PM+ treatment also shows a significant increase
in the food security index (0.12 SD). Apart from that, no coefficients are
statistically significant, although there is a numerically relevant decrease in
profits (-37 percent). Again this result corroborates the pattern that cash
transfer recipients grew their businesses rather than increasing their profits.
The other treatment effects are numerically small.
    In line with the generally small impacts amongst these secondary outcome
variables, the pairwise comparisons shown in columns (5)­(8) are not statisti-
cally significant for the most part, with the sole exception of the food security
index, which larger in the two treatment arms receiving cash than in the pure
PM+ group.


III.C     Treatment effects on psychological well-being
Table 3 reports the impacts on the individual psychological well-being vari-
ables, all coded in standard deviations. The 0.23 SD effect of the cash transfer
treatment on the subjective well-being index is driven by a 0.21 SD impact on
life satisfaction; a 0.19 SD increase in happiness; and 0.16 SD decreases in the
perceived stress and GHQ-12 scales. All effects are statistically significant. In
contrast, the PM+-only treatment has no significant treatment effects on any
of these variables, and all individual coefficients are smaller than 0.05 SD. The
combined treatment has a similar effect on the psychological well-being index
(0.27 SD) as the cash-only treatment (0.23 SD), and most individual impacts
are also numerically similar. However, we observe a larger impact on life sat-
isfaction in the combined treatment (0.39 SD) relative to the cash treatment
(0.21 SD), with the difference significant at the 10 percent level. Thus, for this
specific dimension, combining cash transfers with PM+ may have increasing
returns, but the result needs replication. The function assessment, WHODAS,
did not show significant treatment effects in any treatment arm.
     Detailed treatment effects on other outcome groups are shown in Online
Appendix Section B.1.


                                       30
III.D       Interpreting null results: A Bayesian Approach
We briefly discuss what inferences can be drawn about the effectiveness of the
PM+ program based on the largely null results we report above. For illustra-
tive purposes, we focus on the effect of the PM+ program on the psychological
well-being index. We first note that the standard error of the treatment effect
is 0.06 SD, which means that we had 80 percent power to detect effect sizes
of 2.8 × 0.06  0.17 SD at a significance level of 5 percent.14 This detectable
effect size is relatively small compared to treatment effects of psychotherapy
reported throughout the literature. For instance, Cuijpers et al. (2010) report
an average treatment effect of 0.67 SD in a meta-analysis of 117 randomized ex-
periments comparing psychotherapy interventions to control conditions, which
is still 0.42 SD after statistically adjusting for publication bias. For cognitive-
behavioral therapy specifically, on which PM+ is based, Cuijpers et al. (2013)
report a meta-analytic effect size estimate of 0.71 SD (no adjustment for pub-
lication bias was undertaken). In the previous PM+ trial in Kenya, Bryant
et al. (2017) report a 0.57 standard deviation (SD) improvement in the GHQ-
12. Even allowing for the fact that PM+ is a low-dose, highly manualized
version of CBT delivered by laypeople, the fact that we were powered to de-
tect much smaller effects makes power an unlikely explanation of our findings.
    A natural question to ask is then what the probability is that the true effect
of the PM+ program is smaller than 0.17 SD, our detectable effect size. This
probability is given by the negative predictive value (NPV): the probability
that there is no true effect of a given magnitude, given that no effect was
detected with a given level of power and false positive probability. In addition
to power and the false positive rate, the negative predictive value is influenced
by priors, i.e. the probability we would have assigned to PM+ having an
effect of at least 0.17 SD before the study. For power 1 -  (and thus false

   14
     This insight uses the fact that to declare significance at 5 percent, the absolute value of
the test statistic must be larger than 1.96, and for this to be true with 80 percent probability,
80 percent of the sampling distribution from which test statistics are drawn must be to the
right of 1.96. Because the 80 percent of the standard normal distribution is given by a
z-score of 0.84, this is the case when the sampling distribution is centered 1.96 + 0.84 = 2.8
standard errors away from zero.

                                               31
negative rate  ), false positive rate , and prior probability  , the NPV is
given by Bayes' theorem as the ratio of the expected rate of false negatives,
(1-)(1- ), to the expected rate of negative results overall, (1-)(1- )+ :

                                      (1 - )(1 -  )
                         NP V =
                                   (1 - )(1 -  ) + 

In our case,  = 0.05, and we calculated above that for an effect size of 0.17
SD, 1 -  = 0.8. If we were completely agnostic as to whether PM+ is effective
prior to the study (flat priors,  = 0.5), the post-study probability of PM+
having a true effect smaller than 0.17 is 0.83. With a prior of 90 percent in favor
of PM+, the post-study probability against PM+ is 0.35. Thus, depending on
the strength of our priors, the post-study probability of PM+ being ineffective
is only moderately increased by our results. However, larger effects can be
ruled out with greater confidence: even with a 90 percent prior in favor of its
effectiveness, the post-study probability that PM+ produces effects smaller
than 0.40 SD is 90 percent.


III.E     Cost effectiveness
The total amount paid to the NGO for the delivery of PM+ to the 1018
recipients (525 recipients in the PM+-only group, and 493 recipients in the
combined group) was USD 1,210,107 (nominal), which includes both direct
program cost and overhead. This corresponds to a program cost of USD 1,189
(nominal) per recipient. This cost is larger than the nominal amount of the
cash transfers, USD 485, by a factor of 2.45. We conservatively assume that
the costs of remitting the cash transfers, in M-Pesa and staff costs, amounted
to 10 percent of the transfer value, for a cost of USD 534 per transfer. Using
this cost, the PM+ program is more expensive by a factor of 2.27. The PM+
facilitators were paid KES 700 per session of PM+ administered, for a total
of KES 3500 (USD 37 nominal, USD 75 PPP) across the five sessions of the
program. At this marginal cost for PM+, the nominal amount of the cash
transfer exceeds the marginal cost of PM+ by a factor of 14.43. The point


                                        32
estimates of the cash transfer are larger than those of PM+ by factors of 4.17
(consumption), 10.04 (assets), and 3.04 (revenue). It is possible that the PM+
program would be substantially cheaper in the future, when infrastructure is
already in place and CHWs are already trained; under such conditions, PM+
may be more cost-effective than cash transfers for these outcomes.
    Online Appendix Figure C.1 illustrates the relative cost effectiveness of
PM+ and cash transfers at different scenarios for the cost of PM+. For the
purposes of this analysis, we take seriously the statistically non-significant, but
positive impacts of PM+ on our monetary outcomes, i.e. consumption, assets,
and revenue. (Note that for the other primary outcomes, the PM+ impacts
have negative signs, while those of cash transfers are positive, making PM+
less cost-effective than cash transfers in all cost scenarios.) The horizontal
axis represents different possible costs of delivering PM+ to a single recipient,
ranging from marginal cost (USD 37 nominal) to total cost in this study (USD
1,189 nominal). On the vertical axis, we plot the ratio of the treatment effect
of PM+ on monetary outcomes, per dollar spent on PM+, relative to the
treatment effect of cash transfers on the same outcomes, per dollar spent on
                       ^ /cP M P
cash transfers (i.e. 2  ^
                        
                                 , where cP M P is the varying cost of PM+, and
                         1 /534

 ^1 and  ^2 are the cash and PM+ treatment effect estimates from our main
estimating equation, respectively). The dotted vertical lines represent the
PM+ cost below which PM+ is more cost-effective in changing the outcome
variable in question than cash transfers. We find PM+ may have the potential
to be more cost-effective than cash transfers in improving revenue if the PM+
cost can be reduced to USD 175 per person; USD 128 for consumption; and
USD 53 for assets.


III.F     Heterogeneous treatment effects
We report heterogeneous treatment effects of the cash transfer treatment,
PM+ treatment, and the combined treatment on our primary outcomes in
Online Appendix Tables D.1, D.2, and D.3, respectively. In Online Appendix
Table D.1, we find that cash transfers generate a somewhat smaller effect on


                                        33
expenditure in female recipient households compared to male recipient house-
holds. Note, however, that recipient gender was not randomized, and thus
these households may differ in unobserved ways. We also find that for in-
dividuals with high psychological distress at baseline, cash transfers have a
substantially smaller impact on revenue than in other households. This result
is in line with the view that psychological distress may make it difficult to put
cash transfers to productive use. We find suggestive evidence that transfers to
asset-rich households increase IPV more strongly than transfers to other house-
holds, and that asset holdings increase less strongly in households with high
baseline IPV. However, these effects are somewhat imprecise and we therefore
do not interpret them strongly.
    We find no evidence of interaction effects of the PM+ treatment with any
of our pre-specified dimensions of heterogeneity (Online Appendix Table D.2);
none of the interaction terms reach statistical significance. Most prominently,
PM+ effects on psychological well-being are not larger in participants who
experienced high psychological distress at baseline. Recall that the inclusion
criteria for the study did not include having psychological distress at baseline.
Thus, the small treatment effects of the PM+ treatment on psychological well-
being outcomes (not to mention economic outcomes) might result from PM+
not being very effective for people who are not psychologically distressed. How-
ever, as shown in columns (4) and (5), the interaction terms are numerically
not large and not statistically significant. This is true both for a median split
on baseline psychological distress (column 5), and when the cutoff for baseline
distress is that typically used by the implementing NGO (column 4). Thus,
PM+ has limited effectiveness even for psychologically distressed recipients in
our setting.
    In a further exploratory analysis, we next ask if perhaps PM+ affected
only the most severely distressed participants, even amongst those classified
as distressed. To this end, we consider the 33 percent of participants who
were classified as distressed at baseline (based on the index constructed from
GHQ-12 and WHODAS scores), and further split this subsample into "dis-
tressed" and "severely distressed" participants. We do this for every possible


                                       34
cutoff for "severe distress", beginning with the full 33 percent, and then grad-
ually increasing the cutoff until the heterogeneity analysis is based only on
the single most severely distressed participant. We estimate interaction coef-
ficients and confidence intervals at each point. The results are presented in
Online Appendix Figure D.1. We do not find any evidence for heterogeneous
PM+ treatment effects on the "severely distressed" sub-subgroup, for any of
our outcomes, at any chosen split point.
     Because PM+ was effective in reducing psychological distress among women
who had experienced gender-based violence in a previous study in Kenya
(Bryant et al. 2017), we might expect that women, or women who reported
high levels of IPV at baseline, would show larger impacts. However, in columns
(2) and (3) of Table D.2, we find no evidence for larger effects of PM+ on the
psychological well-being index of women, and of women who experienced high
levels of IPV (in fact, both coefficients are negative, although not statistically
significant).
     Finally, in Table D.3, we report heterogeneous treatment effects of the
combined cash and PM+ treatment. We find that in households with high
baseline IPV, this treatment had a larger (yet imprecisely estimated) pos-
itive effect on revenue than in other households; possibly because in these
households, husbands were more likely to appropriate transfer money (and
transfers to husbands are often more likely to be invested in business; cf.
De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2012). At the same time, asset holdings in-
crease more strongly in female recipient households compared to male recipient
households, although this effect is similarly imprecisely estimated.


III.G     CHW fixed effects
To understand whether some CHWs were more effective than others in deliver-
ing PM+, we proceed as follows. First, we estimate separate treatment effects
on the psychological well-being index by CHW. Specifically, we restrict the
sample to the PM+-only and the pure control group, and regress the z-scored
psychological well-being index on indicator variables for each of the CHWs who


                                       35
delivered PM+ (recall that the assignment of CHWs to clients was random).
A histogram of the resulting coefficients, each of which can be considered the
impact of receiving PM+ treatment from a specific CHW, is shown in Figure
E.1. We find a fair degree of variability in the treatment effect as a function of
CHW, suggesting that some CHWs were more effective than others in admin-
istering PM+. Second, to ensure that this pattern reflects more than natural
variability in outcomes, we ask whether CHW performance predicts outcomes
out-of-sample by testing whether the outcomes of each PM+ participant are
predicted by the outcomes of the other participants who were served by the
same CHW. Specifically, we regress the endline psychological well-being index
of each PM+ participant on the average endline psychological well-being index
of the other PM+ participants who were served by the same CHW, clustering
standard errors at the CHW level. Note that this approach corresponds to a
leave-one-out analysis and is therefore an out-of-sample test of CHW quality.
We find a coefficient of 0.34 (standard deviations), which is highly significantly
different from zero. Thus, some CHWs were indeed more effective than others.


III.H     Treatment effects over time
One possible explanation for the small impact of the PM+ treatment in this
study, despite its success in earlier studies (Bryant et al. 2017), is that the
program only has short-lived effects that subside over time. Our endline was
on average 13 months after the end of the interventions, whereas the previous
demonstrations of effectiveness happened 3 months after the intervention. We
did not have a short-run endline; however, we randomized the survey timing
and therefore have variation in the time elapsed between the end of inter-
ventions and the endline. In the following exploratory analysis, we therefore
investigate how treatment effects change over time. In particular, we are inter-
ested to see if impacts are strongest right after treatment administration. To
answer this question, we estimate our main treatment equation 1 over gradu-
ally expanding subsets of data. Specifically, we begin by restricting the sample
to the pure control group and those participants in the other treatment arms


                                       36
that received their most recent cash transfer or PM+ session 200 or fewer days
ago. We then gradually widen this time window by one day and include people
whose most recent treatment administration was 201 days ago, then 202 days,
and so forth, until we have included the entire sample. The pure control group
is always included in its entirety. For participants in the CT treatment, we
use the duration in days between the endline survey date and the most re-
cent M-Pesa cash transfer. Similarly, for participants in the PM+ treatment,
we use the interval between endline and the most recent PM+ session. For
the CT&PM+ arm, we use the most recent date of either a transfer or PM+
session. To control for potential seasonality effects, we include time fixed ef-
fects for each individual survey month. Intuitively, we are thus comparing
participants in the pure control group to a subset of treated people who were
surveyed in the same month, and whose last treatment was at least a given
number of days ago.
    Online Appendix Figure F.1 shows these moving window response functions
for all primary and secondary outcomes. In each of these nine panels, the
horizontal axis corresponds to the time elapsed between endline and the most
recent cash transfer or PM+ session. The vertical axis shows treatment effects
estimated for the sample defined by each individual point on the horizontal
axis. PM+ treatment effects are shown in red, cash effects in green, effects
from the combined treatment in blue. Note that the rightmost edge of each of
these graphs (about 700 or fewer days) includes the entire sample, and hence
corresponds to the treatment effects of our main tables.
    We find that the effects of cash transfers on consumption and assets begin
somewhat larger and then go down over time, although they are still large
and positive when considering the entire sample (and hence all time horizons).
Psychological well-being is elevated at all time horizons for cash transfer re-
cipients. Importantly, however, well-being is not elevated in the PM+-only
treatment, even at short time horizons. Thus, it is unlikely that PM+ had
early effects which then subsided over time. We note, however, that even
our shortest time horizon--200 days or about 7 months--is longer than that
considered in the previous study demonstrating the effectiveness of PM+ in


                                      37
Kenya (Bryant et al. 2017). It therefore remains possible that the program
would show larger effects at even shorter time horizons, even though the de-
cline between 3 and 7 months would have to be rather steep.


III.I    Demand effects
Experimenter demand effects are a potential concern when using self-report
measures for outcomes of interest. For instance, we might worry that cash
transfer recipients want to express their gratefulness for receiving cash transfers
by giving more positive responses to questions about subjective well-being than
they otherwise would, leading to an observed treatment effect that in actuality
reflects a demand effect. However, such effects are unlikely to explain our
findings, for three reasons. First, existing evidence on experimenter demand
effects suggests that they are not large in magnitude, both in general terms
and in relation to the effects we report here (De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth
2018). Second, we observe treatment effects on some outcome variables (e.g.
cash transfers on psychological well-being), but not on others which should
be at least equally affected by demand effects (e.g. PM+ on psychological
well-being). Finally, we test directly for the importance of demand effects in
our sample, using the approach proposed by De Quidt, Haushofer, and Roth
(2018) and described in Section II.D. Results are reported in Online Appendix
Table G.1. We find no evidence of demand effects; the mean responses given
in the "positive demand" and "negative demand" conditions are almost exactly
identical: 4.65 vs. 4.62 for the question about beatings; 2.79 vs. 2.76 for
the question about rape; and 3.43 vs. 3.42 for the question about depression.
The p-values comparing them are not statistically significant. Thus, demand
effects appear to play no important role in our setting.


III.J    Spillover effects
Online Appendix Tables B.9, B.10, and B.11 show spillover effects for our pri-
mary, secondary, and psychological well-being outcomes, respectively. In each
table, column (2) shows the spillover effect of cash transfers on non-recipients,

                                        38
and column (3) that of the PM+ treatment. Column (4) shows the p-values
comparing the two spillover effects. We find little evidence of spillovers of cash
transfers: consumption is 7 percent higher, and asset holdings 2 percent higher,
in non-recipient households in cash transfer villages compared to households
in control villages, but the confidence intervals include zero.15 Revenue and
the subjective well-being index are hardly affected at all by spillovers. The
intimate partner violence index shows a 0.17 SD increase, suggesting more
violence in non-recipient households in cash transfer villages. However, this
effect is only significant at the 10 percent level, and does not survive multiple
inference correction. We note that this effect goes in the opposite direction to
that reported in a previous similar program (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016).
     The PM+ treatment also has positive but small spillover effects on con-
sumption and asset holdings, with 3 percent and 6 percent increases, respec-
tively, both not statistically significant. Interestingly, revenue in non-recipient
households in PM+ villages is 17 percent higher than in control households;
however, this effect does not survive multiple inference correction. We find
little evidence of spillovers on psychological well-being. In line with the in-
crease in IPV observed in PM+ households in treatment villages, non-recipient
households in these villages also experience an increase in IPV, by 0.16 SD,
significant at the 10 percent level. However, this effect, too, does not survive
FDR correction. Overall, the spillover effects of our two treatments are thus
economically small and statistically weak.
     We find no strong evidence for spillover effects on food security, household
profits, or working hours. The education index shows a -0.15 SD spillover
effect, significant at the 10 percent level.
     Because the spillover effects are generally small, the within-village treat-
ment effects (i.e. comparing treatment to spillover households) are similar to
the across-village treatment effects. For this reason we do not show detailed
tables for this comparison, even though it was pre-specified. We had also
pre-specified several analyses to study the mechanisms for possible spillover

  15
    Note that, using the approach to compute MDEs described in Section III.D, we were
powered to detect relatively small spillover effects.

                                         39
effects, and we do not show them for the same reason. The results for both
sets of analysis are available upon request.


III.K     Effects of transfer frequency
We next compare the relative impact of cash transfers when they are made
as a lump-sum compared to when they are made in five weekly installments.
Details of the econometric approach are shown in Online Appendix Section
H. Online Appendix Table H.1 shows the corresponding treatment effects on
primary outcomes. Columns (2) and (3) show the treatment effects, relative
to control, of weekly and lump-sum transfers, respectively, and column (4)
shows the p-value for the difference of these coefficients. We find that weekly
transfers have a substantially larger impact on both consumption and rev-
enue than lump-sum transfers: weekly transfers increase consumption by USD
14.98 PPP, significant at the 1 percent level; while lump-sum transfers increase
consumption by USD 7.01 PPP (not significant), and the two effects are signif-
icantly different from each other. Similarly, weekly transfers increase monthly
household revenue by USD 51.71 PPP, while the increase is only USD 19.30 for
lump-sum transfers; again the first effect is significant and the second is not,
and the difference between them is significant. We find little evidence for a
differential impact of weekly vs. lump-sum transfers for asset holdings, subjec-
tive well-being, and IPV. We also find no significant differences between weekly
and lump-sum transfers on our secondary outcomes (not shown). Thus, weekly
transfers have larger positive effects on two of our primary outcome variables,
suggesting that in this setting and for these outcomes, they are weakly superior
to lump-sum transfers.


IV.     Conclusion
In this paper, we report the results of a randomized controlled trial that com-
pared the effects of USD 1076 PPP unconditional cash transfers, a five-week
psychotherapy program, and their combination on psychological and economic


                                      40
well-being among a sample of low-income Kenyans. One year after the inter-
vention, we find improvements in both economic and psychological well-being
among cash transfer recipients. In contrast, the psychotherapy program has
no measurable positive effects on these outcomes at this time horizon. The re-
sults are similar when considering only individuals who had low mental health
at baseline, suggesting that these results are not a matter of the psychother-
apy program only working for psychologically distressed people. In line with
these findings, the effects of the combination of both the unconditional cash
transfer and the psychotherapy program are very similar to those of the cash
transfer by itself. We observe little evidence of spillover effects of either pro-
gram, although we find suggestive evidence of spillovers of the cash transfer
on intimate partner violence.
    Together, these results suggest that in this setting, cash transfers are more
effective than this particular psychotherapy program in improving both eco-
nomic and psychological well-being at a time horizon of one year. This result
is important because the cost of the psychotherapy program significantly ex-
ceed that of the cash transfer. Thus, ex post, a donor might have preferred to
invest in cash transfers rather than the psychotherapy program in this study.
    It is important to note that the psychotherapy program we used was a
state-of-the-art intervention for low-income contexts, developed by the WHO
and previously successfully tested in Kenya. In addition, the implementation
of the program in our study was done by the same NGO as in this previous
study in Kenya. Thus, implementation differences are unlikely to explain the
lack of impact. Rather, it appears that this psychotherapy program, even
though it is general in nature, may be most effective when it is deployed to
address a specific problem such as IPV. In addition, it might be made more
effective by increasing its intensity.




                                       41
References
Abubakar, A., and R. Fischer. 2012. "The Factor Structure of the 12-Item General Health Questionnaire
    in a Literate Kenyan Population." Stress and Health: Journal of the International Society for the
    Investigation of Stress 28 (3): 248­254.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention:
    A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects." Journal of the
    American Statistical Association 103 (484): 1481­1495.
Baird, Sarah, Jacobus De Hoop, and Berk Özler. 2013. "Income Shocks and Adolescent Mental Health."
    Journal of Human Resources 48 (2): 370­403.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and Munshi Sulaiman. 2017.
    "Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):
    811­870.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William Parienté, Jeremy
    Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. "A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting
    Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries." Science 348 (6236): 1260799.
Baranov, Victoria, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko. 2020. "Maternal Depression,
    Women's Empowerment, and Parental Investment: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial." Amer-
    ican Economic Review 110 (3): 824­859.
Bedoya, Guadalupe, Aidan Coville, Johannes Haushofer, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2019.
    "No Household Left Behind: Afghanistan Targeting the Ultra Poor Impact Evaluation." NBER Working
    Paper 25981.
Bernard, Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, and Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse. 2014. "The Future in Mind:
    Aspirations and Forward-Looking Behaviour in Rural Ethiopia." BREAD Working Paper 429:1­42.
Biasi, Barbara, Michael S. Dahl, and Petra Moser. 2019. "Career Effects of Mental Health." SSRN Working
    Paper 2544251.
Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez. 2020. "The Long Term Impacts of Grants on
    Poverty: 9-Year Evidence from Uganda's Youth Opportunities Program." American Economic Review:
    Insights 2 (3): 287­304.
Blattman, Christopher, Eric P Green, Julian Jamison, M Christian Lehmann, and Jeannie Annan. 2016.
    "The Returns to Microenterprise Support among the Ultrapoor: A Field Experiment in Postwar
    Uganda." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (2): 35­64.
Blattman, Christopher, Julian C Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan. 2017. "Reducing Crime and Violence:
    Experimental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia." American Economic Review
    107 (4): 1165­1206.
Bryant, Richard A, Alison Schafer, Katie S Dawson, Dorothy Anjuri, Caroline Mulili, Lincoln Ndogoni,
    Phiona Koyiet, Marit Sijbrandij, Jeannette Ulate, Melissa Harper Shehadeh, et al. 2017. "Effectiveness
    of a Brief Behavioural Intervention on Psychological Distress among Women with a History of Gender-
    Based Violence in Urban Kenya: A Randomised Clinical Trial." PLoS Medicine 14 (8): e1002371.
Cohen, Sheldon, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein. 1983. "A Global Measure of Perceived Stress."
    Journal of Health and Social Behavior 24 (4): 385­396.
Cresswell, Jenny A., Kelli D. Barbour, Doris Chou, Affette McCaw-Binns, Veronique Filippi, Jose Guil-
    herme Cecatti, Maria Barreix, Max Petzold, Nenad Kostanjsek, Sara Cottler-Casanova, and Lale Say.
    2020. "Measurement of Maternal Functioning during Pregnancy and Postpartum: Findings from the
    Cross-Sectional WHO Pilot Study in Jamaica, Kenya, and Malawi." BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth
    20 (1): 518.
Cuijpers, Pim, Matthias Berking, Gerhard Andersson, Leanne Quigley, Annet Kleiboer, and Keith S.
    Dobson. 2013. "A Meta-Analysis of Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for Adult Depression, Alone and
    in Comparison with Other Treatments:." The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 58 (7): 376­385.



                                                   42
Cuijpers, Pim, Filip Smit, Ernst Bohlmeijer, Steven D. Hollon, and Gerhard Andersson. 2010. "Efficacy
    of Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy and Other Psychological Treatments for Adult Depression: Meta-
    Analytic Study of Publication Bias." The British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science
    196 (3): 173­178.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2012. "One-Time Transfers of Cash or Capital
    Have Long-Lasting Effects on Microenterprises in Sri Lanka." Science 335 (6071): 962­966.
De Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. 2018. "Measuring and Bounding Exper-
    imenter Demand." American Economic Review 108 (11): 3266­3302.
Getanda, Elijah Mironga, Chris Papadopoulos, and Hala Evans. 2015. "The Mental Health, Quality of Life
    and Life Satisfaction of Internally Displaced Persons Living in Nakuru County, Kenya." BMC Public
    Health 15:755.
Ghosal, Sayantan, Smarajit Jana, Anandi Mani, Sandip Mitra, and Sanchari Roy. 2016. "Sex Workers,
    Stigma and Self-Belief: Evidence from a Psychological Training Programme." CAGE Working Paper,
    no. 302:1­48.
Goldberg, David P, and Barry Blackwell. 1970. "Psychiatric Illness in General Practice: A Detailed Study
    Using a New Method of Case Identification." Br Med J 2 (5707): 439­443.
Hammen, Constance. 2005. "Stress and Depression." Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 1:293­319.
Haushofer, Johannes, M. Chemin, Chaning Jang, and Justin Abraham. 2020. "Economic and Psychological
    Effects of Health Insurance and Cash Transfers: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Kenya."
    Journal of Development Economics 144:102416.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Ernst Fehr. 2014. "On the Psychology of Poverty." Science 344 (6186): 862­867.
Haushofer, Johannes, Anett John, and Kate Orkin. 2019. "Can Simple Psychological Interventions Increase
    Preventive Health Investment?" NBER Working Paper 25731.
Haushofer, Johannes, Michala Riis-Vestergaard, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2019. "The Comparative Impact of
    Cash Transfers and Mental Health Interventions." AEA RCT Registry, February.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. "The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash Transfers
    to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1973­
    2042.
Lund, Crick, Mary De Silva, Sophie Plagerson, Sara Cooper, Dan Chisholm, Jishnu Das, Martin Knapp,
    and Vikram Patel. 2011. "Poverty and Mental Disorders: Breaking the Cycle in Low-Income and
    Middle-Income Countries." The Lancet 378 (9801): 1502­1514.
Lund, Crick, Marguerite Schneider, Emily C. Garman, Thandi Davies, Memory Munodawafa, Simone
    Honikman, Arvin Bhana, Judith Bass, Paul Bolton, Michael Dewey, John Joska, Ashraf Kagee, Lan-
    don Myer, and Pet. 2020. "Task-Sharing of Psychological Treatment for Antenatal Depression in
    Khayelitsha, South Africa: Effects on Antenatal and Postnatal Outcomes in an Individual Randomised
    Controlled Trial." Behaviour Research and Therapy 130:103466.
McKelway, Madeline. 2020. "Women's Employment in India: Intra-Household and Intra-Personal Con-
    straints." Working Paper.
McKenzie, David. 2012. "Beyond Baseline and Follow-up: The Case for More T in Experiments." Journal
    of Development Economics 99 (2): 210­221.
Ravensteijn, Bastian, and Eli Schachar. 2018. "The Impact of Cost Sharing for Mental Health Care on
    Mental Health Care Use and Labor Market Outcomes." Technical Report, Working Paper.
Ridley, Matthew W., Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, and Vikram H. Patel. 2020, May. "Poverty, Depres-
    sion, and Anxiety: Causal Evidence and Mechanisms." Technical Report w27157, National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
Schoenbaum, Michael, Jürgen Unützer, Daniel McCaffrey, Naihua Duan, Cathy Sherbourne, and Ken-
    neth B. Wells. 2002. "The Effects of Primary Care Depression Treatment on Patients' Clinical Status
    and Employment." Health Services Research 37 (5): 1145­1158.
World Health Organization. 2018. "Problem Management Plus (PM+): Individual Psychological Help for
    Adults Impaired by Distress in Communities Exposed to Adversity."


                                                  43
                                                             Figure 1: Design
                                                                   Full study sample
                                                                       233 villages
                                                                    5,756 households




                      Pure Control                  Pure PM+                           Pure Cash                   Cash&PM+
44




                       60 villages                   60 villages                       60 villages                  53 villages


        30 HHs each                  10 HHs each           20 HHs each        10 HHs each            20 HHs each                  10 HHs each



       Pure control         PM+ treated             PM+ spillover                   Cash treated          Cash spillover          Cash&PM+ treated
     1,703 HHs (BL)         525 HHs (BL)           1,219 HHs (BL)                  540 HHs (BL)          1,276 HHs (BL)             493 HHs (BL)
     1,619 HHs (EL)         493 HHs (EL)           1,163 HHs (EL)                  521 HHs (EL)          1,224 HHs (EL)             476 HHs (EL)
                 Figure 2: Study area




                                   Leaflet | Map tiles by Stamen Design, CC BY 3.0 -- Map data © OpenStreetMap



             (a) Project area within Kenya
                                                                                       VillageType
                                                                                           PureControl
                                                                                           PureCash
                                                                                           PurePM+
                                                                                           Cash&PM+




                                   Leaflet | Map tiles by Stamen Design, CC BY 3.0 -- Map data © OpenStreetMap



(b) Spatial distribution of treatment and control villages



                           45
                                                                                                   Figure 3: Treatment effects

                                                                                                                                                                                         Cash                                                                                                                         PM+                                                                                                              Cash and PM+
      Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption                                                                                       |                               |                                                                            |                                           |                                                                                              |                           |

                                     Food consumption                                                                  |                   |                                                                                                                |                           |                                                                                      |                       |

                      Expenditure on temptation goods                                          | |                                                                                                                                              |                   |                                                                                                                  |                   |

        Expenditure on personal and household items                                                        |                   |                                                                                                            |                           |                                                                                                                      |                       |

        Expenditure on housing repair or improvement                                                                                   |                   |                                                                                    |               |                                                                                                                                                          |                       |

                             Expenditure on education                                                  |                   |                                                                                                                        |                       |                                                                                                              |                       |

                                   Medical expenditure                                                 |               |                                                                                                                                |                   |                                                                                                                      |               |

                                     Social expenditure                                                                |               |                                                                                                                |                       |                                                                                                                      |               |

              Total value of assets household owns                                                                                                                         |         |                                                          |                                       |                                                                                                                                                          |                       |

                            Value of productive assets                                                             |                       |                                                                                |                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |                               |

                                      Value of vehicles                                                                        |                       |                                                                                            |                               |                                                                                                                          |                               |

                                      Value of furniture                                                                                       |                               |                                                                    |                                               |                                                                                                                          |                               |

                                      Value of durables                                                                                |                       |                                                                                    |                               |                                                                                                                                          |                           |

                                      Value of livestock                                                                                                                                  |         |                           |                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |

                          Net value of financial assets                                        |                       |                                                                                                            |                                       |                                                                                                  |                           |
                         Monthly household revenue                                                                                     |                               |                                                                                        |                                   |                                                                                                      |                                   |

                        Monthly revenue from livestock                                                 |                           |                                                                                                            |                                    |                                                                                             |                               |
46




                          Monthly agricultural revenue                                                                 |                               |                                                                |                                   |                                                                                                                              |                                       |

                              Monthly enterprise sales                                                             |                               |                                                                                    |                                       |                                                                                                          |                                                   |

                      Monthly household wage income                                                                    |                               |                                                                                            |                                       |                                                                                              |                               |
                     Psychological well-being index                                                                                        |                       |                                                                |                                       |                                                                                                                                                          |                           |

                                                GHQ-12             |                       |                                                                                                                                                        |                               |                                                                          |                           |

                            Cohen Stress Scale (PSS)                   |               |                                                                                                                                                |                               |                                                                      |           |

                                     Happiness (WVS)                                                                               |                       |                                                                                    |                                   |                                                                                                                      |                           |

                                Life satisfaction (WVS)                                                                        |                               |                                                                |                                       |                                                                                                                                                                              |                       |
                     Intimate partner violence index                               |                       |                                                                                                                                                                                |                     |                                                                    |                                                       |

                               Physical violence index                             |                       |                                                                                                                                                                                    |                     |                                                                |                                                   |

                                 Sexual violence index                                 |                           |                                                                                                                                                |                                         |                                                                    |                                               |

                     Pointed twds. beaten by husband                       |                       |                                                                                                                                    |                                           |                                                              |               |

               Pointed twds. forced sexual intercourse                                 |                       |                                                                                                                |                                       |                                                                                      |                               |

                     Envelope incl: beaten by husband                          |                       |                                                                                                                        |                                               |                                                                      |                   |

           Envelope incl: unwanted sexual intercourse                                          |                       |                                                                                                            |                                       |                                                                                          |                               |




                                                           -0.4   -0.2                             0.0                                     0.2                                 0.4            0.6       0.8   -0.4   -0.2                       0.0                                                     0.2       0.4       0.6   0.8   -0.4           -0.2                        0.0                                             0.2                                 0.4         0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Treatment Effect (in SD)




     Notes: Estimated treatment coefficients for all primary outcomes and their immediate components. Each row represents a
     different outcome variable, with bolded rows denoting primary outcomes. To make outcomes comparable, we z-score all of them,
     so that effect sizes can be interpreted in standard deviation differences relative to to the pure control group mean. Each row
     displays three treatment effects, estimated by equation (1): pure cash (left), pure PM+ (middle), and the combined treatment
     (right). We also show one standard error around each point estimate. Estimates which are significantly different from zero at the
     5 percent level are shown in darker shades. Note that for the psychological well-being index, lower values of GHQ-12 and Stress
     correspond to higher well-being.
                                                                      Table 1: Treatment effects, primary outcomes
                                                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)            (4)               (5)             (6)                   (7)                        (8)                      (9)
                                                                             Pure control          Cash              PM+         Cash + PM+            Cash            Cash                  PM+                    Cash & PM+
                                                                             mean (SD)          treatment          treatment      treatment           = PM+        = Cash & PM+          = Cash & PM+          = Cash only + PM+ only             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
      Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)                       52.49            10.40                2.49             3.53             0.08              0.09                  0.80                        0.09                5309
                                                                                (46.51)           (3.53)              (3.61)           (3.00)
                                                                                                  [0.00]              [1.00]           [0.14]
                                                                                                  +20%                +5%              +7%
      Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)                            553.16           272.16              28.75           236.07              0.00              0.55                  0.00                        0.39                5309
                                                                               (664.70)          (40.20)            (44.97)          (53.68)
                                                                                                  [0.00]             [1.00]            [0.00]
                                                                                                  +49%               +5%              +43%
      Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                                       135.48             36.32             11.78            23.96              0.06              0.40                  0.38                        0.18                5309
                                                                               (153.09)           (11.70)           (10.54)          (12.47)
                                                                                                   [0.00]            [1.00]            [0.06]
                                                                                                   +27%              +9%              +18%
      Psychological well-being index                                               0.00             0.24             -0.01              0.28             0.00              0.56                  0.00                        0.61                5309
                                                                                  (1.00)           (0.06)             (0.06)           (0.07)
                                                                                                   [0.00]             [1.00]           [0.00]
47




      Intimate partner violence index                                            -0.00            -0.05                0.25             0.08             0.02              0.28                  0.30                        0.53                3052
                                                                                  (1.00)           (0.08)             (0.12)           (0.12)
                                                                                                   [0.11]             [0.26]           [0.25]

      Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. Outcome variables, measured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the outcome variable. Columns (2),
     (3), and (4) show the treatment effects of the cash-only, PM+-only, and combined treatment groups, respectively, relative to the pure control group. Standard errors, clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses, and FDR p-values in
     brackets. Columns (5)­(7) show p-values for the pairwise comparisons of these treatment arms. Column (8) shows p-values testing whether the sum of the cash-only and PM+-only treatment effects is the same as the treatment effect of the
     combined treatment. Column (9) shows the number of observations.
       * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                              Table 2: Treatment effects, secondary outcomes

                                                           (1)               (2)               (3)        (4)                   (5)             (6)                   (7)                         (8)                      (9)
                                                       Pure control         Cash             PM+     Cash + PM+                Cash            Cash                  PM+                     Cash & PM+
                                                       mean (SD)         treatment         treatment  treatment               = PM+        = Cash & PM+          = Cash & PM+           = Cash only + PM+ only             N
      Food security index                                    0.00            0.14            -0.10              0.13             0.00              0.82                  0.00                        0.37                 5309
                                                            (1.00)          (0.06)            (0.07)           (0.06)

      Monthly household profits (USD PPP)                  19.31           -4.71             -1.31           -6.88               0.58              0.77                  0.42                        0.92                 5309
                                                          (67.78)           (5.38)            (4.49)          (6.21)
48




                                                                           ­24%               ­7%            ­36%
      Working hours per week per capita                    35.05           -0.50             -1.93              1.00             0.41              0.39                  0.10                        0.14                 5309
                                                          (25.50)           (1.47)            (1.51)           (1.50)

      Education index                                      -0.00           -0.05               0.07          -0.07               0.18              0.85                  0.16                        0.48                 1886
                                                            (1.00)          (0.09)            (0.08)          (0.10)

      Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. Outcome variables, measured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the outcome
     variable. Columns (2), (3), and (4) show the treatment effects of the cash-only, PM+-only, and combined treatment groups, respectively, relative to the pure control group. Standard errors, clustered at the village level,
     are shown in parentheses. Columns (5)­(7) show p-values for the pairwise comparisons of these treatment arms. Column (8) shows p-values testing whether the sum of the cash-only and PM+-only treatment effects is
     the same as the treatment effect of the combined treatment. Column (9) shows the number of observations.
       * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                            Table 3: Treatment effects, well-being outcomes

                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)        (4)                  (5)              (6)                  (7)                        (8)                     (9)
                                               Pure control         Cash             PM+     Cash + PM+               Cash             Cash                 PM+                    Cash & PM+
                                               mean (SD)         treatment         treatment  treatment              = PM+         = Cash & PM+         = Cash & PM+          = Cash only + PM+ only             N
                                                                                                                                                                       
      Psychological well-being index                0.00             0.24            -0.01              0.28            0.00              0.56                  0.00                       0.61                5309
                                                   (1.00)           (0.06)            (0.06)           (0.07)
        GHQ-12                                    -0.00            -0.17               0.03           -0.07             0.00              0.19                  0.14                       0.52                5309
                                                   (1.00)           (0.06)            (0.06)           (0.06)
        Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen)            -0.00            -0.17             -0.02            -0.24             0.00              0.27                  0.00                       0.46                5309
49




                                                   (1.00)           (0.05)            (0.05)           (0.06)
        Happiness (WVS)                             0.00             0.20              0.04             0.14            0.02              0.42                  0.20                       0.31                5302
                                                   (1.00)           (0.06)            (0.07)           (0.07)
        Life satisfaction (WVS)                     0.00             0.23            -0.03              0.40            0.00              0.08                  0.00                       0.10                5309
                                                   (1.00)           (0.08)            (0.08)           (0.09)
      WHODAS disability assessment                -0.00            -0.02               0.01           -0.00             0.64              0.80                  0.84                       0.96                5309
                                                   (1.00)           (0.07)            (0.07)           (0.07)
      Notes: OLS estimates of treatment effects. Outcome variables, measured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the
     outcome variable. Columns (2), (3), and (4) show the treatment effects of the cash-only, PM+-only, and combined treatment groups, respectively, relative to the pure control group. Standard errors, clustered at
     the village level, are shown in parentheses. Columns (5)­(7) show p-values for the pairwise comparisons of these treatment arms. Column (8) shows p-values testing whether the sum of the cash-only and PM+-only
     treatment effects is the same as the treatment effect of the combined treatment. Column (9) shows the number of observations.
       * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.
         For Online Publication:
The Comparative Impact of Cash Transfers
 and Psychotherapy on Psychological and
          Economic Well-being

  Johannes Haushofer, Robert Mudida, Jeremy Shapiro




                          1
Contents
A Integrity of the experiment                                                                                3
  A.1 Details on checks for data integrity      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    3
  A.2 Timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  A.3 Baseline Balance . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  A.4 Attrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8

B Direct treatment and spillover effects                                                                     9
  B.1 Direct treatment effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   9
  B.2 Spillover effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                 18

C Cost effectiveness                                                                                        22

D Heterogeneous impacts                                                                                     23

E CHW fixed effects                                                                                         28

F Treatment effects over time                                                                               29

G Demand effects                                                                                            30

H Effects of transfer frequency                                                                             31

I   Indices and variables                                                                                   33




                                       2
A.      Integrity of the experiment
A.1      Details on checks for data integrity
   1. High-frequency checks: These checks consisted of continuous monitor-
      ing of data coming into the server to check for missing observations and
      inconsistencies in responses. A STATA .do file was created and run reg-
      ularly (at least weekly) on incoming data to check for errors. If any
      errors or discrepancies were detected, corrective action was taken to re-
      solve these issues. Further, these checks informed the content of refresher
      training for field officers.

   2. Back-checks: We performed back-checks with all household survey re-
      spondents on a subset of questions that elicited (mostly) immutable
      information (e.g. respondent's age, number of children). Back-checks
      were performed within a week of the initial survey by a different set of
      FOs, and the procedure was known to FOs ex ante. During baseline,
      225 respondents were not reached on the second visit, primarily due to
      relocations. We included only respondents who were available for both
      the primary demographic survey and the back-check in the study to
      minimize later attrition.1

   3. Random spot checks and field observations: Field officers were super-
      vised by Project Leads, who regularly observed them while they con-
      ducted surveys. Specifically, project leads observed if questions were
      asked according to protocol, such as probing when answers are unclear.
      These checks were designed to ensure consistency of questioning across
      field officers. Continuous feedback was relayed to field officers on ar-
      eas that needed improvement. Additionally, senior project management
      made random visits to the field.

   4. GPS checks: GPS coordinates were recorded for all baseline and backcheck

   1
     Respondents who refused to participate in the backcheck or who were estimated to be
only temporarily unavailable by the FOs (37 respondents) were also included in the sample.

                                            3
  surveys. A different team member checked these coordinates on Google
  Earth to confirm the existence of a house at the specified location.

5. M-Pesa confirmation: for respondents receiving cash transfers, we con-
   firmed that the M-Pesa numbers provided at baseline and backcheck
   matched, and that the name associated with the mobile money account
   matched the name of the intended recipient, before the transfer was ini-
   tiated.




                                   4
    A.2   Timing




                                                  Table A.1: Timing
                                                                       (1)      (2)       (3)    (4)     (5)
                                                                      Mean     Median     Min    Max      N
            Months between baseline and intervention start              9.91      10       2      19    1523
            Months between intervention start and endline             13.95       14       3      28    1461
            Months between intervention end and endline               12.61       13       2      23    1461
5




              Cash recipients                                         11.99       13       3      22     977
              PM+ recipients                                          13.52       14       2      23     934
            Months between PM+ and cash (combined group)                1.36      1        -5     12     450
            Months between baseline and endline                       24.05       23       1      31    5492
            Notes: Time in months between baseline, intervention start/end, and endline (mean, median, minimum,
           and maximum). The sample is restricted to the treatment group in the first three rows.
                                                 Figure A.1: Distribution of intervention timing

                                    Cash recipients                                                                 PM+ recipients




                                                                                        150
                150




                                                                                        100
                100
    Frequency




                                                                            Frequency

                                                                                        50
                50
6



                0




                                                                                        0
                         5            10               15              20                                  10               15                20

                             Months between intervention and EL                                             Months between intervention and EL



                                   Combined group                                                                   Combined group
                140




                                                                                        200
                                                                                        150
                80 100
    Frequency




                                                                            Frequency

                                                                                        100
                60
                40




                                                                                        50
                20
                0




                                                                                        0




                         5          10            15              20                          -5                0                 5                 10

                             Months between intervention and EL                                    Months between PM+ and cash (high values = cash later)
    A.3      Baseline Balance
    The table below shows OLS estimates of baseline balance. Outcome variables, measured at baseline, are listed
    on the left. The first column shows the pure control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the
    outcome variable. Columns (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) show baseline differences between the pure control group
    and the cash-only, cash spillover, PM+-only, PM+ spillover, and Cash & PM+ groups, respectively. Standard
    errors, clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses. Column (7) shows the number of observations.
      * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                   Table A.2: Baseline balance
                                                   (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)     (7)
                                               Pure control      Cash       Cash        PM+        PM+        Cash + PM+
                                               mean (SD)      treatment   spillover   treatment   spillover    treatment    N
     Female respondent                             0.64        -0.00      -0.00        -0.00      -0.00         -0.00      5309
7




                                                  (0.48)        (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)
     Age                                          45.36          1.75       1.21         0.18     -0.60           0.93     5309
                                                 (18.44)        (1.03)     (0.87)       (1.14)     (0.88)        (1.15)
     Baseline asset index                          0.00          0.03       0.00         0.01       0.02        -0.00      5309
                                                  (1.00)        (0.05)     (0.04)       (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.05)
     Baseline M-Pesa access                        0.80          0.00     -0.00          0.00     -0.00           0.00     5309
                                                  (0.40)        (0.00)     (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)
     Baseline psychological well-being index       0.00          0.05       0.03         0.02       0.06          0.03     5309
                                                  (1.00)        (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.04)     (0.03)        (0.04)
     Baseline psychological distress index         0.00        -0.01      -0.03        -0.00        0.02          0.06     5309
                                                  (1.00)        (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.06)
     Baseline IPV index                          -0.00         -0.01      -0.01          0.02       0.03          0.12     3212
                                                  (1.00)        (0.07)     (0.06)       (0.08)     (0.07)        (0.13)
     Baseline justifiability of violence         -0.00           0.18     -0.13          0.07       1.00          0.15     3212
                                                  (1.00)        (0.18)     (0.07)       (0.09)     (0.92)        (0.11)
    A.4     Attrition
    The table below shows OLS estimates of attrition between baseline and endline. Column 1 regresses an indicator
    for being observed at both baseline and endline on treatment group assignment across all villages. Standard errors,
    clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses. Columns (2) and (3) restrict the sample to pure PM+
    and pure cash villages, respectively, and include village-level fixed effects, to assess attrition between treatment
    and spillover households in those villages. Unclustered standard errors are shown in parentheses.
                                                      Table A.3: Attrition
                                          All villages                Pure PM+ villages            Pure cash Villages
                                           (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                 1(Completed both surveys) 1(Completed both surveys) 1(Completed both surveys)
     Pure PM+                               -0.00
8




                                             (0.01)
     Pure cash                                0.01
                                             (0.01)
     Cash + PM+                               0.01
                                             (0.02)
     Treatment                                                               -0.02                       -0.01
                                                                              (0.01)                      (0.01)
     Pure control village mean                0.95
     Control mean                                                             0.95                        0.97
     N                                       5756                             1744                        1777
B.     Direct treatment and spillover effects
B.1    Direct treatment effects
The tables below show OLS estimates of direct treatment effects. Outcome
variables, measured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows
the pure control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the
outcome variable. Columns (2), (3), and (4) show the treatment effects of the
cash-only, PM+-only, and combined treatment groups, respectively, relative
to the pure control group. Standard errors, clustered at the village level,
are shown in parentheses, and FDR p-values in brackets where applicable.
Columns (5)­(7) show p-values for the pairwise comparisons of these treatment
arms. Column (8) shows p-values testing whether the sum of the cash-only
and PM+-only treatment effects is the same as the treatment effect of the
combined treatment. Column (9) shows the number of observations.
 * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                      9
                                                      Table B.1: Treatment effects, asset outcomes
                                                          (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                      Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+    Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                      mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment   = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)     553.16        272.16       28.75    236.07       0.00       0.55           0.00                0.39            5309
                                                       (664.70)       (40.20)     (44.97)   (53.68)
                                                                       +49%        +5%       +43%
       Value of productive assets (USD PPP)              37.04         6.92       -3.17      11.17       0.03       0.37           0.01                0.23            5309
                                                        (55.36)       (3.52)       (3.93)    (4.31)
                                                                      +19%         ­9%       +30%
       Value of vehicles (USD PPP)                      114.76         60.34       15.00      55.24      0.08       0.86           0.17                0.58            5309
                                                       (342.36)       (20.34)     (21.17)    (25.21)
                                                                       +53%        +13%       +48%
       Value of furniture (USD PPP)                     288.12         74.79       17.40      66.25      0.02       0.75           0.07                0.45            5309
                                                       (258.02)       (21.53)     (21.30)    (22.91)
                                                                       +26%        +6%        +23%
       Value of durables (USD PPP)                      122.65        36.31         6.31      38.81      0.01       0.86           0.02                0.82            5309
                                                       (157.00)       (9.34)       (8.83)    (12.23)
10




                                                                      +30%         +5%        +32%
       Value of livestock (USD PPP)                      32.70         76.99      -6.70      57.69       0.00       0.25           0.00                0.47            5309
                                                       (123.21)       (12.16)      (5.19)   (12.35)
                                                                      +235%       ­20%      +176%
       Net value of financial assets (USD PPP)         -53.86         -1.48       -3.14        0.81      0.93       0.88           0.82                0.80            5309
                                                       (214.71)       (13.23)     (14.73)    (11.59)
                                                                       ­3%         ­6%        +1%
                                                   Table B.2: Treatment effects, consumption outcomes
                                                                    (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                                Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+    Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                                mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment   = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)          52.49        10.40        2.49       3.53       0.08       0.09           0.80                0.09            5309
                                                                  (46.51)       (3.53)      (3.61)     (3.00)
                                                                                +20%        +5%        +7%
       Food consumption (USD PPP)                                  48.91         5.93        2.65      -0.18       0.35       0.05           0.37                0.04            5309
                                                                  (53.01)       (2.70)      (2.84)      (2.27)
                                                                                +12%        +5%         ­0%
       Expenditure on temptation goods (USD PPP)                    0.60        -0.08       -0.01       0.05       0.25       0.08           0.44                0.11            5309
                                                                   (1.88)        (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.07)
                                                                                ­13%         ­2%       +8%
11




       Expenditure on personal and household items (USD PPP)        6.14          0.54      -0.06       0.52       0.17       0.98           0.24                0.94            5309
                                                                   (8.57)        (0.37)      (0.35)    (0.44)
                                                                                 +9%         ­1%       +9%
       Expenditure on housing repair or improvement (USD PPP)       2.85         1.92       -0.09       1.92       0.00       1.00           0.00                0.89            5309
                                                                   (9.57)       (0.41)       (0.26)    (0.53)
                                                                                +67%         ­3%       +67%
       Expenditure on education (USD PPP)                           6.63          0.59       0.21       0.56       0.44       0.95           0.57                0.73            5309
                                                                  (11.13)        (0.40)     (0.44)     (0.53)
                                                                                 +9%        +3%        +8%
       Medical expenditure (USD PPP)                                3.62         0.34        0.16       0.51       0.56       0.63           0.31                0.98            5309
                                                                   (8.64)       (0.27)      (0.28)     (0.30)
                                                                                +10%        +4%        +14%
       Social expenditure (USD PPP)                                 1.43         0.31        0.09       0.21       0.11       0.48           0.36                0.28            5309
                                                                   (2.77)       (0.11)      (0.11)     (0.11)
                                                                                +22%        +6%        +15%
                                                 Table B.3: Treatment effects, revenue outcomes
                                                     (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                 Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+    Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                 mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment   = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)           135.48         36.32       11.78      23.96      0.06       0.40           0.38                0.18            5309
                                                  (153.09)       (11.70)     (10.54)    (12.47)
                                                                  +27%        +9%        +18%
      Monthly revenue from livestock (USD PPP)      29.42         5.23         2.20      2.88       0.52       0.59           0.88                0.44            5309
12




                                                   (56.58)       (3.72)       (4.08)    (3.60)
                                                                 +18%         +8%       +10%
      Monthly agricultural revenue (USD PPP)        14.12         2.79       -1.17       1.71       0.01       0.54           0.10                0.97            5309
                                                   (17.72)       (1.35)       (1.35)    (1.59)
                                                                 +20%         ­8%       +12%
      Monthly enterprise sales (USD PPP)             9.68         6.64         0.24      6.00       0.14       0.92           0.34                0.90            5309
                                                   (51.83)       (3.85)       (3.08)    (5.67)
                                                                 +69%         +3%       +62%
      Monthly household wage income (USD PPP)       78.01        16.10         5.71      7.97       0.29       0.43           0.81                0.28            5309
                                                  (112.98)       (9.14)       (7.80)    (8.45)
                                                                 +21%         +7%       +10%
                                                        Table B.4: Treatment effects, IPV outcomes

                                                (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                            Pure control      Cash       PM+       Cash + PM+    Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                            mean (SD)      treatment   treatment    treatment   = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Intimate partner violence index          -0.00         -0.05         0.25         0.08      0.02       0.28           0.30                0.53            3052
                                               (1.00)        (0.08)      (0.12)       (0.12)
       Physical violence index                  0.00        -0.06         0.27         0.08      0.01       0.21           0.23                0.49            3052
                                               (1.00)        (0.07)      (0.12)       (0.11)
       Sexual violence index                    0.00        -0.03         0.14         0.06      0.15       0.40           0.58                0.76            3045
13




                                               (1.00)        (0.07)      (0.11)       (0.10)
     Emotional violence index                   0.00          0.11        0.09       -0.01       0.88       0.32           0.36                0.16            3052
                                               (1.00)        (0.11)      (0.09)       (0.09)
     Male attitudes index                       0.00        -0.09       -0.01        -0.05       0.42       0.73           0.69                0.72            3052
                                               (1.00)        (0.08)      (0.08)       (0.09)
     Justifiability of violence index           0.00        -0.03         0.11         0.11      0.21       0.21           0.97                0.86            3052
                                               (1.00)        (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.09)
     Satisfaction with relationship index       0.00          0.07      -0.15        -0.13       0.01       0.02           0.81                0.67            3051
                                               (1.00)        (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.08)
     Violence against children indicator        0.63          0.05        0.05         0.04      0.96       0.84           0.81                0.26            3212
                                               (0.48)        (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.03)
                                                  Table B.5: Treatment effects, IPV further outcomes
                                                      (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                  Pure control      Cash       PM+       Cash + PM+    Cash          Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                  mean (SD)      treatment   treatment    treatment   = PM+      = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
                                                                                                              
     Intimate partner violence index                -0.00         -0.05         0.25         0.08      0.02          0.28           0.30                0.53            3052
                                                     (1.00)        (0.08)      (0.12)       (0.12)
14




     Envelope incl: beaten by husband                 0.74        -0.03       -0.00        -0.06       0.59          0.39           0.17                0.57            3212
                                                     (0.44)        (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)
     Envelope incl: unwanted sexual intercourse       0.56        -0.00       -0.00        -0.01       0.94          0.85           0.91                0.96            3212
                                                     (0.50)        (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)
     Pointed twds. beaten by husband                  0.59        -0.05         0.01       -0.09       0.16          0.31           0.01                0.39            3212
                                                     (0.49)        (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)
     Pointed twds. forced sexual intercourse          0.54        -0.02       -0.02        -0.03       0.98          0.82           0.80                0.85            3212
                                                     (0.50)        (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)
                                                     Table B.6: Treatment effects, food security outcomes
                                                                         (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)           (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                                     Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+    Cash          Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                                     mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment   = PM+      = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
                                                                                                                                                            
     Food security index                                                 0.00          0.14      -0.10       0.13       0.00          0.82           0.00                0.37            5309
                                                                        (1.00)        (0.06)      (0.07)    (0.06)
       Number of times last month adults cut or skipped meals            1.82        -0.21        0.34      -0.11       0.01          0.60           0.04                0.37            5309
                                                                        (4.79)        (0.15)     (0.19)      (0.16)
       Number of times last month children cut or skipped meals          0.77        -0.10        0.17       0.00       0.01          0.17           0.10                0.55            5309
                                                                        (2.37)        (0.06)     (0.09)     (0.07)
       Number of times last month had to borrow food                     0.95        -0.10        0.06       0.04       0.17          0.17           0.89                0.59            5309
                                                                        (2.55)        (0.09)     (0.11)     (0.10)
       All household members regularly eat at least twice a day          0.91          0.03       0.00       0.03       0.13          0.89           0.20                0.88            5309
                                                                        (0.28)        (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)
       All household members regularly eat until they are content        0.87          0.05       0.03       0.04       0.41          0.71           0.67                0.19            5309
                                                                        (0.34)        (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
       Number of times last week respondent has eggs, meat or fish       1.11          0.12      -0.09       0.16       0.02          0.62           0.00                0.25            5309
                                                                        (1.43)        (0.09)      (0.08)    (0.07)
15
                                                    Table B.7: Treatment effects, labor supply outcomes
                                                                      (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)     (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                                  Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+  Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                                  mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Working hours per week per capita                               35.05        -0.50       -1.93      1.00      0.41       0.39           0.10                0.14            5309
                                                                    (25.50)        (1.47)      (1.51)   (1.50)
16




       Hours working in agriculture for this household               16.04        -0.77       -2.24      0.71      0.21       0.21           0.02                0.02            5309
                                                                    (16.84)        (1.09)      (1.14)   (1.15)
       Hours tending animals for this household                      10.07          0.80      -0.38      1.83      0.15       0.24           0.01                0.22            5309
                                                                    (15.24)        (0.77)      (0.76)   (0.83)
       Hours working in non-farm household business                   4.08          0.42       1.09      1.19      0.34       0.24           0.89                0.73            5309
                                                                    (11.57)        (0.47)     (0.64)    (0.58)
       Hours working for pay for someone outside this household      15.50        -0.95       -0.51     -2.66      0.72       0.12           0.06                0.45            5309
                                                                    (19.88)        (1.14)      (1.16)    (1.03)
                                                         Table B.8: Treatment effects, education outcomes
                                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)     (5)        (6)            (7)                 (8)            (9)
                                                                   Pure control      Cash       PM+     Cash + PM+  Cash       Cash           PM+             Cash & PM+
                                                                   mean (SD)      treatment   treatment  treatment = PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash & PM+   = Cash only + PM+ only    N
     Education index                                                 -0.00         -0.05         0.07     -0.07     0.18       0.85           0.16                0.48            1886
                                                                      (1.00)        (0.09)      (0.08)     (0.10)
17




       Proportion of children (< 19) in school                         0.93        -0.00       -0.01        0.00    0.96       0.45           0.47                0.40            5309
                                                                      (0.19)        (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)
       Days of school missed per child in last 30 days                 9.88        -0.11         0.10     -0.18     0.61       0.86           0.50                0.74            5309
                                                                      (6.04)        (0.33)      (0.33)     (0.33)
       Annual expenditure on school expenses per child (USD PPP)     807.52          4.11       19.15    -13.22     0.63       0.58           0.32                0.37            5309
                                                                    (466.12)       (24.17)     (24.96)    (26.38)
       Time spent studying per child in last week                     68.57        -1.39         0.97     -1.29     0.18       0.96           0.21                0.71            5309
                                                                     (24.40)        (1.56)      (1.30)     (1.63)
B.2     Spillover effects
These tables show OLS estimates of spillover effects. Outcome variables, mea-
sured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure control
group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the outcome variable.
Columns (2) and (3) show the spillover effects of the cash-only and PM+-only
treatments, respectively, relative to the pure control group. Standard errors,
clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses, and FDR p-values
in brackets, where applicable. Column (4) shows p-values for the pairwise
comparison of these two spillover effects. Column (5) shows the number of
observations.
  * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                       18
                                       Table B.9: Spillover effects, primary outcomes

                                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)    (5)
                                                                   Pure control     Cash       PM+        Cash =
                                                                   mean (SD)      spillover   spillover    PM+      N
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)              52.49         3.46       1.42       0.45    5309
                                                                      (46.51)       (2.46)     (2.52)
                                                                                    [0.68]     [0.75]
                                                                                    +7%        +3%
     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)                  553.16        13.89       29.29       0.68    5309
                                                                    (664.70)      (35.23)     (33.19)
                                                                                   [1.00]      [0.61]
                                                                                   +3%         +5%
19




     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                             135.48          0.36      22.00       0.03    5309
                                                                    (153.09)        (8.53)    (10.28)
                                                                                    [1.00]     [0.20]
                                                                                    +0%        +16%
     Psychological well-being index                                     0.00         0.02       0.02       0.93    5309
                                                                       (1.00)       (0.05)     (0.06)
                                                                                    [1.00]     [0.87]

     Intimate partner violence index                                  -0.00          0.17       0.17       1.00    3052
                                                                       (1.00)       (0.10)     (0.09)
                                                                                    [0.68]     [0.20]
                           Table B.10: Spillover effects, secondary outcomes

                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)      (4)    (5)
                                             Pure control     Cash        PM+      Cash =
                                             mean (SD)      spillover    spillover PM+       N
     Food security index                          0.00       -0.05        -0.07     0.75    5309
                                                 (1.00)       (0.06)       (0.06)
20




     Monthly household profits (USD PPP)         19.31       -2.20          1.05    0.36    5309
                                                (67.78)       (3.20)       (3.80)
                                                             ­11%          +5%
     Working hours per week per capita           35.05       -0.80        -0.96     0.91    5309
                                                (25.50)       (1.42)       (1.26)

     Education index                            -0.00        -0.15          0.03    0.07    1886
                                                 (1.00)       (0.09)       (0.08)
                        Table B.11: Spillover effects, well-being outcomes

                                            (1)           (2)          (3)      (4)    (5)
                                        Pure control     Cash        PM+      Cash =
                                        mean (SD)      spillover    spillover PM+       N
     Psychological well-being index          0.00         0.02         0.02    0.93    5309
                                            (1.00)       (0.05)       (0.06)
       GHQ-12                              -0.00        -0.03        -0.04     0.79    5309
                                            (1.00)       (0.06)       (0.05)
21




       Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen)      -0.00        -0.00        -0.01     0.85    5309
                                            (1.00)       (0.04)       (0.05)
       Happiness (WVS)                       0.00       -0.02          0.02    0.56    5302
                                            (1.00)       (0.06)       (0.06)
       Life satisfaction (WVS)               0.00         0.05       -0.01     0.43    5309
                                            (1.00)       (0.07)       (0.07)
     WHODAS disability assessment          -0.00        -0.01        -0.09     0.12    5309
                                            (1.00)       (0.06)       (0.06)
     C.                                         Cost effectiveness
                                                                                                    Figure C.1: Cost effectiveness




                                                                                                                                                                - Consumption
                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                - Assets
                                                                                                                                                                - Revenue
     Benefit-cost ratio relative to cash

                                              3




                                                                             PM+ impact per $ spent
                                                                             Cash impact per $ spent
22




                                              2
                                              1
                                              0




                                                         $53     $128 $175
                                                    $0                 $200                 $400                $600                 $800                $1000                $1200

                                                                                                               PM+ cost

                                           Notes: Benefit-cost ratio of PM+ relative to cash transfers. The horizontal axis reflects different potential cost of delivering the PM+ treatment to one person,
                                           ranging from marginal cost (USD 37 nominal per person) to total cost (USD 1,189 nominal per person) in this study. The vertical axis plots the ratio of the
                                           impact of the PM+ (only) treatment on monetary outcomes, per dollar spent on PM+, relative to the impact of the cash transfer (only) treatment on the
                                           same outcomes, per dollar spent on cash transfers. To the left of the dotted vertical lines, PM+ has a larger impact per dollar spent than cash transfers on the
                                           outcome variable in question.
D.      Heterogeneous impacts
To explore whether our estimated treatment effects vary over a set of pre-
specified heterogeneity dimensions, we re-estimate our main equation with
an additional interaction term on one of the five main treatment or spillover
dummies CTvi , P M Pvi , CT /P M Pvi , SP ILLCTvi and SP ILLP M Pvi . For
example, to investigate whether the effect of the cash treatment is differential
for recipients with high baseline assets (HAvi = 1), we estimate


yvi =  + 1 CT vi + h CT vi × HAvi + h HAvi + 2 P M Pvi + 3 CT &P M Pvi
     + 4 DF Svi + 5 SpillCTiv + 6 SpillP M P + Xvi + yviB + vi
                                                                             (2)
     and report h . We repeat this exercise for each of the treatment groups,
and for each of the pre-specified heterogeneity dimensions: a dummy for hold-
ing higher-than-median baseline assets ("high assets"), reporting higher-than-
median baseline intimate partner violence ("high IPV"), being female, or re-
porting higher-than-median psychological distress ("high distress") at baseline.
The tables below show OLS estimates of these analyses. Outcome variables,
measured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure
control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the outcome
variable. Columns (1)­(5) show the interaction term in the heterogeneous
treatment effects specifications for four interactants: asset holdings at base-
line (column 1; median split); IPV at baseline (column 2; median split); gender
(column 3); and high psychological distress at baseline (column 4: 33 percent
most distressed; column 5: median split). Each coefficient can be thought
of as the difference in treatment effects in the group that scores high on the
interactant to the group that scores low on the interactant. Note that all co-
efficients in the table hence stem from different estimations. Standard errors,
clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses.
 * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                      23
                                  Table D.1: Heterogeneous cash treatment effects, primary outcomes

                                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                   (4)                         (5)
                                                            Cash treatment   Cash treatment   Cash treatment        Cash treatment              Cash treatment
                                                             × high assets    × high IPV         × female      × high distress (top 33%)   × high distress (top 50%)
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)       -6.47            -3.19           -13.36                 -8.41                       -1.49
                                                                 (4.60)           (5.54)          (6.00)                 (5.41)                      (5.23)
24




     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)            127.93         -163.42            -91.95                -48.42                         0.10
                                                               (66.91)         (105.72)           (82.28)               (75.53)                     (64.54)
     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                         7.80           -17.95            18.91                -36.70                      -13.97
                                                               (17.33)           (22.24)         (16.96)                (14.50)                     (16.38)
     Psychological well-being index                              0.00            -0.03              0.06                  0.05                        0.12
                                                                (0.09)            (0.11)           (0.10)                (0.09)                      (0.09)
     Intimate partner violence index                             0.28              0.02           -0.10                   0.06                        0.14
                                                                (0.12)            (0.11)           (0.13)                (0.14)                      (0.13)
                                 Table D.2: Heterogeneous PM+ treatment effects, primary outcomes

                                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)                   (4)                         (5)
                                                            PM+ treatment    PM+ treatment   PM+ treatment       PM+ treatment               PM+ treatment
                                                             × high assets    × high IPV       × female      × high distress (top 33%)   × high distress (top 50%)
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)         4.27          -5.13             0.89                  1.49                        2.02
                                                                 (5.66)          (5.68)          (6.89)                (4.90)                      (5.22)
25




     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)            -77.85          -28.91            85.94                 44.27                     -18.28
                                                                (65.70)         (85.36)         (82.72)               (67.01)                     (57.89)
     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                         1.37             8.31           13.07                 12.77                       11.52
                                                               (15.70)          (18.59)         (16.44)               (15.96)                     (17.00)
     Psychological well-being index                             -0.11           -0.16           -0.13                   0.05                        0.06
                                                                 (0.10)          (0.12)          (0.11)                (0.11)                      (0.09)
     Intimate partner violence index                            -0.19             0.19            0.05                  0.06                        0.06
                                                                 (0.24)          (0.24)          (0.21)                (0.25)                      (0.19)
                                Table D.3: Heterogeneous cash & PM+ treatment effects, primary outcomes
                                                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)                         (5)
                                                            Cash & PM+ treatment Cash & PM+ treatment Cash & PM+ treatment Cash & PM+ treatment        Cash & PM+ treatment
                                                                 × high assets        × high IPV            × female       × high distress (top 33%)   × high distress (top 50%)
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)            5.57                  7.97                -2.09                  -2.59                       1.92
                                                                    (5.06)                (4.57)                (5.05)                 (4.32)                    (4.58)
26




     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)               106.46                -16.79                 132.35                  98.33                     22.01
                                                                  (80.28)               (127.48)               (77.81)                (87.22)                   (85.04)
     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                             2.13                 39.34                  3.31                   1.27                    -8.67
                                                                   (18.87)               (19.77)               (20.29)                (15.86)                   (16.82)
     Psychological well-being index                                  0.06                  0.07                  0.05                   0.02                      0.06
                                                                    (0.09)                (0.12)                (0.10)                 (0.11)                    (0.10)
     Intimate partner violence index                               -0.31                 -0.18                 -0.23                  -0.25                     -0.04
                                                                    (0.28)                (0.17)                (0.21)                 (0.19)                    (0.16)
                                                                    Figure D.1: Heterogeneous effects of PM+ on severely distressed participants

                                                                Monthly consumption (USD PPP)                                                        Household assets (USD PPP)                                                    Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)




                                                                                                                                         400
                                                40
           Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                    Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                       Interaction term estimate (95% CI)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                30




                                                                                                                                         200
                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                         -200
                                                0
                                                -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -100
                                                                                                                                         -600
                                                -30




                                                               20        40            60    80                                                 20          40            60      80                                                 20       40            60    80

                                                                         Distress Quantile                                                                  Distress Quantile                                                                 Distress Quantile



                                                                Psychological well-being index                                                   Intimate partner violence index                                                           Food security index




                                                                                                                                         2
           Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                    Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                       Interaction term estimate (95% CI)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                0.5




                                                                                                                                         1
27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                0.0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.2
                                                -0.5




                                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.6
                                                                                                                                         -2




                                                               20        40            60    80                                                 20          40            60      80                                                 20       40            60    80

                                                                         Distress Quantile                                                                  Distress Quantile                                                                 Distress Quantile



                                                              Monthly household profits (USD PPP)                                               Working hours per week per capita                                                            Education index
           Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                    Interaction term estimate (95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                       Interaction term estimate (95% CI)
                                                10 20 30 40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.5
                                                                                                                                         -10
                                                -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1.0
                                                                                                                                         -20




                                                               20        40            60    80                                                 20          40            60      80                                                 20       40            60    80

                                                                         Distress Quantile                                                                  Distress Quantile                                                                 Distress Quantile



     Notes: Estimates for additional heterogeneity analyses of PM+ on the subsample of participants classified as highly distressed (top
     33%) at baseline. Within this subgroup, heterogeneous effects estimations are conducted for the sub-sub-sample of participants
     that are considered severely distressed based on a baseline distress index (weighted index of GHQ and WHODAS scores). The
     definition of severe distress gradually becomes more stringent from left to right along the x-axis, beginning with the entire 33%
     on the left and increasing the cutoff until only one person is considered distressed. The panels plot the interaction coefficients
     and 95% confidence bands for primary and secondary outcomes.
E.       CHW fixed effects
To understand whether the impact of PM+ on psychological well-being differed
by which of the CHWs delivered the intervention, we restrict the sample to
the PM+-only and pure control groups, and regress the z-scored psychological
well-being index on a set of dummies for the CHWs. The histogram below
shows the distribution of treatment effects by CHW.

Figure E.1: Distribution of PM+ treatment effects on psychological well-being
by CHW
         8
         6
     Frequency
        42
         0




                 -2                 -1                         0                 1
                      Average psychological well-being effect size by CHW (SD)




                                                  28
     F.       Treatment effects over time
                                                                                                         Figure F.1: Treatment effects over time
                                                                                   Consumption                                                                             Assets                                                                               Revenue




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                   500
                                                                                                    q Cash




                                   Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                      Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect over time
                                                                                                    q PM+




                                                                30
                                                                                                    q Cash and PM+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                   300
                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                   -100
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                      200   300       400         500    600    700                                       200   300       400      500       600   700                                          200   300       400      500       600   700

                                                                                  Days since treatment                                                                Days since treatment                                                                  Days since treatment



                                                                                       Profits                                                                        Hours Worked                                                                            Well-being




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                   Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                      Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect over time
                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                0
                                                                -20




                                                                                                                                                   -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2
29




                                                                      200   300       400         500    600    700                                       200   300       400      500       600   700                                          200   300       400      500       600   700

                                                                                  Days since treatment                                                                Days since treatment                                                                  Days since treatment



                                                                                            IPV                                                                        Food Security                                                                           Education




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0 0.2
                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                   Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                      Treatment effect over time




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect over time
                                                                1.0




                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.4
                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                0.0




                                                                                                                                                   -0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.8
                                                                      200   300       400         500    600    700                                       200   300       400      500       600   700                                          200   300       400      500       600   700

                                                                                  Days since treatment                                                                Days since treatment                                                                  Days since treatment



          Notes: Treatment effect estimates using our main treatment equation over gradually expanding subsets of data. We begin by restricting the
          sample to the pure control group and those participants in the other treatment arms that received their most recent cash transfer or PM+ session
          200 or fewer days ago, and then gradually widen this time window by one day and include people whose most recent treatment administration
          was 201 days ago, then 202 days, and so forth, until we have included the entire sample. The pure control group is always included in its entirety.
          In each of the nine panels, the horizontal axis corresponds to the time elapsed between endline and the most recent cash transfer or PM+ session,
          and the vertical axis shows treatment effects estimated for the sample defined by each individual point on the horizontal axis. Note that because
          the time window is expanding, individual estiamtes are not independent of one another.
     G.   Demand effects
                                                 Figure G.1: Demand effects
                                                           (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                       Low demand   High demand    Low demand = N low demand /
                                                        mean (SD)    mean (SD)    high demand (p) N high demand
30




          Number of times beaten or slapped                4.65         4.62           0.89        1545 / 1545
                                                          (2.31)       (2.33)
          Number of times forced to have intercourse       2.79         2.76           0.68        1545 / 1545
                                                          (1.25)       (1.27)
          I felt depressed                                 3.43         3.42           0.71        1545 / 1545
                                                          (1.08)       (1.08)
H.      Effects of transfer frequency
To assess whether the frequency of cash transfers impacts outcomes, we restrict the sample to
participants in CT, CT&PM+, and pure control villages and estimate the following model:

           yvi = 0 + 1 LumpCT vi + 2 W eeklyCTvi + 3 CT &P M Pvi + yviB + vi                              (3)

   Here, LumpCTvi is an indicator that the recipient received the cash transfer all at once;
W eeklyCTvi is an indicator the recipient received the cash transfer in weekly installments.
P M Pvi is an indicator that the respondent received the PM+ program in addition to cash
transfers. The comparison between 1 and 2 thus identifies the relative effect of lump-sum
and installment transfers. The outcomes considered in this specification are the same as for
equation 1.2
   The tables below show OLS estimates of the equation above. Outcome variables, mea-
sured at endline, are listed on the left. The first column shows the pure control group mean
and standard deviation (in parentheses) of the outcome variable. Columns (2) and (3) show
the treatment effects of weekly and lump-sum transfers relative to the pure control group,
respectively. Column (4) shows p- values for the comparison of the two treatment effects.
Standard errors, clustered at the village level, are shown in parentheses.
  * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses.




   2
     In the pre-analysis plan, we wrote that this analysis would include village-level fixed effects, thinking
that the randomization into lump-sum vs. weekly transfers happened within villages. This was an error--the
randomization happened at the village level. We therefore omit the fixed effects, which would be collinear
with treatment.

                                                     31
                                       Table H.1: Transfer frequency, primary outcomes

                                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)     (5)
                                                             Pure control      Weekly         Lump sum        Weekly =
                                                             mean (SD)      cash transfers   cash transfers   lump sum    N
     Monthly per-capita non-durable consumption (USD PPP)       52.49          14.93             6.93           0.05     2397
                                                               (46.51)         (3.90)           (4.12)
                                                                               +28%             +13%
     Total value of assets household owns (USD PPP)            553.16          301.67           245.63          0.34     2397
                                                              (664.70)         (52.19)          (48.41)
                                                                                +55%             +44%
     Monthly household revenue (USD PPP)                       135.48           52.74            20.67          0.02     2397
                                                              (153.09)         (13.51)          (13.77)
                                                                                +39%             +15%
     Psychological well-being index                              0.00            0.22             0.25          0.71     2397
32




                                                                (1.00)          (0.07)           (0.08)

     Intimate partner violence index                           -0.00           -0.00            -0.08           0.50     1394
                                                                (1.00)          (0.10)           (0.09)
I.      Indices and variables
The variables or indices below marked with a + are primary outcomes of interest. Variables
or indices marked with a # are secondary outcomes. Impacts on variables or indices below
marked with a * are not primary or secondary, but are reported in the detailed outcome
tables.
   1. Non-durable consumption+ ­ monthly consumption per capita
        (a) Food*
              i. Food own production* (value of milk, meat, eggs and additional animal prod-
                 ucts consumed, value of top three crops produced consumed)
             ii. Food bought
                 A. Meat, fish & dairy*
                 B. Fruit & vegetables*
                 C. Cereals*
                 D. Other food* (roots, pulses, oils, sugars, prepared food, other food)
        (b) Temptation good expenditure*
               i. Alcohol
               ii. Tobacco
              iii. Gambling
        (c) Personal and household items*
               i. Clothing and shoes
               ii. Personal items such as soap, shampoo, etc.
              iii. Household items such as matches, kerosene, etc.
        (d)   Housing repair or improvement*
        (e)   Education expenditures*
        (f)   Medical expenditure*
        (g)   Social expenditure*
               i. Religious expenses or other ceremonies
               ii. Weddings
              iii. Funerals
         (h) Other expenses greater than KES 1,000
     2. Food security# ­ weighted standardized index of:
        (a) Number of times last month adults cut or skipped meals (negatively coded)*
        (b) Number of times last month children cut or skipped meals (negatively coded)*

                                               33
   (c) Number of times last month had to borrow food or rely on help from a friend or
       relative (negatively coded)*
   (d) All household members eat two meals a day (indicator)*
   (e) All household members usually eat until content (indicator)*
    (f) Number of times last week respondent has eggs, meat or fish*
3. Assets+ ­ sum of value of:
   (a) Productive assets*
         i. Irrigation pump
         ii. Hose pipe
        iii. Ox-ploughs
        iv. Oxen/work bulls
         v. Knapsack sprayers
        vi. Wheelbarrows
       vii. Ox-carts/donkey carts
       viii. Hand carts
        ix. Other farming tools
         x. Fishing equipment (boats, canoes, etc)
        xi. Other asset used for agriculture or business
   (b) Vehicles*
         i. Bicycle
         ii. Motorbike
   (c) Furniture*
         i. Sofas
         ii. Chairs
        iii. Table
        iv. Clock/Watch
         v. Beds
        vi. Mattresses
       vii. Cupboards
       viii. Other furniture
   (d) Household durables*

                                         34
         i. Cell phone
        ii. Sewing machine
       iii. Radio, tape or CD player
       iv. Battery
        v. Solar panel
       vi. Television or computer
       vii. Kerosene stove
      viii. Refrigerator
   (e) Other
   (f) Livestock*
         i. Cows (valued at average sample sales price)
        ii. Birds (valued at average sample sales price)
       iii. Small ruminants (valued at average sample sales price)
   (g) Financial assets* - net balance (KES) of savings minus outstanding loans:
         i. Savings with an institution (bank, SACCO, micro-finance organization)
        ii. Savings with MPesa
       iii. Savings in any other place (e.g., with family or friends)
       iv. Loans made by friends or family
        v. Loans from moneylenders, micro-finance institutions, shops, banks or other
           sources
4. Revenue+ ­ sum of monthly household revenue from:
   (a) Livestock*
         i. Cows
           A. Value of milk (sold and consumed)
           B. Value of meat (sold and consumed)
           C. Value of animals sold
           D. Value of other products
        ii. Small ruminants
           A. Value of meat (sold and consumed)
           B. Value of animals sold
           C. Value of other products

                                         35
        iii. Birds
            A. Value of eggs (sold and consumed)
            B. Value of meat (sold and consumed)
            C. Value of animals sold
   (b) Agricultural income (most recent agricultural season)*
         i. Value of crops harvested in most recent season
    (c) Enterprise income*
         i. Sales in prior month (prorated for share of enterprise owned if applicable)
   (d) Wage income*
         i. Sum of income from outside labor
5. Profits# ­ sum of monthly household revenue less costs from:
   (a) Livestock revenue - Cost of care (e.g. fodder, veterinary care, etc.) - Cost of
       rented animals
   (b) Crop revenue - Costs of seeds, fertilizers/herbicides/pesticides, hired machines,
       water, labor and other expenses
    (c) Enterprise revenue - Costs of electricity, wages, water, transport, purchase of
        inputs, other costs (prorated for share of enterprise owned if applicable)
6. Labor# ­ hours spent per week per capita on income generating activities, including:
   (a) Working in agriculture for this household*
   (b) Tending animals for this household*
    (c) Working in a non-farm or livestock business owned by this household*
   (d) Working for pay for someone outside the household (in agriculture, livestock,
       housework, casual labor, salaried job or other paid work)*
7. Education index# ­ weighted standardized index of:
   (a) Proportion of children (<19) in school*
   (b) Average days of school missed per child (<19; last 30 days)* - negatively coded
    (c) Average spending on school expenses per child (<19; last 12 months)*
   (d) Average time studying or in school per child (<19; last 7 days)*
8. Psychological well-being+ ­ weighted standardized index of (a)-(d):
   (a) GHQ-12* with standard scoring

                                          36
   (b) Cohen Stress (PSS)*
   (c) WVS (happiness)* (1-4 scale)
   (d) WVS (life satisfaction)* (1-10 scale)
   (e) WHODAS
9. Intimate Partner Violence+ ­ weighted standardized index of physical and sexual vio-
   lence variables. The recall period is the preceding 6 months.
   (a) Physical violence
         i. How many times per month did your husband beat you, slap you or act
            violently against you?
         ii. How many times per month did your husband push you, shake you, or throw
             something at you?
        iii. How many times per month did your husband slap you?
        iv. How many times per month did your husband twist your arm or pull your
            hair?
         v. How many times per month did your husband punch you with his fist or with
            something that could hurt you?
        vi. How many times per month did your husband kick you, drag you or beat you
            up?
       vii. How many times per month did your husband try to choke you or burn you
            on purpose?
       viii. How many times per month did your husband threaten to attack you with a
             knife, gun, or any other weapon?
        ix. How many times per month did your husband beat any of the children un-
            der the age of 12 living in this household or discipline them using physical
            measures?
   (b) Sexual violence
         i. How many times per month did your husband physically force you to have
            sexual intercourse with him even when you did not want to?
         ii. How many times per month did your husband force you to perform any sexual
             acts you did not want to?
   (c) Emotional violence
         i. How many times per month did your husband not trust you with any money?


                                         37
     ii. How many times per month did your husband expect you to ask him for
         permission before leaving the house?
    iii. How many times per month did your husband ever insult you or make you
         feel bad about yourself?
(d) Attitudes: Male focused attitudes
      i. The important decisions in the family should be made only by the men of the
         family
     ii. The wife has the right to express her opinion even when she disagrees with
         what her husband is saying
    iii. It is the husband's responsibility to provide for the wife and the family
    iv. A real man produces a male child
(e) Attitudes about justifiability of violence
      i. A wife should tolerate being beaten by her husband
     ii. It is acceptable for a husband to not trust his wife with any money
    iii. It is acceptable for a husband to expect his wife to ask him for permission
         before leaving the house
    iv. Emotional violence attitude: It is acceptable for a husband to insult his wife
        or make her feel bad about herself
     v. Physical violence attitude: It is acceptable for a husband to beat his wife,
        slap her, or act violently against her
    vi. Sexual violence attitude: It is acceptable for a husband to physically force
        his wife to have sexual intercourse with her even when she does not want to
    vii. Child violence attitude: It is acceptable for a father to beat his children under
         the age of 12 or discipline them using physical measures.
(f) Satisfaction with relationship ­ weighted standardized index of:
      i. Are you satisfied with your relationship?
     ii. How often do you think your relationship is good compared to most other
         relationships in your village? How often do you think that your relationship
         met your original expectations?
    iii. How often are there any problems in your relationship?
    iv. How often do you wish you hadn't gotten in this relationship?
     v. How often do you feel that your husband is unable to provide sufficiently for
        you and your family?

                                        38
(g) Violence against children (indicator)
(h) Intimate partner violence: testing for reporting and demand effects
      i. List randomization: physical and sexual violence
     ii. Envelope randomization: physical and sexual violence
    iii. Anonymous reporting by pointing at faces (physical and sexual violence against
         spouse, physical violence against children)
        A. In the past 6 months, has your husband ever beaten you, slapped you, or
           acted violently against you? Please point to the happy face if this DID
           NOT happen to you. Please point to the sad face if this DID happen to
           you.
        B. In the past 6 months, did your spouse ever beat any of the children under
           the age of 12 living in this household or disciplined them using physical
           measures? Please point to the happy face if this DID NOT happen to
           any children under the age of 12 living in the household. Please point to
           the sad face if this DID happen to any of the children under the age of
           12 living in the household.
        C. In the past 6 months, has your husband ever forced you to have sexual
           intercourse with him even when you did not want to? Please point to the
           happy face if this DID NOT happen to you. Please point to the sad face
           if this DID happen to you.
    iv. Demand treatments: difference in answers to physical and sexual violence
        questions before vs. after demand treatment, with individual-level fixed ef-
        fects.
(i) Bargaining power: indifference point between receiving KES 1000 oneself, or one's
    spouse receiving KES 800­2000.




                                      39
