                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      VOLATILITY EXPECTATIONS AND RETURNS

                                      Lars A. Lochstoer
                                         Tyler Muir

                                     Working Paper 28102
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28102


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank seminar participants at NBER Behavioral Finance, Virtual Finance Seminar, UCLA,
UT Austin, Tilburg, Toronto, Insead, Norwegian School of Economics, Maastricht, Nova, and
Amsterdam, and Andy Atkeson, Nick Barberis, John Campbell, Ing-Haw Cheng, Mike Chernov,
Itamar Dreschler (discussant), Andrea Eisfeldt, Stefano Giglio (discussant), Valentin Haddad,
Barney Hartman-Glaser, Hanno Lustig, Alan Moreira, Stefan Nagel, Stavros Panageas, Andrei
Shleifer, Kelly Shue, and two anonymous referees for comments. We thank James O'Neill and
Alvaro Boitier for excellent research assistance. We thank Ing-Haw Cheng, Stefano Giglio, Ian
Dew-Becker, and Travis Johnson for making data available. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lars A. Lochstoer and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Volatility Expectations and Returns
Lars A. Lochstoer and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 28102
November 2020
JEL No. G0,G12,G4

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that agents have slow-moving beliefs about stock market volatility that lead
to initial underreaction to volatility shocks followed by delayed overreaction. These dynamics are
mirrored in the VIX and variance risk premiums which reflect investor expectations about
volatility and are also supported in surveys and in firm-level option prices. We embed these
expectations into an asset pricing model and find that the model can account for a number of
stylized facts about market returns and return volatility which are difficult to reconcile, including
a weak, or even negative, risk-return tradeoff.


Lars A. Lochstoer
University of California at Los Angeles
lars.lochstoer@anderson.ucla.edu

Tyler Muir
University of California at Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
tyler.muir@anderson.ucla.edu
1.       Introduction
Agents perceptions of risk play a critical role in asset pricing models. However, a
long literature finds that the empirical risk-return tradeoff is weak at best (Glosten,
Jagannathan, and Runkle, 1993), despite this tradeoff being strong in leading asset
pricing models (Moreira and Muir, 2017).1 This paper proposes a model where the
representative agent may have biased, slow moving expectations about volatility and
we show that these expectations can help explain a weak relation between risk and
return. We discipline the expectations about volatility in the model in three ways: we
microfound beliefs based on sticky and extrapolative expectations (shown to be present
in many other contexts), we use survey data to directly assess agents expectations of
volatility, and we study prices and returns of volatility dependent claims (VIX futures,
variance swaps, and straddles) which help assess if mistakes in beliefs are present in
financial market prices.
     Expectations about volatility appear to initially underreact to news about volatil-
ity followed by a delayed overreaction. This pattern matches direct empirical facts
about volatility dependent claims and the variance risk premium. Cheng (2018) finds
that prices of VIX futures do not respond strongly enough to changes in volatility, so
that increases in volatility negatively predict the premium on a short-position in VIX
futures. We extend these results to variance swaps and straddle returns over a longer
sample. Claims that provide insurance against future volatility, which are uncondition-
ally expensive, initially appear "too cheap" after volatility rises but appear expensive
later on. This is hard to square with a rational risk premium because these claims
are typically riskier after volatility rises (Cheng, 2018), suggesting the risk premium
should go up rather than down.
     We then embed these beliefs into an otherwise standard Epstein-Zin (1989) equi-
librium model with stochastic volatility and argue we can explain many empirical facts
     1
      Moreira and Muir (2017) show that the basic risk-return relation is strong in calibrations of
leading equilibrium asset pricing models (including habits, long run risk, time-varying disasters, and
intermediary based models). Martin (2016) argues this relationship holds in a wide class of models if
2 t is replaced by risk-neutral variance which we will consider empirically as well.

                                                  2
about stock market volatility, the VIX, the variance risk premium, and stock returns.
First, the model can generate a weak ­ and potentially even negative ­ conditional risk-
return tradeoff. When volatility rises, agents only partially react by requiring a higher
expected return on stocks which pushes current stock prices down. This matches the
negative correlation between realized returns and volatility innovations (French, Schw-
ert, and Stambaugh, 1987) and is consistent with a discount rate effect from volatility
shocks. Given the initial underreaction, however, agents on average again update pos-
itively about volatility next period even without additional news. This effect can push
prices next period down further, and make it appear as though the initial increase
in volatility is associated with a future decline in the observed equity risk premium
in the short term. Through this channel, the model can simultaneously match that
realized stock returns are strongly negatively correlated with contemporaneous innova-
tions in volatility (French et al., 1987) while also generating a weak risk-return tradeoff
(Glosten et al., 1993). This also leads to volatility timing strategies which generate
positive alpha (Moreira and Muir, 2017). The price decline is hump-shaped and prices
take longer to recover than in the rational benchmark, implying that objective equity
risk premiums are high well after the volatility shock subsides. We provide evidence
consistent with this view, as in Brandt and Kang (2004).
   The variance risk premium ­ defined as V IX 2 minus an objective forecast of vari-
ance ­ will also feature underreaction and delayed overreaction directly through the
beliefs channel which shows up in market implied volatility (VIX). Because the mistake
in beliefs shows up both in volatility claims and equity claims in the same direction,
the observed variance risk premium will positively forecast stock returns (Bollerslev,
Tauchen, and Zhou, 2009; Drechsler and Yaron, 2011). However, compared to ratio-
nal models that link equity and variance risk premiums (Bollerslev et al., 2009), our
model can account for the otherwise puzzling evidence that while the variance risk
premium positively forecasts stock returns, neither the VIX nor realized variance are
individually strong forecasters of returns.
   We microfound the beliefs in our model through sticky expectations and extrapola-

                                              3
tion, both of which have been found in many other contexts (i.e., Coibion and Gorod-
nichenko (2015), Mankiw and Reis (2002), Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018)
and Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2019)).2 These forces combine to generate initial un-
derreaction and delayed overreaction to volatility news. Intuitively, sticky expectations
lead to underreaction in beliefs particularly at short horizons, while overextrapolation
leads to overreaction. While these forces are prevalent in other work and lead to a
convenient and tractable belief process, we do not take a strong stand on these micro-
foundations ­ other behavioral factors that lead to initial underreaction and delayed
overreaction might also generate similar dynamics (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrah-
manyam, 1998; Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998; Hong and Stein, 1999).3
    We use survey data on volatility and uncertainty about stock returns from the
Graham and Harvey CFO survey (as well as the Shiller survey) and document that the
surveys exhibit slow moving expectations as in our model. In particular, respondents
are asked about the 90th and 10th percentile of stock returns over the next year,
which we use to infer beliefs about volatility. We regress survey expectations about
volatility on past volatility realizations and show that expectations look like a weighted
average of past volatility realizations as our model predicts, whereas optimal forecasts
mainly load only on current volatility. Thus, the surveys expectations appear sticky
or slow-moving. The evidence of slow updating toward volatility is consistent with the
dynamics of CFO learning found in Boutros, Ben-David, Graham, Harvey, and Payne
(2019). We also use longer horizon survey evidence based on a 10 year horizon which
allows us to assess agents views on the persistence of volatility. Similar to Landier
et al. (2019), agents use a persistence parameter that is too large, consistent with
overextrapolation. This can generate overreaction in long run claims on volatility in
    2
      See Payzan-LeNestour, Pradier, and Putni¸ns (2018) for related work on expectations of volatility
based on past volatility. Bouchaud, Krueger, Landier, and Thesmar (2019) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy,
and Lustig (2018) apply sticky expectations to the profitability anomaly and exchange rates, respec-
tively.
    3
      Our model is related to other models of extrapolation from past data or experience effects
including Barberis, Greenwood, Jin, and Shleifer (2015), Collin-Dufresne, Johannes, and Lochstoer
(2016), Nagel and Xu (2019), Malmendier and Nagel (2011), Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), and
Glaeser and Nathanson (2017).

                                                  4
the spirit of Giglio and Kelly (2017) and Stein (1989).
    The sharpest place to identify such beliefs in financial market prices is in volatility
claims and option markets. While survey evidence is useful, a concern is that biases
in surveys may not show up in prices (i.e., if respondents don't actively trade or other
rational agents trade sufficiently to eliminate respondents' impact on prices). We
follow and extend (Cheng, 2018) and show that the mistakes in the model show up in
prices and in predictable variation in the returns of variance swaps, VIX futures, and
straddles. We also document results at the firm level, where we show implied volatility
from firm level options does not react strongly enough to recent changes in volatility,
leading to underreaction and a lower variance risk premium following increases in
volatility (see Poteshman (2001) for related work). This is true even when we include
time fixed effects that control for aggregate movements in firm volatility which makes
a risk based explanation even more difficult. The firm level analysis provides further
support for our story of initial underreaction and also provides robustness to our main
empirical results which rely on aggregate market data and hence a relatively smaller
sample.4
    We use the survey data and evidence from option markets to calibrate our model.
The calibrated model does fairly well at quantitatively matching the main stylized facts
in the literature on the relation between volatility, stock returns, and the variance risk
premium (which we extend to a more recent sample). Most importantly, we show
that slow-moving expectations about volatility are key to matching these dynamics ­
the nested rational version of the model fails to account for the evidence. We come to
similar conclusions for the rational model of Bollerslev et al. (2009). A natural concern
is that biases in beliefs will lead to excessive trading profits for a rational investor in
the model. The mistakes in the calibrated model are modest: agents beliefs about
volatility in the model have a correlation of about 0.9 with an objective forecast. In
an extension, we show that Sharpe ratio gains for a rational investor who trades on
   4
     Rachwalski and Wen (2016) also provide firm level evidence on the risk-return tradeoff: "Stocks
with increases in idiosyncratic risk tend to earn low subsequent returns for a few months. However,
high idiosyncratic risk stocks eventually earn persistently high returns."

                                                 5
these mistakes are modest compared to other anomalies in the literature. We also
explicitly consider learning in our objective volatility forecasts where we construct
estimates of variance using only data available to the agents at the time.
     Our model is parsimonious, stylized, and tractable and our main point is this simple
change in volatility expectations can help match key features of the data. However,
we also outline several shortcomings of the model and discuss extensions that add
complication but better fit certain features of the data. Finally, we present additional
model implications on the term structure of volatility dependent returns and discuss
alternative models.
     Section 2 provides a microfoundation for the expectations in this paper and brings
in survey data about volatility. Section 3 presents the model, while Section 4 compares
the model to the stylized facts in the literature on stock returns, volatility, the VIX,
and the variance risk premium. Section 5 provides additional evidence, discusses
shortcomings of the model, and considers alternative explanations.



2.      Belief Microfoundations and Survey Evidence

2.1     A simple microfounded model of variance belief formation

There is a burgeoning literature estimating investor beliefs from both surveys and
experiments. For instance, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) find that average survey
expectations display dynamics consistent with the sticky information model of Mankiw
and Reis (2003). In this model, average expectations are sticky since only a fraction of
agents update their information set at each point in time. At the same time, evidence
on individual agents expectations (e.g., Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Sheifer (2020),
Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2019)) find that agents tend to overextrapolate in the
sense that they believe shocks have a more persistent effect than they truly do. These
two biases thus appear pervasive in survey data.
     We provide a simple model of investor expectations of stock market variance that


                                            6
allows for both stickiness and overextrapolation. In particular, as in Mankiw and Reis
(2003), let a fraction 1 -  of agents update beliefs at each point in time. Denote their
                                                                    S
time t - j expectation of realized variance (rv ) at time t + 1 as Ej,t-j [rvt+1 ], where

the S superscript stands for subjective expectations. The average forecast, denoted
EtS [rvt+1 ], is then:
                                                       
                            EtS [rvt+1 ]   = (1 -  )           j Ej,t
                                                                  S
                                                                     -j [rvt+1 ].          (1)
                                                       j =0

    Further, we let agents believe realized variance follows an AR(1) process with
autocorrelation coefficient ~. If ~ is too high relative to the true process for expected
variance, agents overextrapolate. That is, consistent with the findings in Landier, Ma,
and Thesmar (2019), we allow individual agents to believe that the true process is
more persistent than it really is. This gives a simple model that relates expectations
to lagged realized variance:

                                                          
                         EtS [rvt+1 ] = v
                                        ¯ + (1 -  )~
                                                                 j~j (rvt-j - v
                                                                              ¯),          (2)
                                                         j =0


where v
      ¯ is the unconditional mean. This form of belief formation is also used in Brooks,
Katz, and Lustig (2018). A higher value of  implies more information stickiness. If
the underlying true process is persistent, stickiness can lead to initial underreaction in
aggregate beliefs as these beliefs load too heavily on past lags of realized variance. If
the underlying true process is not sufficiently persistent (e.g., if it is i.i.d.), the beliefs
process only generates overreaction. A higher value of ~ leads to overreaction and too
persistent beliefs.
    This is particularly clear if we consider agents' longer-run expectations about vari-
ance, as the expected variance k periods from today is:


                             EtS [rvt+k ] = v
                                            ¯+~k-1 (EtS [rvt+1 ] - v
                                                                   ¯).                     (3)


    This model provides a useful way to understand our empirical estimates and gives a
microfoundation for the belief dynamics we use in our main model and that we uncover
                                                   7
in survey beliefs. Stickiness leads to initial underreaction, while the overextrapolation
bias leads to subsequent overreaction. We note, however, that belief patterns which
generate initial underreaction and delayed overreaction can be generated assuming
other investor biases, as has been done in previous literature (Daniel et al., 1998;
Barberis et al., 1998; Hong and Stein, 1999). We leave the exercise of distinguishing
these potentially different microfoundations for future work.


2.2     Survey Data

We bring survey data related to volatility which allows us to evaluate the main mech-
anism in our paper using direct data on expectations. Our main source is the Graham
and Harvey survey of CFOs which is quarterly from 2001 to 2018. The survey asks
respondents for a mean forecast for the stock market over the next year as well as
10th and 90th percentiles. We construct the 90th minus 10th percentile as a mea-
sure of volatility or uncertainty and square this number to get a measure of expected
variance. While this measure has limitations, it captures how spread out agents view
the return distribution, and under the view of a normal distribution would perfectly
capture agents expectations about variance.


2.2.1   Stickiness of variance expectations

We fit survey expectations and actual realized variance over the period investors are
asked to forecast as an exponential weighted average of past variance as in the micro-
founded model above. In particular, we project the expected 12-month variance from
the survey onto lagged monthly realized variance using the same functional form as
that in our model (Equation (2)):

                                                J
                            (1yr)
                      Surveyt       = a+b             j rvt-j +   s
                                                                  t,t+12 .           (4)
                                               j =0




                                           8
Since the variance-measure from the survey is only proportional to variance, we focus
on the estimated value of  in this regression. Relative to the model above,  =  ~.
We emphasize, however, that a non-zero  for the survey alone does not necessarily
imply non-rational expectations.5
     Note that we allow survey expectations to embody signals other than lagged re-
alized variance. In particular, we do not require that the error term is i.i.d. and we
compute standard errors with block bootstrap with a 6 quarter block length. We set
J = 11 so that we use one year of lagged realized variance given our finite sample.
Our results are not sensitive to small variation in the number of lags. The survey is
quarterly, t = 3, 6, 9, ..., T , but we use the monthly frequency for rv (sum of squared
daily returns to the S&P500 in a given month) as our model and later data analysis
is at the monthly frequency.
     Table 1 reports that the estimated value of  is 0.87 with a standard error of 0.11.
Thus, survey respondents effectively take into account many lags of realized variance
when forming expectations about future variance. As a benchmark, we also report
the results from projecting realized variance over the next 12 months onto lagged rv
using the same functional form on the right hand side as in Equation (4). If the survey
expectations are rational, these two projections will yield the same coefficients.6 In this
benchmark case,  is estimated to be -0.16. The difference between this estimate and
the estimate using the survey expectations is statistically significant at the 1%-level
as reported in the table. In other words, the full-information rational expectations
process for realized variance loads much more heavily on current variance and less on
past variance over this sample, while agents' expectations appear sticky in the sense
that they assign higher than optimal weights to additional lags.
     Next, we evaluate the extent to which survey expectations reflect the information
    5
       The lag structure is that of an ARMA(1,1) in realized variance, which is a parsimonious way
to capture short- and long-run dynamics in expected variance. Thus, the model also allows for a
commonly used process for the objective dynamics of realized variance. See Appendix D.1 and D.1.1
for further details about the survey, as well as derivations showing how the lag structure in Equation
(4) relates to an ARMA(1,1) and the above model of beliefs.
     6
       To see this, note that E [E [rvt,t+12 |y t , rv t ]|rvt , ..., rvt-11 ] = E [rvt,t+12 |rvt , ..., rvt-11 ] where y t is
the history of other signals and rv t is the history of rv .
                                                              9
in the VIX, and vice versa. In Panel B of Table 1, we regress the squared V IX on the
contemporaneous survey expectation of variance, as well as the most recent monthly
realized variance. Both variables come in positive and significant at the 1%-level with
an R2 of 74%. If we instead put next year's realized variance on the left-hand-side
(rightmost column of Panel B), the survey comes in with an insignificant negative sign,
while the lagged variance comes in positive and strongly significant. Thus, a rational
forecast does not load on the survey at all after controlling for the current level of
realized variance, while the squared VIX is in fact strongly related to the survey. The
survey expectations should show up in the VIX if they capture the expectations of
market participants, and the results in Panel B of Table 1 indicates that they indeed
do.
      As a more direct way to explore this, we also use the V IX 2 in place of the survey
as a measure of market expected variance and again estimate our  parameter. We
estimate a  of 0.42 (std err of 0.12) using VIX data from January 1990 to April 2020.
Thus, the dependence on past variance that leads agents expectations to respond too
slowly (underreaction) is present not just in surveys, but in actual market prices of
expected variance.7 However, the lower value for  suggests that this bias is much
lower in actual financial market prices.
      An additional source of survey evidence on volatility is from Robert Shiller who
asks investors the probability of a stock market crash over the next 6 months such as
that seen in 1987. This survey is monthly from July of 2001. While this measure is not
as direct as a measure of variance expectations, it does gauge agents beliefs about risk
in the stock market in general. We use this survey as a robustness check and relegate
the findings to a Appendix Table 16. The Shiller survey produces an estimate of  of
around 0.77, close to the value found in the CFO survey. This provides further support
for stickiness in variance expectations (e.g.,  > 0). The evidence of slow updating
    7
      Other evidence also suggests agents do take action based on their reported beliefs about risk,
which is important for survey beliefs to affect prices. Giglio, Maggiori, Stroebel, and Utkus (2019)
show that survey data on investor beliefs about risk translates directly into actions in terms of portfolio
allocations, while Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) find that CFO expectations about volatility
translate into investment decisions.

                                                    10
toward volatility is consistent with the findings of Boutros et al. (2019).
   To further assess the degree of investors slow moving expectations, we run a first
order vector autoregression (VAR) with future realized variance as well as the reported
expectations from the survey. Both variables are normalized to have unit standard
deviation. We order future variance first, followed by the survey expectation and plot
the impulse response to a one standard deviation variance shock. Results are given
in Figure 3. As before, future variance increases substantially after this shock then
subsequently declines as it mean reverts. The survey expectations, however, show a
hump shaped response, with expectations continuing to rise after the initial shock.
This is directly consistent with finding a large value of  in the survey beliefs. The
expectations initially do not rise as much (underreaction) but then subsequently remain
elevated long after expected variance declines (subsequent overreaction), consistent
with the dependence of survey expectation on longer lags of past variance. The pattern
from both surveys is similar, and this prediction is exactly what we expect from our
model of slow moving expectations of volatility. Thus, two independent surveys provide
consistent evidence in favor of the mechanism we propose.


2.2.2   Persistence of variance expectations

Next, we evaluate the persistence of agents' beliefs as implied by the CFO survey.
Importantly, respondents are asked the same questions about the return distribution
at the 10 year horizon. Equation (3) shows how long-run forecasts relate to the short-
run forecast under the illustrative model of aggregate expectations given earlier. The
10-year and 1-year survey forecasts are for cumulative 10- and 1-year variance expressed
in annual terms. Thus, we have:

                                                      11
                EtS [rvt+1 + ... + rvt+12 ] = 12¯
                                                v+         ~k (EtS [rvt+1 ] - v
                                                                              ¯),
                                                     k=0
                                                     119
              1 S
                Et [rvt+1 + ... + rvt+120 ] = 12¯
                                                v+     ~k (EtS [rvt+1 ] - v
                                                                          ¯),
             10                                    k=0



                                           11
which implies that

                                      (10yr)                      (1yr)
                           Surveyt               ~+~
                                               = a b × Surveyt            + t,

                119 k
                k=0 ~               ~120
where ~
      b=   10    11
                      ~k
                           =   1 1-
                               10 1-~12
                                           and where the error term allows this relation to not be
                 k=0 

exact.
   Panel C of Table 1 shows that ~
                                 b = 0.25 with a standard error of 0.04 in the sample
available. Under the belief model above, the implied monthly autocorrelation, ~, is 0.96
with a 95% confidence interval from 0.92 to 0.97. This is much more persistent than the
autocorrelation of realized variance, which is only 0.72 in this sample, which implies
that agents overextrapolate when forecasting future variance. This number is close to
the experimental evidence in Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2019) who provide agents
reported belief about persistence as a function of the true persistence of the process.
These results echo the evidence in Stein (1989) and Giglio and Kelly (2017) who show
overreaction of long term volatility expectations from options data and variance swap
prices, respectively. In particular, they argue that longer term expectations of volatility
are too volatile relative to those at short horizons, a form of relative overreaction in
long term expectations.
   In summary, the survey-based variance expectations indicate that agents' expec-
tations are sticky in the sense that they use too many lags of variance to form expec-
tations of future variance  > 0, and that agents perceive the persistence of variance
to be substantially higher than it truly is ~ > . A reasonable concern is that survey
forecasts do not reflect expectations of agents in the market and that these beliefs
therefore are not important for asset prices. However, we have shown that these pat-
terns show up in the VIX. Later, we strengthen this evidence further by studying
the implications of biased beliefs on return predictability for claims on stock market
variance. In particular, this finding directly links to the work of Cheng (2018) who
shows that the price of volatility claims don't respond strongly enough to increases in
volatility. These "mistakes," or forecast errors, are better assessed in terms of return

                                                     12
predictability, i.e., if agents make mistakes in their expectations about volatility this
should feed into the prices of volatility dependent claims and generate return pre-
dictability, as Cheng (2018) shows. We reevaluate this evidence in light of our model
in Section 4.



3.      The Model
In this section, we develop an asset pricing model similar to that in Bansal and Yaron
(2004) except that we allow the representative investor to have biased beliefs regarding
the dynamics of stock return volatility. This simple modification enables the model to
account for the empirical evidence discussed earlier.
     Let the objective process for aggregate log dividend growth be given by:


                           dt = µ +  t t ,                                           (5)

                             2   ¯ +  2
                             t = v    t-1 - v
                                            ¯ +  t ,                                 (6)


where  2
       t is the realized variance of dividend growth innovations, observed at time t,

and t and  t are uncorrelated i.i.d. standard Normal shocks. Variance is persistent
with 0 <  < 1. Equation (6) implies that variance can go negative. For ease of expo-
sition we follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) and proceed as if  2
                                                            t is always non-negative.

In Appendix B, we show that this simplification is unimportant for our conclusions by
solving a model with Gamma distributed variance shocks, where variance is guaranteed
to always be positive.
     We assume a representative stockholder with consumption equal to aggregate div-
idends whose marginal utility prices all claims in the economy but whose beliefs po-
tentially depart from rationality. The agents' expectations of the conditional variance




                                           13
of dividend growth are given by:


                      EtS   2
                        -1  t      = v
                                     ¯ + xt-1 ,                                     (7)

                             xt = xt-1 + (1 - )  2
                                                 t -v
                                                    ¯
                                               
                                   = (1 - )    j =0   j  2
                                                         t-j - v
                                                               ¯ .                  (8)


The S superscript on the expectations operator highlights that the expectation is
taken under the agent's subjective beliefs. If  = 0 and  = , the agent has rational
expectations about the volatility dynamics, while if  > 0 the agent has slow-moving
volatility expectations, allowing an exponentially weighted average of past variance to
affect the current expectation, as opposed to only the current value as the physical
volatility dynamics prescribe. The scale of agents' expectations is set by , and we
return to the interpretation of this parameter shortly. We assume 0 < ,  < 1.
Section 2.1 provides direct microfoundations for these beliefs using a model of sticky
expectations and overextrapolation. In this case,  = (1 -  )~
                                                             and  =  ~, where  > 0
governs the stickiness of expectations and ~ >  implies that investors overextrapolate.
These two features have been found in many other settings analyzing survey evidence
(e.g., Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Sheifer (2020),
Landier, Ma, and Thesmar (2019)).
   Under agents' beliefs, the shock to variance is:


                         S
                         t  2
                            t -v
                               ¯ - xt-1

                                =  2
                                   t-1 - v
                                         ¯ - xt-1 +  t ,                            (9)


where   2     ¯ - xt-1 = EtP
        t-1 - v
                                2      S     2      P    S
                           -1 [ t ] - Et-1 [ t ] = Et-1  t is the mistake agents
make when forecasting variance. Here a P superscript on the expectations operator
means the expectation is taken under the objective measure. We can thus write the




                                          14
dynamics of xt under agents' beliefs as:


                        xt = ( + (1 - ) ) xt-1 + (1 - )  S
                                                         t.                        (10)


Note that investors' variance expectations are sticky relative to the true variance dy-
namics if  > 0 and   , as the persistence of xt then is higher than the true
persistence of  2
                t (that is,  + (1 - )  > ). Also note that the shock itself is moder-

ated by a factor of 1 - . Figure 1 shows the impulse-response from a positive variance
shock ( 0 ) for objective and subjective expected variance. The parameter values are
calibrated to the data as described below. The true AR(1) dynamics of variance are
reflected in the monotonically decaying response in the rational case (dashed red line).
The solid blue line give the impulse-response of agents' expected variance as reflected
in the dynamics of xt . Agents' initially underreact, as  is greater than zero in this
case, but the higher persistence of xt leads to subsequent overreaction.
   Following Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), the agent has Epstein-Zin utility
(Epstein and Zin, 1989) where  ,  , and  are the time-discounting, risk aversion, and
intertemporal substitution parameters, respectively. The stochastic discount factor is
therefore:
                                           
                                Mt =   e-  dt +(-1)rt ,                            (11)

              1-
where  =     1-1/
                    and rt is the log return to the aggregate dividend claim. We use
the standard log-linearization techniques of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Bansal
and Yaron (2004) to derive equilibrium asset prices (see Appendix A for details). In
particular, we assume aggregate log returns are rt = 0 + pdt - pdt-1 + dt , where
pd is the aggregate log price-dividend ratio and  is a constant close to but less than
one that arises from the log-linearization. We then obtain:


                                    pdt = c - Axt ,                                (12)

            1 (1- )(1-1/ )
where A = - 2 1-(+(1-))
                           . Notice that if ,  > 1 we have that A > 0. This is the

                                           15
standard preference parameter configuration for asset pricing models with Epstein-
Zin preferences. It implies that the price-dividend ratio is low when agents perceive
variance to be high, as in the data.


3.1       Equity risk premium dynamics

Let rt and rf,t denote the aggregate log return and risk-free rate in period t, respec-
tively. The subjective conditional risk premium of log returns in this economy is:

                                                 1 S
                          EtS                            2
                            -1 [rt - rf,t ] = ( - )Et-1  t +  r ,                    (13)
                                                 2

where  r is a constant given in the Appendix that captures the price effect of discount
rate shocks due to the variance shocks ( t ). The first term reflects the standard risk-
return trade-off that is linear in the conditional variance of dividend growth, where
the -1/2 part arises as this is the log return risk premium.
   The conditional variance of log returns is determined both by the conditional vari-
ance of dividend growth and the impact of the variance shock on the price-dividend
ratio:
                                   S                S    2
                               V art -1 (rt ) =  + Et-1  t ,                         (14)

where  = (A(1 - ) )2 .
   The objective risk premium, however, is:


         EtP                  S                             S    2    P    2
           -1 [rt - rf,t ] = Et-1 [rt - rf,t ] +  (1 - ) A Et-1  t - Et-1  t   ,     (15)


where the P superscript on the expectation denotes that it is taken using the true,
objective variance dynamics. Note that the risk premium loads negatively on true
conditional variance as  (1 - ) A > 0 for our calibrated parameters -- a major de-
parture from earlier literature. To see where Equation (15) comes from, recall that the
shock to agents beliefs about variance is predictable (see Equation (9)). The mistake


                                             16
is persistent, which magnifies its effect on prices as given by the term A (1 - ).8
    The mistakes in agents' conditional variance expectations are reflected in current
discount rates and therefore prices. Consider a positive shock to variance ( t-1 > 0).
With  > 0 investors' expectations are sticky, meaning investors do not update their
beliefs sufficiently and initially underreact to the variance shock. Thus, EtP    2
                                                                             -1 [ t ] >

EtS    2
  -1 [ t ]. Since A > 0 in the relevant calibrations, this means a positive shock to

variance can, if the mistake is sufficiently large, decrease next period's objective risk
premium. The reason is that investors will on average perceive a positive shock to
discount rates next period as the realized value of  2
                                                     t on average is higher than they

had expected. This leads to a predictable decline in the price-dividend ratio under the
objective measure. Recall that the price dividend ratio is given by c - Axt . Hence,
the price-dividend ratio falls at the impulse, but note that it keeps falling in the
following period due to the increase in discount rates when agents learn variance
is higher than expected and EtS    2
                              -1 [ t ] rises. Subsequently, given the too persistent

variance expectations, agents eventually overreact to the volatility shock, which leads
to EtP      2      S       2
     +j -1  t+j < Et+j -1  t+j for some j > 0. In this case, the second term in

Equation (15) becomes positive and the conditional risk premium overshoots.
    Upon impact, a positive shock to variance decreases prices as the long-run impact
on discount rates is positive when A is positive. This is consistent with the negative
contemporaneous correlation of realized variance and returns in the data (e.g., French,
Schwert, and Stambaugh, 1987). In particular, shocks to returns are:


                                 rt - EtP
                                        -1 [rt ] = -
                                                    1/2
                                                         t +  t t ,                           (16)


where 1/2 = A (1 - )  encodes the present value impact of the shock to variance
( t ) due to its effect on the discount rates agents require for holding the risky asset.
    8
        This expression is found by using the Campbell-Shiller return approximation and noting that
 P                   S                     P       S                          P     2    S     2
Et -1   (-pdt ) - Et -1 (-pdt ) = -A Et-1 [xt ] - Et-1 [xt ] = -A (1 - ) Et-1  t - Et-1  t .




                                                 17
3.2     Variance risk premium dynamics

In addition to the equity claim, we also price a variance claim with payoff:


                                         RVt   +  2
                                                  t,                                           (17)


where RVt stands for realized variance at time t.9 We define the time t - 1 implied
variance (IVt-1 ) as the swap rate that gives a one-period variance swap a present value
of zero:
                                 0 = EtS
                                       -1 [Mt (RVt - IVt-1 )] .                                (18)

Thus:
                                  IVt-1 = EtS
                                            -1 [Rf,t Mt RVt ] .                                (19)

As is standard in the literature, we denote the (objective) expected payoff of a position
in the variance swap where you are paying the realized variance and receiving the
implied variance as the variance risk premium:


                                V RPt-1 = IVt-1 - EtP
                                                    -1 [RVt ] .                                (20)
    9
      Our model-definition of realized variance is motivated by industry practice for variance swap
payoffs, where monthly realized variance is the sum of squared daily log returns within the month.
In the model, squared monthly log returns are:
                                          2
                           (rt - Et-1 [rt ]) =  2
                                                t + 2 t 
                                                        0.5
                                                             t t +  2 2
                                                                    t t .

To approximate the use of higher frequency data to estimate realized variance within our model, we
assume that the second moments of realized shocks equal their continuous-time limit. Setting  2  t =
2t  =  1 and     
                t t = 0 in the  above gives  the realized variance in Equation  (17).   In benchmark
equilibrium models, typically calibrated at the monthly frequency (e.g., Bollerslev, Tauchen, and
Zhou (2009), Drechsler and Yaron (2011)), there is no clear counterpart to this multi-frequency
approach where IV and RV are monthly, but where RV is estimated using daily data. In the models
cited above, the definition of the IVt is the risk-neutral expectation of the market return variance
in month t + 2. For example, IV at the end of January is the risk-neutral expectation at the end of
January of market return variance in March. We define RV in a manner that avoids this one-month
offset that is at odds with the data definitions. This brings the model closer to the moments from
the data we use for calibration of the model parameters. While it is convenient to align the model
definitions more closely to the timings used in the data, we note that our model results would also
go through with alternate definitions of the variance risk premium used in earlier literature.




                                                18
The dynamics of this risk premium depends directly on investors' variance expectations
per Equation (19).
   The equilibrium implied variance is:


                                IVt-1 = EtS
                                          -1 [RVt ] +  IV ,                              (21)

                                                                1 2       1/ -
where EtS            S        2
        -1 [RVt ] = Et-1 [ +  t ] = +¯
                                     v +xt-1 and  IV =          2
                                                                      -   1-1/
                                                                                (1   - ) A  2 .
The second term is an unconditional risk premium required by the agents due to the
variance claim's exposure to shocks to variance. The conditional variance risk premium
is then:


                      V RPt-1 = IVt-1 - EtP
                                          -1 [RVt ]

                                 =  IV + EtS            P
                                           -1 [RVt ] - Et-1 [RVt ]

                                 =  IV + EtS   2    P    2
                                           -1  t - Et-1  t .                             (22)


Thus, the dynamics of the variance risk premium share a component of the dynamics
of the equity risk premium (Equation (15)), namely the mistakes agents' make in their
variance expectation. Thus, agents will initially underreact to the variance shock, but
subsequently overreact due to their sticky expectations, which leads to time-variation
in the variance risk premium similar to that in the data. In fact, the lagged variance
risk premium forecasts equity returns, as it does in the data and as it does in Bollerslev,
Tauchen, and Zhou (2009). However, in the their model this is due to time-varying
variance of variance, which we abstract from in this baseline version of our model.
   Next, we calibrate the parameters of the model to assess if it can quantitatively
account for the empirical observations discussed earlier.


3.3    Model calibration

We calibrate the model to moments that are at the heart of the issues we seek to
address with the model. The data is monthly and from 1990 through April 2020. We

                                            19
use the V IXt2 as the proxy for IVt , where V IXt is the option-implied risk-neutral
volatility of stock returns over the next month. RVt is calculated as the sum of daily
squared log excess market returns in month t.
    Panel A of Table 2 gives the parameters of the baseline model. We match the
mean, autocorrelation, and variance of RVt in the data with the parameters governing
the objective variance dynamics in the model (¯
                                              v , , and  ). We set the risk aversion
parameter  by matching the equity premium and we take the elasticity of substitution
 to be 2.2 as estimated in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2016). Finally, we set  to match
the response of the variance risk premium (V RP ) to a shock to RV in the model to
that in the data, and we set  to match the variance of IVt in the model to the variance
of the V IXt2 in the data. We set  = 0.971/12 , consistent with values used in earlier the
literature and the average level of the price-dividend ratio in the data. Our moments of
interest do not require us to estimate the time-discounting parameter,  , or the mean
of dividend growth, µ.10 Table 2 gives the parameter values as well as the moments
from the data used in the calibration. Note that the chosen value of  is conservative
in the sense that it is lower than that estimated using the survey data. We choose a 
of 0.5 which is in between the estimate from the survey data (0.87) and the estimate
we get if we use the V IX (0.4) in place of surveys as a measure of market variance.
Our choice of  implies a value of the persistence of volatility dynamics under agents
beliefs of  + (1 - ) = 0.9 which is again close to but more conservative than the
survey estimates based on long term and shorter term volatility expectations (0.96).
    Figure 1 shows the impulse-response of a one-standard deviation shock to RV
under the rational beliefs (red, dashed line) and the calibrated subjective beliefs about
next period's variance (solid, blue line). We show an alternative calibration in the
black line that gives intuition for a lower value of . The subjective beliefs display
a hump-shaped "slow-moving" response due to the beliefs loading on too many lags
of variance and not enough on current variance. The difference between the rational
   10
      This is why we set the log-linearization parameter  exogenously to a standard value in the
literature. In our monthly calibration,  is very close to 1 and there is little sensitivity to reasonable
variation in this parameter to the moments we target.

                                                   20
and the subjective beliefs ­ initial underreaction followed by longer-term overreaction
­ is what gives rise to deviations from the standard models in terms of the observed
risk-return trade-off. The figure also shows how  scales the impulse-response (see
dotted black line versus solid blue line). The bottom panel plots the price dividend
ratio. Notably, in our model calibration prices fall initially by more than in the rational
case ­ this is because of the overextrapolation leading to too high of persistence for
expected variance. However, consistent with underreaction, prices can continue to fall
after the initial shock which breaks the standard risk-return tradeoff. In this way, we
match that realized returns fall substantially when variance increases (consistent with
a discount rate effect), yet next period returns are not high on average.



4.     Model Comparison to Stylized Facts

4.1     Stylized Facts

We outline the main stylized empirical facts from the literature that we will target
in our model, which we extend using more recent data. Since these facts are mainly
already documented in the empirical literature, we relegate discussion of robustness
to the appendix.
     Data and Sources. We study US data from December 1991 to April 2020 for
which we have stock market excess returns, the VIX (taken as the VIX on the last
day of the month, thus representing forward looking volatility for the month), realized
variance (computed as the sum of squared daily log returns within a month), and
a measure of expected variance. Stock return data use the return on the S&P500
index over the risk-free rate taken from Ken French. In addition, we study variance
swap returns, VIX futures returns, and straddle returns to capture claims on future
volatility or variance from several sources. Our main data source for variance swap
returns is Dew-Becker, Giglio, Le, and Rodriguez (2017) which provides variance swap
returns based on dealer quotes from 1996-2017. VIX futures returns are from Cheng


                                            21
(2018) from 2004-2017 and we supplement this with returns on the VXX ETF from
2017-2020 (as Cheng (2018) notes the VXX ETF tracks VIX futures returns and has a
correlation near 1 with one month VIX futures in the overlapping sample). We further
measure the variance risk premium (VRP) as the squared VIX minus realized variance
as in Bollerslev et al. (2009). When using returns (e.g., variance swap or VIX futures)
we take the negative of the returns, so the implication is the return for selling variance
or being short the VIX. This means the unconditional premium for these returns is
positive as the exposure to volatility is negative. Finally, we add data from Johnson
(2017) which contains daily straddle returns and synthetic variance swap returns from
underlying options which we cumulate to monthly returns from 1996-2019. This data
has the advantage of avoiding over the counter prices or quotes that may have illiquidity
concerns.
   Expected Variance. To get a measure of objective expected variance at time
t - 1, which we denote ^2
                        t-1 , we use high frequency intraday data on the S&P500

and follow the HAR model used in Bekaert and Hoerova (2014). This uses squared
five-minute returns at the daily, weekly, and monthly horizon to forecast next month's
realized variance. Importantly, our forecast is done in real time so that at time t - 1 the
forecast uses only information up to t - 1. Our intraday data are available in 1990 but
we use a two year burn in period to construct the expected variance forecast. Further
details are contained in Appendix D. Following our model, we proxy for subjective
expected variance as a weighted average of past expected variance over the past six
                    1     6    j 2
months, denoted   6     j j =1  ^ t-j .   The term in front of the sum ensures weights sum
                  j =1 

to one. We use  = 0.5 as in the model calibration, and only 6 lags since weights j
are close to negligible beyond this.
   Empirical Results. Table 3 Panel A shows forecasting regressions for volatility
claims on current expected variance and the exponential weighted average of past
expected variance. In the first five columns, for each of the (short) volatility dependent
returns, we see a negative coefficient on expected variance and a positive coefficient
on the weighted average term, with the magnitude of the coefficients being roughly

                                               22
similar. That is, the regression in all cases emphasizes the difference between the
weighted average and objective expected variance as the model predicts. This says
that when agents beliefs about variance are high relative to an objective forecast of
variance, volatility claims are "expensive" such that being short volatility or variance
is profitable over the next month. The monthly R2 implies a reasonably high degree of
predictability of all the volatility claims and the coefficients are significant in each of
the columns. These results are closely related to those in Cheng (2018) who shows that
increases in expected volatility negatively predict the VIX futures return. Following
Cheng (2018), in the first column for VIX futures returns we use expected volatility
in place of expected variance, and the weighted average of expected volatility. Using
variance instead leads to similar results but allows less of a direct comparison to Cheng
(2018). While the magnitudes of coefficients in columns (5)-(7) are easily interpretable
in our model, (1)-(4) are less so. For straddle returns, the coefficient on the difference
between expected variance and a weighted average of expected variance (the "mistake"
in beliefs), is about -30. The standard deviation of the difference is 0.16% per month, so
a 1 standard deviation increase in the difference translates to nearly a 5% change in the
straddle risk premium. This is large given the unconditional monthly average return
of 9.5% for straddles. Similarly, for variance swaps, a 1 standard deviation increase in
the difference translates to about a 9% change vs the unconditional premium of 25%.
   Column (6) shows that only expected variance predicts future realized variance,
while the additional lags of expected variance do not. The coefficient is not statisti-
cally different from one and the R2 is high at 47% confirming our real time expected
variance forecast does predict future variance well (when we we run this as a univariate
regression, without the weighted average, we obtain a coefficient of 1.10 and standard
error of 0.20). Column (7) shows that market implied variance (the squared V IX ),
however, loads substantially on the weighted average of past expected variance in ad-
dition to current expected variance as our model predicts. The differential pattern
in columns 6 and 7 helps explain the patterns in the first five columns. The R2 on
the VIX is very high, indicating that we capture the majority of VIX variation from

                                            23
these two components. While we have interpreted all these results through biases in
beliefs as in our model, an alternative interpretation is through rational risk premiums.
However, as noted in Cheng (2018), this interpretation is not natural because volatil-
ity claims are typically much riskier when expected volatility is high relative to the
past. In Appendix Table 15 we show these return regressions at a weekly frequency to
assess where the monthly return predictability is most concentrated. Consistent with
Cheng (2018), the predictability is stronger in the first two weeks relative to that in
weeks three and four.11 This is consistent with our model because underreaction in
our model is most pronounced in the near term.
   Panel B shows the risk-return tradeoff regressions of the market excess return on
expected variance and the VIX. Column (1) shows that expected variance has no
predictive power for future returns, so that the risk return tradeoff is weak, echoing a
much longer literature on this finding (Glosten et al., 1993; Whitelaw, 1994; Lettau and
Ludvigson, 2003).12 We note that these papers come to this conclusion over a variety
of sample periods. This result also holds when using the VIX to forecast market
returns in column (2). However, as column (4) shows, the variance risk premium
           2
(V IXt2-1 ­^ t-1 ) predicts returns with a positive sign, while neither the VIX or RV

predict returns by themselves. This confirms results from Bollerslev et al. (2009) in
our extended sample. However, we note that the first two columns are puzzling from
the perspective of the model in Bollerslev et al. (2009) in which the VIX alone is a
strong predictor of returns, both because it embeds the variance risk premium and
because it reflects expected future variance, and both of these strongly contribute to
the equity risk premium in that model.
   These facts are in line with findings from the empirical literature and this table
should be mainly viewed as extending them in a more recent sample. As such, we
leave extensive robustness checks to the appendix. We show subsample analysis to
the financial crisis, we use volatility in place of variance to reduce dependence on high
  11
    See Cheng (2018) Figure 4.
  12
    See also Brandt and Kang (2004); Moreira and Muir (2017, 2019); Eraker (2020) as a non
exhaustive list of this literature.

                                           24
variance observations, and we run weighted least squares to downweight high volatility
periods which might overly influence our results. An important takeaway is that high
variance periods are important, especially for the results in Panel B predicting equity
market returns, while results predicting the variance claim returns (first 4 columns
of Panel A) appear more robust. The latter evidence is true in our model as well ­
variance return predictability identifies our main mechanism more sharply while the
equity return is exposed to additional sources of shocks. These results are echoed
in Johnson (2019) who argues the evidence for the variance risk premium predicting
stock returns is weaker than previously recognized. However, Bollerslev, Marrone, Xu,
and Zhou (2014) study the ability of the variance risk premium to predict returns
across eight different countries and argue it is a robust feature of the data. We provide
international evidence along these lines in Appendix Table 18. Zhou (2018), a review
article, finds that the variance risk premium helps predict returns across many asset
classes including stocks, credit, currencies, and bonds and contains many additional
references that find the variance risk premium helps predict equity returns (Drechsler
and Yaron, 2011; Bollerslev, Todorov, and Xu, 2015).
   Table 6, which we return to later, repeats this analysis at the firm level for US
data which gives us significantly more observations compared to the aggregate results
and hence provides further robustness to our main results. We see strikingly similar
results for the variance risk premium with increases in firm-level variance negatively
predicting the firm-level variance risk premium. This is true even when including time
fixed effects suggesting that the facts we document hold even when removing aggregate
movements in volatility.


4.2    Stylized Facts in the Model

We show these facts in our calibrated model in Table 4. To emphasize intuition and the
importance of the bias to match the data, we show results as we vary the parameter
. We consider the fully rational case in the model as a benchmark ( = 0,  = 0.72)
in column 2 and then use our calibration of  = 0.8 in the remaining columns while
                                           25
increasing  to 0.3, 0.5, and 0.8.
   We show the relation between risk and return (regression of future market return on
current and past variance), volatility-managed alphas, the correlation between realized
returns and variance shocks, the forecasting regressions of stock returns using the
variance risk premium, the relation of the conditional variance risk premium with
current and past variance, and the correlation of the model implied variance (V IX 2 )
and realized variance.
   We first note that the dependence of future returns on current variance declines as
we increase , while the dependence on past variance ( weighted average) increases
as we increase . The rational case in our model implies only current variance should
predict returns, with zero weight on the past average, consistent with the basic risk
return tradeoff intuition. With high enough , current variance can have zero or even
negative relation to next period returns, while the average of past variance comes in
positively for larger values of . These results are mirrored in the next row which doc-
uments the volatility managed alpha, with empirical numbers taken from Moreira and
Muir (2017). The alpha is positive in the data, reflecting a weak risk-return tradeoff.
As we increase  and the risk-return tradeoff weakens, we increase the volatility timing
alpha as well.
   The contemporaneous correlation between realized returns and shocks to variance
doesn't depend too strongly on , and quantitatively decreases slightly as we increase
. The reason for this is that there are two effects which go in opposite directions in our
model: the first is that a higher  implies a lower reaction to volatility news through
slow moving expectations. On the other hand, a higher  leads agents expectations
to be more persistent that the true volatility process. This second effect results in
an effectively larger discount rate response to volatility shocks as they last longer in
agents expectations, and tends to move prices more when volatility changes, while
the first effect dampens the response to volatility news. Thus, our model keeps the
negative correlation between returns and variance shocks even when underreaction to
volatility is large.

                                           26
   Next, we show implications for the variance risk premium. First, the the variance
risk premium forecasts stock returns strongly in the data, and the model can account
for this once  > 0. The variance risk premium itself (here measured as V IX 2 minus a
forecast of realized variance based on current and past variance) is negatively related
to current variance and positively related to past variance. This is just the result
from Table 1 that, relative to future variance, VIX loads more on past variance and
less on current variance. The model can generate this pattern with  > 0 (which is
required for the variance risk premium to have time-variation). As  increases, so that
expectations are slow moving, current variance forecasts this premium more negatively
and past variance forecasts the premium more positively. This is simply because the
mistake in expectations is larger when we increase .
   Finally, empirically there is a strong correlation between implied variance (V IX 2 )
and realized variance (0.86). If VIX is influenced market by beliefs about variance
this suggests that such beliefs are highly correlated with an objective forecast. In the
model, this correlation weakens as we increase  as it implies investors make larger
mistakes. However, notably this correlation remains fairly high even for large values of
. This may at first seem surprising, since it implies the subjective forecast of variance
is strongly correlated with the objective measure in the model, meaning mistakes are
actually fairly small, even when we increase . But note that volatility is persistent,
and agents beliefs still put most weight on recent variance. Because volatility is fairly
persistent, putting weight on lagged variance results in only a modest mistake, and
these weights decay fairly quickly for longer lags (which have weight k ). This is an
important point since it highlights that while the degree of bias in our model may
appear large, persistence in variance actually implies only modest mistakes and, as we
show shortly, modest profits from trading. Only in the case where  is highest at 0.8
is this correlation in the model lower than what we see empirically.
   Having discussed this intuition, we note that  of around 0.5 does fairly well jointly
accounting for the facts in the data in terms of the risk-return tradeoff, volatility
managed alpha, variance risk premium dependence on past variance, and correlation

                                           27
between VIX and realized variance. However, these results also suggest some tension
in the model in terms of jointly matching all facts quantitatively. In particular, the
risk-return tradeoff is even weaker in the data than the model with  = 0.5 (this is
also reflected in the volatility managed alpha), and a large  is needed to match this
moment. On the other hand, the variance risk premium results favor a more modest
value of  for the magnitudes of the variance risk premium on past variance to not
be too large. Most important, however, the model with biased beliefs matches the
moments on balance better than the rational benchmark.


4.3    Volatility managed portfolios

Moreira and Muir (2017) document that volatility-managed factor portfolios yield
positive alpha in standard Gibbons, Ross, Shanken (1987) type return regressions.
For the market factor they consider a strategy that each period has a portfolio weight
in the market that is inversely proportional to RV . They show that the alpha of such
a strategy relative to the buy-and-hold market factor can be approximated by:

                               c                           µt
                     =-              Cov Et [RVt+1 ] ,               ,              (23)
                            E [RVt ]                   Et [RVt+1 ]

where Et [rt+1 - rf,t ] = µt and where c is a constant that scales the timing portfolio
to have the same return variance as the market. Since there is no strong risk-return
trade-off in the model with biased beliefs, the covariance above is negative, which gives
rise to a positive alpha as in the data. Our simple variance process allows negative
values for variance, therefore to calculate this covariance we use the approximation:

          µt         µ
                     ¯    1                µ
                                           ¯
                       +    (µt - µ
                                  ¯) -         (Et [rvt+1 ] - v
                                                              ¯ - ) ,               (24)
      Et [rvt+1 ]  v
                   ¯+ v  ¯+             v + )2
                                       (¯




                                           28
and report the alpha for the volatility-managed market portfolio in Table 2 as:13

                                1                          µ
                                                           ¯
                 -0.6 ×           Cov Et [rvt+1 ] , µt -     Et [rvt+1 ] ,                     (25)
                              v
                              ¯+                         v
                                                         ¯+

which is equal to 1.4% annualized -- in the same order of magnitude as the 4.9%
Moreira and Muir (2017) document. As emphasized in the last section, to fully match
this alpha would require a larger value of .


4.4     Comparison to Bollerslev Tauchen Zhou

Standard asset pricing models typically struggle with the facts outlined above because
they suggest that an increase in risk (volatility) will be associated with heightened
risk premiums at all horizons, and in particular this relationship will be strongest in
the near term but decays with horizon as volatility is mean-reverting. For example,
Moreira and Muir (2017) show the risk return tradeoff in leading models is strong,
including models with habit formation (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999), long run risk
(Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Drechsler and Yaron, 2011), rare disasters (Barro, 2006;
Wachter, 2013) and intermediary models (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013). Further,
expected returns will typically rise most on impact and will gradually fade through
time as volatility fades. We are not aware of leading equilibrium asset pricing models
which produce a temporary decline in risk premiums followed by a delayed increase.
    Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009; BTZ hereafter) provide a rational bench-
mark model of the dynamics of the variance risk premium and the conditional equity
premium and therefore overlaps with some of the stylized facts we seek to explain.
In this model, the representative agent has rational expectations and the volatility
of volatility follows a mean-reverting process. The time-variation in the amount of
variance risk gives rise to time-varying expected returns to variance swaps and the
market risk premium. In particular, the lagged variance risk premium in their model
  13                                  c
     Moreira and Muir find that E [RV   t]
                                            0.6 in the data, and we simply use this value to compute
the volatility timed portfolio alpha implied by our model.


                                                29
predicts future excess market returns as in the data. To highlight how the subjective
beliefs model of this paper differs in terms of asset price dynamics, Table 5 compares
our model directly to BTZ based on the stylized facts we target.14
    Both models match that the variance risk premium positively predicts stock re-
turns, which is the main fact that BTZ is calibrated to match. Where the models
strongly differ is on the risk-return tradeoff. First, the BTZ model implies a coefficient
of 10 for the risk-return tradeoff, while in the data this is much weaker. Because of
this, their model can't match the return predictability regressions on past variance or
generate a positive volatility managed alpha. Next, a salient fact in the data is that
while the difference V IXt2 - RVt is a strong predictor of market returns, neither lagged
RV nor the V IX (or the V IX 2 ) are strong return predictors on their own -- a fact
that BTZ documents in their Table 3 (page 4482 in BTZ (2009)). In the BTZ model,
including both V IXt2 and RVt to forecast stock returns, both coefficients are strongly
positive, while in the data the coefficients have opposite signs.


4.5     Impulse Responses: Data vs Model

To succinctly summarize the empirical patterns in a way that is easy to relate to our
model, we estimate a first order vector autoregression (VAR) with expected variance ^2
(formed as before), the variance risk premium V IX 2 - ^ 2 , excess market returns, and
                                                                                       15
the log market price-dividend ratio as the variables in the state vector.                   Expected
variance is ordered first, so all variables can respond contemporaneously to a shock to
^ 2 . Figure 2 plots impulse responses of the equity premium and variance risk premium

to a shock to ^2.
    The variance risk premium goes negative after the shock before slowly rising and
   14
      To give the BTZ model a better chance at matching these patterns, we recalibrate the objective
variance process in their model to match that in the data. Their calibration implies a counter-
facturally high persistence of RVt .
   15
      The log price dividend ratio is from CRSP based on value weighted returns. We construct the
price dividend ratio as the sum of dividends over the past year divided by the current price. We find
similar results using other price measures for example the cyclically adjusted price to earnings ratio
(CAPE) from Robert Shiller's website.


                                                 30
becoming positive beyond month 3 (Cheng, 2018). Similarly, the equity risk premium,
if anything, initially falls but rises further out. While the initial response of the equity
risk premium is not statistically different from zero here (consistent with a weak or
negative risk-return tradeoff), note that the upper bound is small which we will show
relative to leading rational models. Most notably, the premiums have a hump-shaped
pattern: they appear low initially but rise as future volatility falls. This is in contrast
to the standard benchmark model, with the equity premium being affine in expected
variance. In this setting the risk premium response should peak immediately and
roughly mirror the response of future variance from period 1 onwards, with a spike
upwards followed by a decline as future variance mean reverts. The shaded regions
indicate 95% confidence intervals based on bootstrapping the residuals in the VAR.
We consider alternative specifications of the VAR in the appendix that rely less on
high variance periods and argue that the main patterns documented here are robust.
   Figure 2 also shows impulse responses in the model vs the data. The impulse-
responses from the calibrated model are given in the blue dashed lines, while the
impulse-responses from the model assuming  = 0 and  =  (the rational case) are
given in the red dash-dotted lines for comparison.
   The impact of a shock to expected variance on the conditional market and variance
risk premiums is very different across the two models. In particular, the response in the
rational model is to immediately increase the conditional risk premium due to the usual
risk-return trade-off (Equation (15)), at odds with the empirical facts. In our model,
however, the response of the conditional equity premium as measured in the VAR is, as
in the data, initially negative. This is due to the mistake investors are making in their
variance forecast as shown in Figure 1. The equity premium subsequently overshoots
due to the slow-moving expectations of the agents, consistent with the pattern in the
data. The same is true for the variance risk premium, although in this case the pattern
is slightly stronger than the data as its dynamics are only affected by the mistake in
expectations (see Equation (22)). The rational version of the model has no effect on
the variance risk premium from a shock to expected variance, again at odds with the

                                            31
data. While one could change this, for example in a model where the volatility of
volatility shocks varied over time, it would be difficult to generate both the negative
initial response and hump shaped dynamics. In particular, because the volatility of
volatility shocks tend to be positively correlated with the level of volatility, this would
tend to push the initial response of the variance risk premium up. In other words,
volatility claims tend to be riskier after a shock to expected variance (Cheng, 2018),
and so a rational model with this feature would have a harder time matching the data.



5.      Additional Evidence, and Alternative Explana-
        tions

5.1     Firm Level Analysis

We revisit our stylized aggregate facts at the firm level (stock level) in Table 6. We
take implied volatility from OptionMetrics at the stock level from 1996-2017 and use
daily and monthly return data from CRSP for the stocks in the merged OptionMetrics
sample (6,489 unique stocks over the sample). Implied volatility is measured on the
last day of the month and measures option implied volatility over the subsequent
month (30 days) for at the money options. Realized variance is computed using the
daily returns within a given month. Our measure of the variance risk premium is
        2
then IVi,t - RVt+1 which is the implied variance over the next month minus the actual
realized variance over the next month. We use daily log stock returns from CRSP and
computed the sum of squared log returns over the following month's trading days as
our measure of realized variance.
     Similar to our results in Table 3, we forecast equity risk premiums, variance risk
premiums, and future realized variance over the next month but we use the change in
realized variance from month t to t - 6. We use the change over six months, rather
than the weighted average of all realizations over six months, for several reasons. Most
importantly, this helps account for quarterly earnings announcements at the firm level

                                            32
which are a big driver of firm level volatility and result in quarter fixed effects at the
firm level with realized volatility being high during months with earnings announce-
ments. By differencing the six month lag we both account for unconditional firm level
effects and effects of quarterly earnings announcements on firm level volatility. We
winsorize lags of realized variance at the 95th percentile, though importantly we do
not winsorize future realized variance so that the left hand side in this case is still the
realized variance risk premium. In unreported results we find similar result without
winsorization, but the main advantage is we find much stronger predictive power for
future variance with winsorization due to substantially more noise in firm level real-
ized volatility estimates compared to the aggregate. We also find qualitatively similar
results in several other specifications, including using log of realized variance or using
volatility in place of variance, though these results are omitted for space.
   The results show that increases in volatility over 6 months negatively forecast
variance risk premiums, but positively forecast future variance. The coefficients for
predicting future variance and future variance risk premiums are highly statistically
significant with or without time fixed effects (standard errors are double clustered by
time and firm). The results with time fixed effects are especially important because
these remove any aggregate movements in firm level variance or variance risk premi-
ums. By removing aggregate effects, we are more likely capturing purely idiosyncratic
movements in realized variance that helps push against a risk-based story for our re-
sults. These results are also similar in spirit to Poteshman (2001) who argues for
underreaction in option prices in an earlier sample.
   The firm level analysis achieves two things. First, it provides robustness to our
aggregate results which rely on fewer observations. Second, it provides more insight
into whether the variance risk premium results we document are likely driven by
true economic risk premiums (compensation for risk) or whether they are instead
more likely driven by biased expectations and underreaction to changes in volatility.
As stressed earlier, the aggregate results are not consistent with standard risk based
models since higher risk (more variance) should, if anything, imply a higher rather

                                            33
than lower risk premium. Nevertheless, it is always possible to construct a model in
which investor preferences move in such a way to match the aggregate evidence. The
firm level evidence is more powerful since we think of firm level variance as largely
idiosyncratic, especially in our second specification where we include time fixed effects
in the regression to remove any common components of firm level variance. Hence, we
would likely expect a much smaller effect at the firm level from a risk premium story
due to variance shocks being more idiosyncratic at the firm level. Instead, we recover
a coefficient of around -0.1 for the firm level VRP, which is in line with the magnitudes
we observe in the aggregate results.
   Further in this dimension, at the firm level we see a weakly negative but not
significant coefficient for the equity risk premium. This is exactly what we expect
in the model if agents do not price idiosyncratic firm level risk. In our aggregate
results, investors should require more compensation for the increase in variance and
this mechanism combined with biased beliefs results in the negative coefficient on the
equity risk premium. Absent this channel, we would only expect the results to hold
for the variance risk premium. Taken together, the firm level results support our
main hypothesis that agents initially underreact to changes in variance and that this
is reflected in implied volatilities.


5.2     Evidence on Actual Trading Behavior

Hoopes, Langetieg, Nagel, Reck, Slemrod, and Stuart (2017) show evidence that in-
vestors do react to changes in volatility with more sophisticated investors and older
investors responding more strongly. Specifically, they show that higher income and
older investors sell more aggressively following increases in volatility. This is reason-
able in our model if one takes higher income investors to be more sophisticated and
less prone to the expectations bias in our paper. Similarly, it is possible that investors
learn more about the volatility process with time (as the evidence on investor expe-
rience suggests they would) and hence exhibit less of a bias as they are older. Giglio
et al. (2019) also find that agents views about risk are directly informative for their
                                           34
portfolio decisions, with higher expectations of stock market risk being associated with
a lower allocation to stocks. A shortcoming of our model is that it features a represen-
tative investor and so does not speak directly to this evidence (as there is no trade in
equilibrium), though modest extensions of the model which allow for differences in the
amount of bias would naturally be consistent with the evidence on trading behavior
in Hoopes et al. (2017).


5.3       Term Structure Evidence

The model has implications for the conditional term structure of variance risk pre-
miums. We showed that the model produces underreaction to volatility for 1 month
variance claims. A natural question is how this extends to longer horizon variance
claims.
   Empirically, we have return data for variance swaps, VIX futures, and straddles
for multiple maturities. We show these implications in Table 7 where we run the same
predictive regressions as before using all maturities and normalize the coefficients by
dividing by 100. For VIX futures and straddles, we focus only on the sample where we
have non-missing observations at all maturities using data provided by Johnson (2017).
We do the analogous procedure in the model where we regress the one month return of a
variance swap with maturity k on expected variance and a weighted average of expected
variance. Overall, current expected variance continues to negatively predict returns for
all maturities while past variance positively predicts. The slow-moving nature of the
extrapolative expectations means agents believe variance is highly persistent, which in
turn implies that mistakes in conditional variance expectations also matter for long-
horizon claims. This generates excess volatility in the long end of the variance term
structure, matching the spirit of the empirical findings in Giglio and Kelly (2018).




                                          35
5.4    Credit Returns

Table 8 again runs predictive regressions but uses returns that depend on credit risk.
These returns are particularly interesting for our story because credit risk is sensitive
to changes in volatility which affect default risk (Merton, 1974). Credit returns are
constructed from three sources. The first uses CDS excess returns from He, Kelly, and
Manela (2017) who form 20 CDS portfolios based on credit risk. We equally weight
across these 20 portfolios to form a single CDS excess return. The second column
uses the Barclays total return index for high yield and investment grade corporate
bonds. We compute the excess return as the difference between the return of these
two series. The third is the (negative) change in the BaaAaa spread from Moody's.
This computes the change in this yield spread as a proxy for the credit return as used
in L´
    opez-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek (2017).
   All three credit return series point in the same direction and support our main
results. Current volatility negatively predicts the returns and the moving average
of past variance positively predicts. Similar to our earlier regressions, the absolute
magnitudes of the coefficients are similar, meaning the change in volatility relative to
the moving average explains the predictability. Both coefficients are highly significant
in all three cases.


5.5    Model Shortcomings and Extensions

Our model is intentionally simplified to focus on one particular channel ­ beliefs about
volatility ­ in influencing the prices of financial market claims. Here we outline limi-
tations of the baseline model and discuss useful extensions.
   Our model has implications for the price dividend ratio that are clearly rejected
in the data. Most importantly the model ­ if taken literally ­ says the dividend
yield is perfectly correlated with the VIX in levels, which is clearly counterfactual.
In particular, empirically the dividend yield is much more persistent than the VIX,
though the two are correlated (in particular, VIX and the dividend yield both tend to

                                           36
go up in bad times). This highlights that the dividend yield is likely also influenced
by forces outside our model. An extension of our model with time-varying expected
dividend growth would generate additional movements in the dividend yield and, if
these growth rates were highly persistent, could generate the difference in persistence
and also lower the correlation between the dividend yield and the VIX in levels. Still,
in the data a much more robust fact is that changes in prices are highly negatively
correlated with changes in the VIX (prices go down when VIX goes up) as in our
model, and this result can still hold even in an extension with slow time-varying
dividend growth. This highlights why we choose not to use dividend yield related
moments when targeting the parameters in our calibration even though our baseline
model has implications for these moments.
    In the main model we put the stochastic volatility on the cash flow process. How-
ever, this is not particularly important and our paper doesn't have much to say whether
this is discount rate or cash flow volatility. In our model discount rate volatility would
still be priced and would still imply the highest premium at shorter horizons. However,
a lower price of discount rate shocks could lower the risk-return tradeoff further. We
make the assumption of stochastic cash flow volatility for convenience.
    In our model, RV follows an AR(1) process. Thus, the optimal predictor of variance
in the model is simply lagged RV, while the VIX has no marginal predictive power.
In the sample we consider (1990-2020), this is in fact a close approximation ­ the
increase in R2 in a forecasting regression for RV is negligible when adding the VIX
as a predictive variable in addition to lagged RV. In other samples, however, the VIX
has stronger marginal predictive power. Chernov (2007) shows that this is indeed the
case in the 1986-2001 sample, but he also points out that the VIX alone cannot be the
optimal predictor of future variance since the variance risk premium is time-varying
in the data.16 This latter fact is consistent with our model, where the VIX reflects the
expectational errors of the agents in addition to the objective variance forecast. In
  16
      Related, Chernov (2007) finds that the coefficient on the VIX in variance forecasting regressions
is significantly below 1, consistent with substantial variation in the variance risk premium. This is
also the case in our sample.

                                                  37
terms of the former, it is straightforward to extend our model to make the VIX have
marginal predictive power for future variance. In particular, if we assume investors
each period observe a noisy signal about next period's RV that is uncorrelated with
current RV (i.e., a time t signal correlated with  t+1 ), the VIX will reflect this added
information as the signal affects agents' beliefs. Importantly, such an extension will
not affect the projection of the VIX or agents' beliefs about future variance onto lagged
RVs, which is the focus of the bias we consider in our model. We provide this extension
in Appendix C.
   Finally, both the individual survey evidence from Giglio et al. (2019) and the
evidence on actual trading behavior in Hoopes et al. (2017) suggest that heterogeneity
in beliefs about risk is important, though our model features a representative agent.
A limitation of our analysis is we can't speak directly to this evidence.
   A natural extension of our model is to introduce a set of agents (risk averse ar-
bitrageurs) that have rational expectations. In such a model the wealth share of the
arbitrageurs becomes a new state-variable. Generally speaking, the degree of mis-
pricing will increase with impediments to arbitrage and decrease with the arbitrageur
wealth share. There are several features of the data that are consistent with this.
For instance, we document a stronger pattern when current variance is high. Since
arbitrageurs on average are short volatility, these are times when they recently have
suffered losses on their arbitrage positions and therefore hold less wealth, scaling back
their positions. This is consistent with data on hedge fund positions as shown by Cheng
(2018). Further, our results are strong after 2010, which coincides with a period of
tighter bank regulation after the Financial Crisis. Also, our results that a higher  is
needed to match the moments in the stock market than those in the variance market is
consistent as there are many other shocks to stock prices than variance shocks, making
the arbitrage riskier in this market. While an extension to such a heterogeneous agent
model would be quite interesting, it is beyond the scope of this paper.
   One implication and limitation of our representative agent model is that expec-
tations of returns and variance should be strongly positively related. However, we

                                           38
find empirically that survey expectations of returns and variance from the Graham
and Harvey CFO survey are essentially uncorrelated: the adjusted R-square of sur-
vey expected returns on our measure of expected variance is zero (results untabulated
but available on request). Giglio et al. (2019) show at the individual level expecta-
tions returns and expectations of a crash in the stock market are strongly negatively
correlated. These results are natural if agents have heterogeneous beliefs, which our
representative agent model doesn't capture. For example, as Giglio et al. (2019) men-
tion, if an individual investor believes there is a higher chance of a market crash than
other agents, they will think future risk is high and also that expected returns are low.
The reason is this agent is small relative to the market, so their beliefs barely affect
market prices if at all. The agent will thus view stock prices as too high and future
returns as too low since they don't reflect the risk of a crash and these agents decrease
their portfolio allocation in their data as expected. This would not be the case if this
were the only investor in the market, as prices would then need to fall substantially to
keep the agent from selling.
   However, as we aggregate up the views of agents, the correlation between expec-
tations of returns and expectations of risk will increase. If a large subset of investors
believes the risk of a crash is high, then this view will be reflected in aggregate mar-
ket prices and thus raise their view of expected returns. Our CFO survey results are
consistent with this view: the correlation between aggregated CFO views on variance
and expected returns in our survey evidence is much higher than the individual level
results of Giglio et al. (2019), though still not nearly as high as in our model with a
single investor. There are typically about 300 responses to the CFO survey (Graham
and Harvey, 2008) which is far from the aggregate expectations of the entire market.
This view is also related to Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) who acknowledge not all
investors can have low expectations of returns or be return extrapolators ­ there must
be other investors on the other side which are absent in these surveys.
   We view this heterogeneity in beliefs as important, and feel that extensions of
our model which account for these facts at the individual level are fruitful areas to

                                           39
study, as are extensions where some agents extrapolate risk and some have rational be-
liefs. However, accommodating this in our current framework would add a substantial
amount of complexity, and we therefore we leave this study to future research.


5.6    Rational Arbitrageurs and Trading Profits

The biased beliefs of the representative agent in our model leads to errors in expecta-
tions about conditional stock market variance. In this section, we analyze the gains a
rational agent would achieve through optimal timing of the variance claim, assuming
this agent trades only an infinitesimally small amount and thus does not affect prices.
We focus on the variance claim because this is where trading on the mistake is the
most direct and has the highest sharpe ratio compared to the equity claim.
   From Equation 22, we have that variation in the variance risk premium is due
to differences between the agent's subjective belief about conditional stock market
variance and the true conditional stock market variance. Consider a myopic mean-
variance optimizing rational agent that is timing the variance claim based on the
current expectational errors of the representative agent. The rational agent's position
in the variance claim is then:
                                            V RPt
                                      t =         ,                                 (26)
                                              2

where  is a risk aversion coefficient and  t is the number of units short in the variance
claim. That is, when the expected return to shorting variance is high (low) the short
variance claim position is scaled up (down). To focus on the effects of timing, we
consider the Sharpe ratio of a strategy that is on average variance neutral. That is,
we compute the Sharpe ratio for the strategy with returns ( t - E [ t ]) (IVt - RVt+1 )
both in the model and in the data, noting that the risk aversion parameter  does not
need to be specified for the Sharpe ratio calculation.
   To estimate the V RP in the data, we run the regression:


                      IVt-1 - RVt =  +  1 ^2
                                           t-1 +  2 IVt-1 +  t ,                    (27)

                                            40
where IV is the squared V IX and ^ 2 is the HAR-estimate of the true conditional
market variance. The estimated V RP is then V RP t = ^+^    2   ^
                                                        2 ^ t +  2 IVt . This is

the optimal regression to run within the model for estimating the conditional variance
risk premium. Table 9 shows the results from this regression both in the data and
in the model. The first column shows that the ^ and ^ coefficients in the data are
                                               1     2

-0.85 and 0.87, while the R2 is 19%. We note that the regression coefficients are not
statistically different from -1 and 1, respectively. The annualized sample Sharpe ratio
from the above timing strategy is 0.41.
       In column 2, we run the same regression on simulated model data. The regression
coefficients in the model are indeed -1 and 1, while the R2 is 12%, slightly lower than
the regression in the data. The timing Sharpe ratio in the model is, however, quite a
bit larger than that in the data at 1.17.
       This suggests that the mistakes in variance expectations within our model are too
large. However, the high timing Sharpe ratio is not a robust feature of our model.
In particular, in the baseline model we for analytical convenience assume conditional
variance is Normally distributed. Realized variance in the data, however, has sam-
ple skewness and kurtosis of 6.89 and 69, respectively. To illustrate the effect of a
more realistic data process for variance, without altering the expectation formation
mechanism, we simulate variance as:


                                2   ¯ +  2
                                t = v    t-1 - v
                                               ¯ +      2
                                                        t-1 ~t ,                     (28)

                 (1)      (2)                                            (1)
where ~t =  t          +  t Jt is a mixture of Normals. In particular,  t       N (0, 1),
 (2)
 t  N (0,  2
           J ), and Jt is a random indicator variable that each period equals 1 with

probability p and 0 otherwise. Thus, we have both time-varying volatility and 'jumps'
in the variance process that along with the square root process allow us to achieve high
skewness and kurtosis. Eraker, Johannes, and Polson (2003) shows that such dynam-
ics are important to account for the dynamic behavior of conditional market return
variance. In continuous-time this process never goes negative, and in our discrete-time

                                             41
simulations we simply set any negative variances to zero, though we note that such
observations are rare and small in magnitude. We calibrate this process to match the
first four moments of realized variance by setting  = 0.0738,  J = 5, p = 1/30, using
the same persistence parameter as before,  = 0.71. Under the assumption that vari-
ance risk is not priced and with the same process for xt as before, the impulse-response
of the variance risk premium to a variance shock is the same as in the baseline model
at all horizons. In other words, the main features of our model remain the same in
this simulation.
   The third column of Table 9 shows that this more realistic specification of variance
dynamics again gives regression coefficients of -1 and 1 as in the baseline case. The
R2 is 9% and the Sharpe ratio from timing is now much smaller at 0.30, slightly lower
than that in the data. We note that an annualized Sharpe ratio around 0.5 is similar
to that of other 'anomalies' such as momentum or carry.


5.7    Alternative Explanations

Moreira and Muir (2017) show that leading equilibrium asset pricing models (e.g.,
habits models, intermediary models, long run risk, and rare disasters) typically imply
a strong risk return tradeoff and hence won't match the facts that volatility is a weak
predictor of returns.
   What other models could explain our results? While some models can indeed
match some of our stylized facts, we are not aware of models that can quantitatively
jointly match them. This is especially true regarding the firm level analysis which relies
solely on idiosyncratic movement in firm level variance, and our survey expectation
data which suggests slow moving volatility expectations. We briefly discuss models
with rational inattention and heterogeneity in terms of which facts they can explain.
   Models featuring infrequent rebalancing and/or rational inattention (Abel, Eberly,
and Panageas, 2013) at first appear promising but won't easily match the facts that
we document. Essentially, even if a small fraction of traders is attentive at any given
time, they will still price in changes to volatility. Similarly, even if agents know they
                                           42
will not rebalance again soon they will still ensure a risk-return tradeoff at the horizon
at which they expect rebalance. This will result in a risk-return tradeoff that resembles
the standard case. Further, Hoopes et al. (2017) show evidence that investors do react
to changes in volatility with more sophisticated investors (e.g., those in highest income
brackets) responding most quickly. That is, it does not appear agents are not aware
and do not act on changes in volatility. Finally, we are unaware of these models being
able to easily match the variance risk premium dynamics, and particularly the firm
level facts or the survey expectation data.
   Heterogeneous agents models can potentially explain the weak risk-return relation,
and in these models this risk-return relation can even go negative depending on the
wealth distribution (e.g., G^
                            arleanu and Panageas (2015), Longstaff and Wang (2012)).
These models feature a conditional risk-return tradeoff that is typically positive for
most parts of the stationary distribution but can turn negative in the worst states. For
the unconditional risk-return tradeoff to be weak, calibrations of the models would typi-
cally also require that the correlation between contemporaneous returns and volatility
would be weak, which is not the case. Further, in typical calibrations that aim to
match other moments (e.g., the equity premium) the risk-return tradeoff is positive.
It is not obvious these models would be able to explain the mismatch in frequencies
that we observe, e.g., with risk premiums initially declining but then rising further
out after volatility increases. Further, it is less clear that these models can match
the variance risk premium results, the firm level results we document (which rely on
firm level idiosyncratic variance rather than aggregate variance), and the slow moving
expectations from our survey data. In these models the relation between volatility and
expected returns is only weak or negative in bad times though we don't find such a
conditional relation in the data (for example, the strong negative correlation of returns
and realized variance innovations is robust in good and bad market conditions).
   Since high current volatility reflects high uncertainty about asset values, it is nat-
ural to consider learning about parameters and/or latent states governing economic
dynamics as a possible explanation for the empirical facts. Consider as an example a

                                           43
model where there are two latent high volatility regimes ­ one regime is short-lived,
the other regime is long-lived. Let's say current volatility is high, so investors know
the economy is in one of these high volatility regimes, but they do not know which
one. In a stationary learning environment with a long sample, investors prediction for
future volatility will on average be right given available information so there should
not be return predictability in returns other than that coming from higher expected
risk. However, the learning may be nonstationary and/or the sample may be rela-
tively small when it comes to these types of events. Thus, ex post predictability that
was not ex ante actionable may appear in forecasting regressions. For instance, at
the onset of the financial crises there was anecdotally substantial fear of a long-lived
crisis as volatility spiked to extreme levels. In fact, volatility instead mean-reverted
quite quickly as investors learned that the financial meltdown-scenario was averted.
Note that investors in this case would have overestimated future variance, as the high
volatility regime ex post turned out to be of the short-lived variety. Thus, investors
would appear to have overreacted to the initial high volatility shock, which would lead
to high variance forecasting high returns. This is the opposite of what we find. Thus,
it is not immediately clear that a learning channel will explain the empirical results.
That said, the concern of small-sample issues is a valid one, which is one of the reasons
we also examine the cross-section of firm-level options. The consistent results in a pure
cross-sectional analysis suggests that our results are not due to small-sample concerns.



6.     Conclusion
We show that underreaction followed by delayed overreaction to volatility news can
match many empirical facts surrounding volatility and risk premiums that are puzzling
from leading equilibrium asset pricing models. We achieve this feature by assuming
agents expectations of volatility are slow moving and extrapolative and we show this is
directly consistent with expectations in survey data. In particular, our model matches
the weak overall risk-return tradeoff and matches the dynamic responses of both the

                                           44
equity premium and variance risk premium following shocks to variance.
   We are able to account for the fact that shocks to volatility are indeed associ-
ated with negative contemporaneous realized returns through a discount rate channel
though still the relation between volatility and next period returns are weak. Finally,
in our model the variance risk premium predicts returns more strongly than either
variance or implied variance, as in the data. Survey evidence directly supports slow
moving expectations about volatility, as does evidence using firm level option prices.




References
Abel, Andrew B, Janice C Eberly, and Stavros Panageas, 2013, Optimal inattention
 to the stock market with information costs and transactions costs, Econometrica 81,
 1455­1481.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of
  asset pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481­1509.

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2015, X-
  capm: An extrapolative capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Economics
  115, 1 ­ 24.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
  sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307 ­ 343.

Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 823­866.

Bekaert, Geert, and Marie Hoerova, 2014, The vix, the variance premium and stock
  market volatility, Journal of econometrics 183, 181­192.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John R Graham, and Campbell R Harvey, 2013, Managerial mis-
  calibration, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1547­1584.

Bollerslev, Tim, James Marrone, Lai Xu, and Hao Zhou, 2014, Stock return pre-
  dictability and variance risk premia: statistical inference and international evidence,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 633­661.

Bollerslev, Tim, George Tauchen, and Hao Zhou, 2009, Expected Stock Returns and
  Variance Risk Premia, The Review of Financial Studies 22, 4463­4492.


                                           45
Bollerslev, Tim, Viktor Todorov, and Lai Xu, 2015, Tail risk premia and return pre-
  dictability, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 113­134.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Over-reaction
  in macroeconomic expectations, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Bouchaud, Jean-philippe, Philipp Krueger, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar,
  2019, Sticky expectations and the profitability anomaly, The Journal of Finance 74,
  639­674.

Boutros, Michael, Itzhak Ben-David, John R Graham, Campbell R Harvey, and
  John W Payne, 2019, The persistence of miscalibration, Available at SSRN 3462107
  .

Brandt, Michael W., and Qiang Kang, 2004, On the relationship between the con-
  ditional mean and volatility of stock returns: A latent var approach, Journal of
  Financial Economics 72, 217 ­ 257.

Brooks, Jordan, Michael Katz, and Hanno Lustig, 2018, Post-fomc announcement drift
  in us bond markets, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
  205­251.

Cheng, Ing-Haw, 2018, The VIX Premium, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 180­
 227.

Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015, Information rigidity and the expec-
  tations formation process: A simple framework and new facts, American Economic
  Review 105, 2644­78.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Michael Johannes, and Lars A. Lochstoer, 2016, Asset Pricing
  When `This Time Is Different', The Review of Financial Studies 30, 505­535.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psy-
 chology and security market under- and overreactions, The Journal of Finance 53,
 1839­1885.

Dew-Becker, Ian, Stefano Giglio, Anh Le, and Marius Rodriguez, 2017, The price of
  variance risk, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 225 ­ 250.

Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2011, What's vol got to do with it, Review of
  Financial Studies 24, 1­45.

Eraker, Bjorn, 2020, Predictability puzzles, Available at SSRN 3625709 .

                                         46
Eraker, Bjørn, Michael Johannes, and Nicholas Polson, 2003, The impact of jumps in
  volatility and returns, The Journal of Finance 58, 1269­1300.

French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected
  stock returns and volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3­29.

G^
 arleanu, Nicolae, and Stavros Panageas, 2015, Young, old, conservative, and bold:
 The implications of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing, Journal of Polit-
 ical Economy 123, 670­685.

Giglio, Stefano, and Bryan Kelly, 2017, Excess Volatility: Beyond Discount Rates*,
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 71­127.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Stephen Utkus, 2019, Five
  facts about beliefs and portfolios, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Charles G. Nathanson, 2017, An extrapolative model of house
  price dynamics, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 147 ­ 170.

Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David E. Runkle, 1993, On the relation
  between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks,
  Journal of Finance 48, 1779­1801.

Graham, John R, and Campbell R Harvey, 2008, The equity risk premium in 2008:
  evidence from the global cfo outlook survey, Available at SSRN 1162809 .

Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014, Expectations of Returns and Expected
  Returns, The Review of Financial Studies 27, 714­746.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New
  evidence from many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1­35.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, The Amer-
  ican Economic Review 103, 732­770.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, mo-
  mentum trading, and overreaction in asset markets, The Journal of finance 54,
  2143­2184.

Hoopes, Jeffrey, Patrick Langetieg, Stefan Nagel, Daniel Reck, Joel Slemrod, and
 Bryan Stuart, 2017, Who sold during the crash of 2008-9? evidence from tax return
 data on daily sales of stock, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, 2018, Foreign safe asset
  demand and the dollar exchange rate, Working Paper 24439, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

                                          47
Johnson, Travis L, 2017, Risk premia and the vix term structure, Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 52, 2461­2490.

Johnson, Travis L, 2019, A fresh look at return predictability using a more efficient
  estimator, The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 9, 1­46.

Landier, Augustin, Yueran Ma, and David Thesmar, 2019, Biases in expectations:
  Experimental evidence, Working paper, working paper, May.

Lettau, M, and S Ludvigson, 2003, Measuring and modelling variation in the risk­
  return tradeoff, prepared for the handbook of financial econometrics, edited by y,
  Ait­Sahalia and Lars­Peter Hansen .

Longstaff, Francis A., and Jiang Wang, 2012, Asset Pricing and the Credit Market,
  The Review of Financial Studies 25, 3169­3215.

L´
 opez-Salido, David, Jeremy C Stein, and Egon Zakraj sek, 2017, Credit-market senti-
  ment and the business cycle, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1373­1426.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2011, Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
 Experiences Affect Risk Taking?*, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373­
 416.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis, 2002, Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices:
 A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve*, The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 117, 1295­1328.

Martin, Ian, 2016, What is the expected return on the market?, Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 132(1), 367­433.

Merton, Robert C, 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of
 interest rates, The Journal of finance 29, 449­470.

Moreira, Alan, and Tyler Muir, 2017, Volatility-managed portfolios, The Journal of
 Finance 72, 1611­1644.

Moreira, Alan, and Tyler Muir, 2019, Should long-term investors time volatility?,
 Journal of Financial Economics 131, 507 ­ 527.

Nagel, Stefan, and Zhengyang Xu, 2019, Asset pricing with fading memory, Working
  paper, University of Chicago.

Payzan-LeNestour, Elise, Lionnel Pradier, and T¯    alis J Putni¸ns, 2018, The'waterfall
  illusion'in the financial markets: Risk perception is distorted after prior exposure to
  extreme risk, UNSW Business School Research Paper .

Poteshman, Allen M., 2001, Underreaction, overreaction, and increasing misreaction
  to information in the options market, The Journal of Finance 56, 851­876.
                                           48
Rachwalski, Mark, and Quan Wen, 2016, Idiosyncratic Risk Innovations and the Id-
  iosyncratic Risk-Return Relation, The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 6, 303­328.

Stein, Jeremy, 1989, Overreactions in the options market, The Journal of Finance 44,
  1011­1023.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate
 stock market volatility?, Journal of Finance 68, 987­1035.

Whitelaw, Robert F., 1994, Time variations and covariations in the expectation and
 volatility of stock market returns, Journal of Finance 49, 515­541.

Zhou, Hao, 2018, Variance risk premia, asset predictability puzzles, and macroeco-
  nomic uncertainty, Annual Review of Financial Economics 10, 481­497.




                                        49
7.     Tables / Figures

Table 1: Survey Expectations. We fit the actual variance process and the survey
expectations to an exponential weighted average on past realized variance. That is,
                            i-1 2
we fit: yt,t+k = a + bJi=1      t-i + t and report the estimated  where we choose J to
be 12 periods, and k as the horizon at which investors forecast variance in the survey
(one year). We then repeat this replacing  2  t on the left hand side with the expectation
of variance from the survey over the same horizon. A higher  from the expectations
data signifies that expectations rely more on variance farther in the past compared to
the optimal forecast for volatility. We use the Graham and Harvey CFO survey which
is available quarterly and corresponds to a one year forecast horizon. Standard errors
are below in parentheses.

             Panel A: Dependence on Past Variance ()
 Source             Survey               Future Variance
 CFO                0.87                       -0.16
                    (0.11)                    (0.38)
 N                    69                         69
 R2                  0.74                      0.36
 t(survey - f v )                             (2.58)
            Panel B: Surveys, VIX, and Future Variance
                    V IXt2               Future Variance                   V IXt2 - RVt+1
 CF Ot              1.62                       -0.78                           2.10
                    (0.30)                    (1.04)                           (0.77)
                        
 t 2
                    0.60                      0.67
                    (0.09)                    (0.13)
   2
 R                   0.74                      0.36                              0.05
 N                    69                         69                               68
 Panel C: Regression of 10 year Expectations on 1 year Expectations
                   Volatility                Variance
 1 Year             0.38                      0.25
                    (0.06)                    (0.04)
 R2                  0.47                       0.44
 N                    69                         69
 ~                   0.98                       0.96
 CI  ~            [0.96,0.98]               [0.92,0.97]




                                           50
      Table 2: Calibration. We describe the calibration of parameter values.

                                        Panel A: Parameters

Parameter              Description                                Value   Targeted Moment(s)
                       Risk Aversion                              3       Equity Premium
                       Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution   2.2     Literature / VRP
v
¯                      Unconditional Variance (Monthly)           0.25%   Data
                       Persistence of Variance                    0.71    Data
                       Volatility of Variance Shocks (Monthly)    0.31%   Data
                       Expectation Stickiness                     0.5     VIX / Surveys
                       Scale of Expectations                      0.8     Vol of VIX / Surveys
                                           Panel B: Moments
Moment                 Description                                Model   Data
E [rm ] - rf           Equity Premium (Annual)                    7.9%    7.7%
   E [RVt ]            Square Root Avg. Variance (Annual)         18%     18%
(RVt , RVt-1 )         Persistence of Variance (Monthly)          0.71    0.71
 (RVt )                Volatility of Variance (Monthly)           0.44%   0.44%
 (V IXt2 )             Volatility of V IX 2 (Monthly)             0.33%   0.35%
(V IXt2 , RVt )        Correlation RV and V IX 2 (Monthly)        0.88    0.85
(V IXt2 , V IXt2-1 )   Persistence of V IX 2 (Monthly)            0.91    0.84
      c
         r ,r
    RVt-1 m,t m,t
                       Volatility-Managed Alpha (Moreira Muir)    1.4%    4.9%
(rm,t , RVt )          Correlation of Returns and Vol Shocks      -0.20   -0.38




                                           51
Table 3: Stylized Facts. Panel A runs predictive regressions of variance dependent
returns, the VIX, and future realized variance on expected variance (^     2 t-1 ) and a
weighted average of expected variance over the past six months (1 - )k=1 k-1 
                                                                           6
                                                                                    ^2
                                                                                     t-k .
  2                                                       2
^ t-1 represents expected variance at time t - 1 while  t is the realized variance of

daily market returns in month t. Variance dependent returns are short positions in
VIX Futures, straddles, and variance swaps. Theses returns represent the premium for
insuring against future increases in VIX, variance, or volatility (so that the variance
risk premium is positive on average). Panel B runs excess stock returns (market
returns over the risk free rate) on expected variance, the average of past expected
variance, and the implied variance from the VIX. Data are monthly from 1992-2020,
the variance swap, VIX futures, and straddle return data are 1996-2019, 2004-2020,
1996-2020, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses use Newey West correction
with 12 lags.

                                     Panel A: Variance Returns

                  (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)                (5)           (6)        (7)
                                                                               2       2
                Vix Fut     Straddle     Var Swap      Var Swap (TJ)       V IXt -1 -  t     2 t     V IXt 2
                                                                                                            -1


 ^2
  t-1          -5.04*****   -29.18**     -40.62***           -55.90***       -1.26***      1.53***    0.30**
                  (1.78)     (11.49)      (14.16)              (14.52)         (0.49)       (0.54)    (0.12)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j     5.11**      36.57**      42.90**             58.96***        1.23***        -0.58   0.64***
                  (2.13)     (14.24)      (20.19)              (16.86)         (0.46)       (0.46)    (0.07)

 N                194        292            264                282              334          334       335
 R2             0.0523      0.0240        0.00682            0.00496           0.172        0.469     0.790

                                   Panel B: Stock Market Returns
                                      (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)
                                     Market     Market          Market    Market

                     ^2
                      t-1               -0.59                    -2.21    -3.44***
                                       (0.80)                   (1.38)     (0.87)
                         2
                     V IXt-1                         0.41                 3.69***
                                                    (1.16)                 (1.25)
                          j 2
                     6
                     j =1  ^ t-j                                 2.17
                                                                (2.11)

                     N                  340        363            335      340
                     R2              2.04e-05   -0.00170        0.00105   0.0211




                                                 52
Table 4: Stylized Facts in Model and Sensitivity to . We compare our main
facts from Table 3 in the data (first column) vs in our model (remaining columns).
The risk-return tradeoff regresses one month ahead market excess returns on current
variance and an average of variance over the past 6 months. The volatility-managed
alpha is taken from Moreira and Muir (2017) based on their volatility timing strategy
(see text for details). All other data used are monthly from 1990-2020 as corresponding
to the results in Table 3. We show how our results change as we increase the parameter
 across the columns. The second column is the rational model case,  = 0,  = 0.72
while in other columns we use our calibrated value of  = 0.8.
                             Data                       Model
                                       Rational Case    = 0.3  = 0.5     = 0.8
                              (1)           (2)         (3)    (4)       (5)

                                       Risk Return Tradeoff
             2
             t-1             -2.21          2.71       -0.23    -1.52    -1.05
                            (1.38)
                  j 2
             6
             j =1  ^ t-j     2.17            0          3.02     3.74    1.78
                            (1.42)
             R2              0.1%          5.3%        3.5%     3.4%     1.4%

                                     Volatility-Managed Alpha
                             4.86            -0.09       0.30    1.40    5.33
                            (1.56)

                       Correlation: Realized Returns and Vol Shocks
                           -0.38       -0.24         -0.20    -0.16      -0.15

                     Forecasting Returns with Variance Risk Premium
             V RPt-1       3.47          0          7.40      2.58       1.42
                          (0.92)
             R2            2.3%         0%          1.9%      1%         0.5%

                                                            2            2
             Expected Variance Risk Premium (V RPt-1 = V IXt -1 - Et-1 [ t ])
              2
              t-1          -1.26        0         -0.25    -0.70     -0.92
                          (0.49)
                   j 2
             6j =1  ^ t-j  1.23         0         0.39     0.80       0.58
                          (0.46)

                           Correlation: V IX 2 and Realized Variance
                             0.86          1           0.98      0.92    0.73




                                                  53
Table 5: BTZ Comparison. We compare our model to the model of (Bollerslev
et al., 2009), given in column 2. The text discusses the calibration of BTZ. Remaining
columns show how our model results change as we increase the parameter .
                           Data                     Model
                                    BTZ     = 0.3    = 0.5            = 0.8
                            (1)      (2)    (3)      (4)              (5)

                                    Risk Return Tradeoff
           ^2
            t-1             -2.21    10     -0.23    -1.52            -1.05
                           (1.38)
                j 2
           6
           j =1  ^ t-j       2.17    0      3.02      3.74            1.78
                           (1.42)
           R2               0.1%    7.9%    3.5%     3.4%             1.4%

                      Forecasting Returns with Variance Risk Premium
           V RPt-1          3.47    3.94     7.40     2.58         1.42
                           (0.92)
           R2               2.3% 1.2%       1.9%       1%          0.5%

                         Forecasting Returns with E[RV] and VIX
           ^2
            t-1            -3.44   6.06    -2.28     -2.21      -2.02
                          (0.87)
               2
           V IXt -1         3.69   3.94    4.78       4.71       4.52
                          (1.25)
           R2              2.1%     8%      4%       3.6%       3.4%          3%

                                                         2             2
           Expected Variance Risk Premium (V RPt-1 = V IXt -1 - Et-1 [ t ])
             2
           ^ t-1          -1.26   0     -0.25   -0.70          -0.92
                         (0.49)
                  j 2
           6 j =1  ^ t-j   1.23   0      0.39    0.80           0.58
                         (0.46)

                         Correlation: V IX 2 and Realized Variance
                           0.86     0.99     0.96     0.89            0.73




                                               54
Table 6: Stock level analysis. We repeat our results at the stock level. We run
three forecasting regressions yi,t = ai + b6  2                      2
                                               t-1 + i,t where 6  i,t-1 is the (lagged) 6
month change in realized variance at the stock level for firm i (the realized variance
estimates on the right hand size are winsorized at the 95% level, see text for discussion).
As dependent variables, y , we use the equity risk premium (stock return over the risk
                   f
free rate, ri,t - rt labeled ERP), future variance ( 2
                                                     i,t ), and the variance risk premium
(difference between implied variance from option metrics and future realized variance,
              2        2
V RP = IVi,t    -1 -  i,t where IV is option implied volatility). Data are monthly but
realized variance uses daily data within the month. The last three columns repeat the
regression using time fixed effects. In our panel regressions standard errors are double
clustered by stock and time.

                 ERP          Vol        VRP          ERP          Vol         VRP
  6  2
     t-1        -0.129     0.253       -0.104        -0.040     0.188       -0.070
                (0.137)    (0.067)      (0.036)      (0.075)    (0.046)      (0.022)
  N             536,726    536,726      536,726      536,726    536,726      536,726
  Adj R2         0.001      0.010        0.002        0.159      0.060        0.024
  Time FE          N          N            N            Y          Y            Y




                                            55
Table 7: Term Structure. We regress excess returns to variance claims at different
maturities on lagged variance and a weighted average of past variance. Data and
returns are monthly, standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West with 12 lags. In
the data coefficients are normalized for comparison to the model. See text for more
detail.
                             Panel A: Model Coefficients by Maturity
                            (1)       (2)      (3)       (6)     (12)
               2
             t-1           -0.34     -0.20    -0.15     -0.14   -0.12

                j 2
           6
           j =1  ^ t-j    0.54      0.31        0.24   0.17     0.14

           Adj. R2       15.9%     15.9%    15.9%    15.9%    15.9%
                                 Panel B: Data Variance Swaps
                            (1)      (2)      (3)      (6)     (12)
                                                          
           2
           t-1           -0.90    -0.78    -0.66    -0.45    -0.22
                          (0.24)   (0.19)   (0.15)   (0.09)   (0.06)
                j 2                                       
           6
           j =1  ^ t-j    1.02     0.85    0.69      0.40      0.15
                          (0.47)   (0.36)   (0.26)   (0.17)   (0.12)

           N               264       264       264      264      264
           Adj. R2        0.7%      1.0%      1.4%     1.3%     0.0%
                                 Panel C: Data Straddle Returns
                            (1)      (2)       (3)      (6)     (12)
                                                           
           2
           t-1           -0.40    -0.41     -0.27    -0.17    -0.16
                          (0.12)   (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.05)   (0.03)
                j 2                                       
           6
           j =1  ^ t-j   0.58      0.47     0.32     0.22     0.15
                          (0.21)   (0.10)    (0.09)   (0.06)   (0.04)

           N               264       264       264     264      264
           Adj. R2        1.1%      2.9%      1.7%    1.4%     1.7%
                                   Panel D: Data VIX Futures
                            (1)                (3)     (6)
           2
           t-1           -0.35              -0.33 -0.20
                          (0.08)             (0.06)  (0.04)
                j 2
           6
           j =1  ^ t-j    0.26                0.03   -0.17
                          (0.13)             (0.09)  (0.09)

           N               166                   166    166
           Adj. R2        2.2%                  3.6%   5.1%


                                           56
Table 8: Additional Returns. We run predictive regressions of future excess returns
on past expected variance, and a weighted average of expected variance over the past
                         k-1 2
six months (1 - )6  k=1     ^ t-k . We use credit returns as credit is a volatility sensitive
asset class. We use CDS returns from He et al. (2017), the difference in Barclays high
yield and investment grade returns (HY-IG), and the (negative) change in the Baa
Aaa spread from Moody's. Data are monthly from 1990-2018, the CDS data and High
Yield total return data are 2004-2012 and 1995-2015, respectively. Standard errors in
parentheses use Newey West correction with 12 lags.
                                            Credit Returns
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)
                                       CDS      HY-IG BaaAaa

                       2
                       t-1            -0.54           -3.08     -0.17
                                       (0.05)          (0.62)    (0.02)
                            j 2
                       6
                       j =1  ^ t-j    0.66            2.68      0.16
                                       (0.10)          (1.14)    (0.04)

                       N                  143          240       313
                       Adj. R2           19.2%        15.9%     25.9%




Table 9: Timing Sharpe Ratios. We run predictive regressions of the realized
variance risk premium (V IXt2-1 - RVt ) on expected variance and the squared VIX at
t - 1. We then take the predicted value from the regression and compute the Sharpe
ratio of the optimal timing portfolio. The first column is the data and the second two
columns are the main model and our extended model with jumps and time-varying
volatility of volatility. Standard errors in parentheses use Newey West correction with
12 lags.
                                  (1)        (2)          (3)
                                 Data      Model Model Extended

                    ^2
                     t-1       -0.85***          -1              -1
                                (0.20)
                    V IXt2-1   0.87***           1               1
                                (0.18)

                    N             338
                    R2            0.19      0.124               0.09
                    Sharpe        0.41       1.17               0.30


                                             57
Figure 1: Dynamics of variance expectations in the model. We plot the
behavior of agents expectations of volatility in our model (blue line) and the true path
of expected volatility (dashed red line) in response to a one standard deviation increase
in variance in our model. The dot dashed black line provides an alternative calibration
when we set the scale of expectations lower. Because agents effectively take a weighted
average of past volatility they initially underreact and then subsequently overreact.
The variance risk premium then reflects the difference between agents expectations of
volatility minus the rational forecast of volatility, hence it goes negative initially then
becomes positive. The bottom panel shows the behavior of stock prices (the price
dividend ratio) which also responds slowly in the model, reflecting agents slow moving
beliefs. This slow response makes it appear as if equity risk premiums don't initially
rise (and potentially even fall) after an increase in volatility but then rise later after
the volatility shock has largely subsided. The x-axis is in months. The black dashed
line shows an alternative model calibration.

                                  Variance Expectations
   1
                                                                        Rational
  0.8                                                                    =0.5, =0.8
                                                                         =0.6, =0.7
  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

   0

 -0.2
           0           2           4             6         8           10             12


                                   Price Dividend Ratio
   0
                                                                        Rational
                                                                         =0.5, =0.8
   -1                                                                    =0.6, =0.7


   -2


   -3


   -4
           0           2           4             6         8           10             12




                                            58
Figure 2: Impulse responses: data vs model. We plot the behavior of expected
stock returns and variance risk premiums in the data vs the model at various horizons
for a one standard deviation shock to variance. The black line shows the impulse
response in the data from a VAR(1) of expected variance, market excess returns (de-
noted ERP for equity risk premium), the variance risk premium (VRP), and the log
price dividend ratio. VRP is implied variance (V IX 2 ) minus expected variance. Re-
sponses are for a one-standard deviation shock to expected variance at time 0 and gray
shaded region represents 95% confidence interval. The blue dashed line repeats this
using simulated data from the calibrated model. The red dot dashed line repeats this
exercise in the simulated model data but imposes no bias in beliefs (rational model).
Equity returns are given in units of percent per month. The x-axis is in months.


                                         VRP
             0.2


               0


            -0.2


            -0.4


            -0.6
                   0       2       4        6         8    10       12
                                       Months

                                         ERP
             0.5



               0



            -0.5



              -1
                       2       4        6         8        10       12
                                       Months


                                            59
Figure 3: Survey Expectations, VAR. We run a VAR(1) using realized variance
and survey expectations of variance and plot the impulse response to a 1 standard
deviation shock to realized variance. Expected variance rises strongly after the shock
and then mean reverts fairly quickly. Survey expectations rise slowly, underreact
initially and then remain elevated for longer. Both variables are standardized to have
unit variance.

                           Panel A: CFO (Graham Harvey) Data
              Variance response                                         CFO Survey
 1                                                    0.5

0.8                                                   0.4

0.6                                                   0.3

0.4                                                   0.2

0.2                                                   0.1

 0                                                     0
      0       2        4         6          8               0       2          4         6        8
                  Quarters                                                Quarters

                                     Panel B: Shiller Data
              Variance response                                         Shiller Survey
 1                                                    0.3

0.8                                                  0.25

0.6                                                   0.2

0.4                                                  0.15

0.2                                                   0.1

 0                                                   0.05
      0   5       10       15        20    25               0   5         10       15        20   25
                   Months                                                  Months




                                                60
8.    Internet Appendix: Not Intended for Publica-
      tion
The appendix contains additional derivations, tables, and figures. In particular,

  A. Baseline model derivation

  B. Derivation of model with Gamma distributed shocks

  C. VIX derivation with additional variance signal

  D. Expected variance construction and additional data sources

  E. Robustness: Additional tables and figures

      (a) Sample splits (Table 13)
      (b) Volatility instead of variance in regressions (Table 11)
       (c) Weighted Least Squares (Table 12)
      (d) International data (Table 18)
       (e) Long-sample regressions at different horizons (Table 17)


A.     Baseline Model solution
In this section, we provide more detailed solutions for the baseline model in the paper,
where variance shocks are Normally distributed.

A.1     The Variance Process
From the main text, agents beliefs about the dividend process are as follows:

                                   dt = µ +  t t ,                                  (29)

where t is i.i.d. standard Normal and

                      2    ¯ + xt-1 +  S
                       t = v            t,                                          (30)
                      xt = xt-1 + (1 - )  2t -v
                                              ¯
                          = ( + (1 - ) ) xt-1 + (1 - )  S
                                                        t,                          (31)

where  S                                                                       2
       t is an i.i.d. standard Normal shock uncorrelated with . Both variance  t
and t are observed at time t.




                                          61
   We assume an exchange economy where the agent has Epstein-Zin preferences,
and aggregate log dividend growth is denoted d and the agent's consumption equal
aggregate dividends. The first order condition is then:
                       1 = EtS [Mt+1 Rt+1 ]
                                                 
                             =   EtS e-  dt+1 +rt+1
                             =   EtS e(1- )dt+1 +0 +pdt+1 -pdt ,                             (32)
where r is the log return on the dividend claim and where pd is the log price-dividend
                  1-
ratio. Also,  = 1- 1/
                      , where  and  are the risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity
of substitution parameters, respectively.
    We proceed with the conjecture pdt = c - Axt . Then:
       1 =   EtS e(1- )(µ+t+1 t+1 )+0 +(c-Axt+1 )-(c-Axt )
                          1      2 2
         =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- ) t+1 +0 +(c-A(xt +(1-)(t+1 -v
                                                             ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                           2
                                                                           .                 (33)

Now, ignoring any terms that don't multiply x and using  2     ¯ + xt +  S
                                                         t+1 = v         t+1 , we
have that:
                         1        2 2
           EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )     t+1 +0 +        (c-A(xt +(1-)(2    ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                                  t+1 -v             =
                                                21
                    const × EtS e(1- )           2
                                                   xt -A(xt +(1-)xt )+Axt
                                                                              .              (34)
And so we have:
                              1
                      (1 -  )2  - A ( + (1 - ) ) + A = 0,                                    (35)
                              2
which gives:
                                 1  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
                                 A=-                  .                                      (36)
                                 2 1 -  ( + (1 - ) )
Thus, with ,  > 1, we have that A > 0.
  The conditional variance of log returns is then:
                                 S                S
                             V art -1 (rt ) = V art-1 (pdt + dt )
                                            =  + EtS     2
                                                     -1  t ,                                 (37)

where  = (A (1 - )  )2 . To get the equity risk premium, we need to solve for
the risk-free rate which in turn requires solving for c. Going back to the first-order
equation for the risky asset:
                                  1          2 2
       1 =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )              t+1 +0 +   (c-A(xt +(1-)(2    ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                                        t+1 -v


                           1      2
          =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- ) (v  t+1 )+0 +(c-A(1-) t+1 )-c
                                    ¯+ S                 S



                                      2                                   2
                             1
                                          ¯+0 -c(1-)+ 1 1
                                                      2(2
                                                          (1- )2 -A(1-))  2
          =   e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )            v
                                                                              ,              (38)
                                                     62
where the second equality uses the fact from above that terms in the exponential that
multiplies xt add to zero.
  Then:
                                                                                         2
                    1                        1               1
0 =  ln  +(1 -  ) µ+ (1 -  )2 v
                              ¯+0 -c (1 - )+                   (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )           2.
                    2                        2               2
                                                                                         (39)
And so
                                                                                              2
     ln  + 1 -  -1 µ +        1
                              2
                                  1 -  -1 (1 -  ) v
                                                  ¯ + 0 + -1 1
                                                             2
                                                                 1
                                                                 2
                                                                     (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )          2
c=                                                                                                    .
                                                 1-
                                                                                         (40)
The risk-free rate is given by:
 e-rf,t = EtS [Mt+1 ]
        =   EtS e- dt+1 +(-1)(0 +pdt+1 -pdt )
         =   EtS e- dt+1 +(-1)(0 +c-Axt+1 -c+Axt )
                      1 2
         =   E S e-µ+ 2  (v       t+1 )+( -1)(0 +c-A((+(1-))xt +(1-) t )-c+Axt )
                           ¯+xt + S                                  S
                  t
                      1                       1
                       ¯+(-1)(0 +c(-1))+( 2 
                          2                       2 +( -1)A(1-(+(1-)))
                                                                         )xt
         =   e-µ+ 2  v
              1 1 2              2 2
           ×e 2 ( 2  -(-1)A(1-))  .                                                      (41)
Thus, plugging in for c we have:
                                                                                     2
                              1                    1        1
rf,t = - ln  +  -1 µ -          1 -  -1 (1 -  ) v
                                                ¯-            (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )         2 ...
                              2                    2        2
                                                             2
           1           1 1
         + (1 - 2 ) v
                    ¯+       (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )  2 ...
           2           2 2
             1 2
         -       + ( - 1) A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt
             2
                                             2
           1     1 2
         -          - ( - 1) A (1 - )            2
           2     2
The conditional expected log return is:
EtS [0 + pdt+1 - pdt + dt+1 ] = 0 + c - c + Axt + µ + EtS [-Axt+1 ]
                              = 0 + c ( - 1) + µ + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt .
Plugging in for c we have:
               EtS [rt+1 ] = 0 + c ( - 1) + µ + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt
                                              1
                           = - ln  +  -1 µ -    1 -  -1 (1 -  ) v
                                                                ¯...
                                              2
                                                            2
                                1 1         2
                             -       (1 -  ) - A (1 - )  2 ...
                               2 2
                             +A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt
                                                 63
The conditional log risk premium is then:
                                  1 2
        EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] =          + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt ...
                                  2
                                                                                                      2
                                 1            1              1
                                - (1 - 2 ) v
                                           ¯-                  (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )                         2 ...
                                 2            2              2
                                                                        2
                                  1      1 2
                                +           - ( - 1) A (1 - )               2
                                  2      2
   Next, note that:

                           1  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
  A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) = -                     (1 -  ( + (1 - ) ))
                           2 1 -  ( + (1 - ) )
                           1
                        = -  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
                           2
                              1      1
                        =  - +  - 2
                              2      2
   So then
                     1 2                               1
                         + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) =   -                                   .
                     2                                 2
   We then have:
                                                1                   1
                EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] =       -         ¯+  -
                                                     v                  xt ...
                                                2                   2
                                                                                         2
                                            1   1
                                          -       (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )                         2 ...
                                            2   2
                                                                                         2
                                            1   1 2
                                          +        - ( - 1) A (1 - )                         2.
                                            2   2
This can be written
                                                         1
                        EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] =    -             EtS  2
                                                                   t+1 +  r .                                      (42)
                                                         2
where
                                                                            2
                               1         1
                      r    = -             (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )                   2 ...
                               2         2
                                                                            2
                                     1   1 2
                                 +          - ( - 1) A (1 - )                   2.
                                     2   2
   The objective risk-premium is:
          EtP [rt+1 - rf,t ] = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] +  EtP              S
                                                       +1 [pdt+1 ] - Et+1 [pdt+1 ]
                               = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] - A EtP             S
                                                          +1 [xt+1 ] - Et+1 [xt+1 ] .
                                                    64
We have that:
                  EtS [xt+1 ] = ( + (1 - ) ) xt
                  EtP [xt+1 ] = ( + (1 - ) ) xt + (1 - ) EtP  S
                                                              t+1
                            = EtS [xt+1 ] + (1 - ) EtP  2      S  2
                                                        t+1 - Et  t+1               .
Thus:
       EtP [rt+1 - rf,t ] = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] - A (1 - ) EtP  2      S  2
                                                               t+1 - Et  t+1            ,    (43)
which is the same equation we get in the case with Normal variance shocks.
   Shocks to realized returns are then:
    rt+1 - EtP [rt+1 ] = dt+1 - EtP [dt+1 ] +  pdt+1 - EtP [pdt+1 ]
                         =  t+1 t+1 + A -xt+1 + EtP [xt+1 ]
                         =  t+1 t+1 + A (1 - ) -  2       ¯ + EtP
                                                    t+1 - v                        2
                                                                                   t+1 - v
                                                                                         ¯
                         =  t+1 t+1 - A (1 - )  t+1 .                                        (44)
   Next, turning the the variance risk premium (VRP), note that the error in variance
expectation will feed through in the VRP. In particular:
                                            Mt
                     IVt-1 = EtS
                               -1         S
                                                     ¯ + xt-1 +  S
                                                    +v           t
                                         Et-1 [Mt ]
                            =  +  IV + EtS   2
                                         -1  t ,                                             (45)
                          Mt
where  IV = EtS
              -1
                                S
                        S [M ]  t
                       Et    t
                                      . To see that this is indeed a constant, note that:
                          -1


                                                      Mt
                                      EtS
                                        -1                   S =
                                              EtS
                                                -1     [Mt ] t
                                                                                             
              -µ+ 1  2 (v      t+1 )+( -1)(0 +c-A(xt +(1-)(xt + t+1 ))-c+Axt )
                        ¯+xt + S                                S
           e      2
EtS                                                                                      S
                                                                                         t+1 =
                                                                                            
               -µ+ 1  2 (v      t+1 )+( -1)(0 +c-A(xt +(1-)(xt + t+1 ))-c+Axt )
                         ¯+xt + S                                S
       EtS    e    2

                                                                              
                                   1 2
                                 (
                                e 2    - (  - 1)A   (1 -  ) )     S
                                                                  t +1
                         EtS          1 2
                                                                           S
                                                                           t+1 =
                                                                              
                               S
                              E e 2 (     - (  - 1)A   (1 -   ) )    S
                                                                     t +1
                                 t
                                                                  
                                                  m S
                                              e     t+1
                                     EtS                       S
                                                               t+1 .
                                                                                             (46)
                                                      m S
                                            EtS   e     t+1



where m = 1
          2
             2 - ( - 1) A (1 - ). From Stein's Lemma we have that:
                                             
                                m S
                               e t+1
                        EtS             S         2
                                          t+1 =  m.
                                                                                             (47)
                              S  m S
                             Et e t+1
                                                       65
To summarize:

                     IVt-1 =  +  IV + EtS   2
                                        -1  t ,                                  (48)
                             1 2
                        IV =    - ( - 1) A (1 - )  2 .                           (49)
                             2

The results given in the main text follow from the derivations shown here.


B.     Model with Gamma-Distributed Variance Shocks
In this section, we show that a model where the variance process has Gamma dis-
tributed shocks ­ which allow us to guarantee positive variance ­ lead to the same
expressions for risk premium dynamics as in the model in the main text. The only
thing that changes somewhat are the unconditional levels of risk premiums (the in-
tercepts in the expressions), but these are not our main focus. Before we get into the
model, it is useful to establish some general properties of the Gamma distribution.

B.1    The Gamma Distribution
If X > 0 is a Gamma distributed random variable, we have that:

                                 X  Gamma (k, s)                                 (50)
                                              x
                                      xk-1 e- s
                              f (x) =           ,                                (51)
                                      sk  (k )

where k is the shape and s is the scale parameter, respectively,  (k ) is the Gamma
function, f (x) is the probability density function, and k, s > 0. Then:

                           E [X ] = ks,                                          (52)
                        V ar (X ) = ks2                                          (53)
                         E etX = (1 - st)-k for t < s-1 .                        (54)

Imposing V ar (X ) = 1 implies that k = s-2 .
   Note that the analogue of Stein's Lemma for a Gamma distributed variable is:
                                                        x
                              tx              txxk-1 e- s
                          E e x     =      e x k           dx
                                         0      s  (k )
                                            k tx- x
                                           x e s
                                    =                 dx
                                         0  sk  (k )
                                            k x(t- 1 s)
                                           x e
                                    =                   dx.                      (55)
                                         0   sk  (k )


                                         66
             ~  k + 1 and s
Next, define k               ~  - t-1     . Recall that we always need t < s-1 so
                                      s-1
t - s-1 < 0 and thus s                                  ~ > 0 given that k > 0. We
                     ~ > 0, which is required. Clearly, k
can then write:
                                            ~ ~
                                          ~k  k
                                          s                      ~     x
                                                                xk-1 e- s
                                                                        ~
                            tx
                        E e x     =                                       dx
                                          sk  (k )       0      s ~
                                                                  k
                                                                ~ k   ~
                                            ~ ~
                                          ~k  k
                                          s
                                  =                  .                            (56)
                                          sk  (k )

B.2     The Variance Process
As in the main text, agents beliefs about the dividend process are as follows:
                                    dt = µ +  t t ,                               (57)
where t is i.i.d. standard Normal and
                      2t = v
                           ¯ + xt-1 +  ~S
                                        t,                                        (58)
                      xt = xt-1 + (1 - )  2t -v
                                              ¯
                          = ( + (1 - ) ) xt-1 + (1 - )  ~S
                                                         t,                       (59)
where  ~S       S
        t = t - s
                      -1
                         where  St is a Gamma distributed variable scale and shape
parameters s and k , respectively, that is independent of t . We normalize the shock to
have unit variance and so k = s-2 , which in turns implies that its mean is mean s-1
              t ] = 0. Both variance  2
and so Et-1 [~                         t and t are observed at time t.
   In order for variance to always be non-negative, the restriction
                                    (1 - ) s-1
                                                  v
                                                  ¯                               (60)
                                 1 - ( + (1 - ) )
has to be satisfied. In our calibration, we have
                                           =    0.23%,
                                           =    0.9,
                                           =    0.6                               (61)
                                      v
                                      ¯    =    0.26%.                            (62)
Thus, we need:
                                   0.4 × 0.23%
                     s                                    = 8.85.                 (63)
                          0.26% × (1 - (0.6 + 0.4 × 0.9))
   Note that:
                                EtS-1 [ t t ] = 0,                                (64)
                             V art-1 ( t t ) = EtS
                                 S                     2
                                                   -1  t .                        (65)
                                               67
B.3    Solving the Gamma-Model
As in the main text, we assume an exchange economy where the agent has Epstein-
Zin preferences, and aggregate log dividend growth is denoted d and the agent's
consumption equal aggregate dividends. We proceed as before with the conjecture
pdt = c - Axt and consider the first-order condition for the risky asset:

       1 =   EtS e(1- )(µ+t+1 t+1 )+0 +(c-Axt+1 )-(c-Axt )
                          1      2 2
         =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- ) t+1 +0 +(c-A(xt +(1-)(t+1 -v
                                                             ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                           2
                                                                           .                  (66)

Now, ignoring any terms that don't multiply x and using  2     ¯ + xt +  S
                                                         t+1 = v         t+1 , we
have that:
                         1        2 2
           EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )     t+1 +0 +      (c-A(xt +(1-)(2    ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                                t+1 -v             =

                                               21
                    const × EtS e(1- )          2
                                                  xt -A(xt +(1-)xt )+Axt
                                                                                   .          (67)
And so we have:
                              1
                      (1 -  )2  - A ( + (1 - ) ) + A = 0,                                     (68)
                              2
which gives:
                                             1  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
                                 A=-                              ,                           (69)
                                             2 1 -  ( + (1 - ) )
which is the same as for the case of Normally distributed variance shocks. Thus, with
,  > 1, we have that A > 0.
   The conditional variance of log returns is:
                                 S
                             V art -1 (rt ) = V art-1 (pdt + dt )
                                            =  + EtS     2
                                                     -1  t ,                                  (70)

where  = (A (1 - ) )2 . To get the equity risk premium, we need to solve for
the risk-free rate which in turn requires solving for c. Going back to the first-order
equation for the risky asset:
                                  1          2 2
       1 =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )              t+1 +0 +   (c-A(xt +(1-)(2    ¯)))-(c-Axt )
                                                                        t+1 -v


                           1      2
          =   EtS e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- ) (v  t+1 )+0 +(c-A(1-) t+1 )-c
                                    ¯+ S                 S



                                      2                       1         2
                                                       EtS e[ 2 (1- )       -A(1-)] S
                             1
          =   e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- )            ¯+0 -c(1-)
                                          v                                         t+1   ,   (71)

where the second equality uses the fact that terms in the exponential that multiplies
xt add to zero.

                                                   68
   From the moment generating function (MGF) of the Gamma distributed shock we
then have that:
                                    1      2
                     1 =   e(1- )µ+ 2 (1- ) v¯+0 -c(1-)+z1
                                                           ,              (72)
where
                         1                1
                z1 = -      ln 1 - s        (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )  ,                (73)
                         s2               2
and where s is the scale parameter for the Gamma distribution as given above. This
imposes the parameter restriction
                           1
                             (1 -  )2 - A (1 - )  < s-1 ,                         (74)
                           2
to have existence of the MGF of the Gamma.
    Then:
                                         1
             0 =  ln  + (1 -  ) µ +        (1 -  )2 v
                                                    ¯ + 0 - c (1 - ) + z1 .       (75)
                                         2
And so
                          ln  + (1 -  ) µ + 1
                                            2
                                              (1 -  )2 v
                                                       ¯ + 0 + z1
                   c=                                             .               (76)
                                          (1 - )
The risk-free rate is given by:

         e-rf,t = EtS [Mt+1 ]
                =   EtS e- dt+1 +(-1)(0 +pdt+1 -pdt )
                          1 2
                              ¯+(-1)(0 +c(-1))+( 1  2 +(-1)A(1-(+(1-))))xt
                =   e-µ+ 2  v                    2

                               1
                    ...EtS e( 2                    )S
                                   2 -( -1)A(1-)
                                                    t+1 .



Again using the MGF of the Gamma distribution, we have:
                          1                      1 2
         e-rf,t =   e-µ+ 2 
                              2v
                               ¯+(-1)(0 +c(-1))+ 2  (
                                                    +(-1)A(1-(+(1-)))   )xt +z2

where
                         1                1 2
                z2 = -      ln 1 - s         - ( - 1) A (1 - )  .
                         s2               2
This yields the second parameter restriction:
                           1 2
                              - ( - 1) A (1 - )  < s-1 .
                           2
   We then have:
                              1
           rf,t = - ln  + µ -  2 v¯ - ( - 1) (0 + c ( - 1)) ...
                              2
                     1 2
                  -      + ( - 1) A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt - z2 .
                     2
                                    69
Plugging in the expression for c, we have
                            1
       rf,t = - ln  + µ -  2 v  ¯ - ( - 1) 0 + ...
                            2
                                           1
              ( - 1) ln  + (1 -  ) µ-1 + (1 -  )2 v¯-1 + 0 + -1 z1 ...
                                           2
                 1 2
              -      + ( - 1) A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt - z2
                 2
                      1
            = 0 + µ + v ¯ - v¯ + z1 ...
                      2
                                        1
              - ln  + (1 -  ) µ-1 + (1 -  )2 v ¯-1 + 0 + -1 z1
                                        2
                 1 2
              -      + ( - 1) A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt - z2
                 2

The conditional expected log return is:

EtS [0 + pdt+1 - pdt + dt+1 ] = 0 + c - c + Axt + µ + EtS [-Axt+1 ]
                              = 0 + c ( - 1) + µ + A [1 -  ( + (1 - ) )] xt .

Plugging in the expression for c, we have:
                                            1
                          ln  + (1 -  ) µ + 2 (1 -  )2 v
                                                       ¯ + 0 + z1
     EtS   [rt+1 ] = 0 +                                          ( - 1) ...
                                          (1 - )
                     +µ + A [1 -  ( + (1 - ) )] xt
                                                   1
                   = 0 - ln  + -1 (1 -  ) µ + -1 (1 -  )2 v ¯ + 0 + -1 z1 ...
                                                   2
                     +µ + A [1 -  ( + (1 - ) )] xt .

The conditional log risk premium is then:

                                                    1
EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] = 0 - ln  + -1 (1 -  ) µ + -1 (1 -  )2 v   ¯ + 0 + -1 z1 ...
                                                    2
                     +µ + A [1 -  ( + (1 - ) )] xt
                                                 1
                                                                                
                                         0 + µ + 2 ¯ - v
                                                   v    ¯ + z1 ...
                     -  - ln  + (1 -  ) µ-1 + 1 2
                                                   (1 -  )2 v
                                                            ¯-1 + 0 + -1 z1 ... 
                               1 2
                            - 2   + ( - 1) A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt - z2
                         1               1 2
                   = v¯- v ¯ - z1 + z2 +     + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) xt
                         2               2

   Next, note that:


                                            70
                           1  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
  A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) = -                     (1 -  ( + (1 - ) ))
                           2 1 -  ( + (1 - ) )
                           1
                        = -  (1 -  ) (1 - 1/ )
                           2
                           1
                        = - (1 -  )2
                           2
                              1      1
                        =  - +  - 2
                              2      2
   So then
                      1 2                               1
                          + A (1 -  ( + (1 - ) )) =   -
                      2                                 2
and then
                                                     1
                      EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] = z2 - z1 +  - EtS  2t+1 ,
                                                     2
which is the same as that we get in the Normal variance shock case, up to an intercept.
   The objective risk-premium is:
           EtP [rt+1 - rf,t ] = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] +  EtP              S
                                                        +1 [pdt+1 ] - Et+1 [pdt+1 ]
                             = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] - A EtP             S
                                                        +1 [xt+1 ] - Et+1 [xt+1 ] .

We have that:
               EtS [xt+1 ] = ( + (1 - ) ) xt
               EtP [xt+1 ] = ( + (1 - ) ) xt + (1 - ) EtP  S
                                                           t+1
                           = EtS [xt+1 ] + (1 - ) EtP  2      S  2
                                                       t+1 - Et  t+1           .
Thus:
     EtP [rt+1 - rf,t ] = EtS [rt+1 - rf,t ] - A (1 - ) EtP  2      S  2
                                                             t+1 - Et  t+1            ,   (77)
which again is the same equation we get in the case with Normal variance shocks.
   Shocks to realized returns are then:
    rt+1 - EtP [rt+1 ] = dt+1 - EtP [dt+1 ] +  pdt+1 - EtP [pdt+1 ]
                        =  t+1 t+1 + A -xt+1 + EtP [xt+1 ]
                        =  t+1 t+1 + A (1 - ) -  2       ¯ + EtP
                                                   t+1 - v                   2
                                                                             t+1 - v
                                                                                   ¯
                        =  t+1 t+1 - A (1 - )  t+1 .                                      (78)
   Next, turning the the variance risk premium (VRP), note that the error in variance
expectation will feed through in the VRP. In particular:
                                         Mt
                   IVt-1 = EtS
                             -1        S
                                                      ¯ + xt-1 +  S
                                                     +v           t
                                      Et-1 [Mt ]
                           = +        + EtS
                                          -1  t
                                                 2
                                                     ,                                    (79)
                                              71
                       Mt
where  = EtS
           -1
                             S
                     S [M ]  t
                    Et    t
                                         . To see that this is indeed a constant, note that:
                       -1


                                                            Mt
                                           EtS
                                             -1                    S =
                                                    EtS
                                                      -1     [Mt ] t
                                                                                                 
              -µ+ 1  2 (v      t+1 )+( -1)(0 +c-A(xt +(1-)(xt + t+1 ))-c+Axt )
                        ¯+xt + S                                S
          e       2
EtS                                                                                            S
                                                                                               t+1 =
                                                                                                  
               -µ+ 1  2 (v      t+1 )+( -1)(0 +c-A(xt +(1-)(xt + t+1 ))-c+Axt )
                         ¯+xt + S                                S
       EtS    e    2

                                                                              
                                     1 2
                                   (
                                  e 2    - (  - 1)A   (1 -  ) )     S
                                                                    t+1
                           EtS          1 2
                                                                           S
                                                                           t+1 =
                                                                              
                                 S
                                E e 2 (     - (  - 1)A   (1 -   ) )   S
                                                                      t+1
                                     t
                                                                          
                                                        m S
                                                    e     t+1
                                         EtS                          S
                                                                      t+1 .
                                                                                                 (80)
                                                            m S
                                                  EtS   e     t+1



where m = 2   1 2
                - ( - 1) A (1 - ). Recall that agents believe       ~S     S
                                                                     t = t + s
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                    is
                                    -1                           -2
Gamma distributed with mean s and variance 1 (i.e., k = s ). Note that in this
case,   ~S
         t is Gamma with shape parameter k = s
                                                    -2
                                                       and scale parameter s. Also,
recall that E [e x] is a constant if x is Gamma and t < s-1 (see Equation (56)):
                tx

                                                                         
                      m S                                  m ~ S
                     e t+1                   -1           e t+1
            EtS                   S 
                                  t +1  = - s   + E S
                                                    t                ~St
                                                                         ,        (81)
                    S   m S                              S  m   ~ S
                   Et e t+1                            Et e t+1

where                                                    
                                      ~S                                 s-2
                                e   m  t+1                      s
                                                                ~               (s-2 + 1)
                     EtS                           ~S
                                                    t
                                                              ~
                                                             =s                           ,      (82)
                              EtS em~t+1   S
                                                                s                (s-2 )

                                  -1
      ~ = - m - (s)-1
where s                                  . To summarize:

                           IVt-1 =  +  + EtS   2
                                           -1  t ,                                               (83)
                                                            s-2
                                                   s
                                                   ~               (s-2 + 1)
                                 = s
                                   ~                                   - 2
                                                                             - s-1 ,             (84)
                                                   s                (s )
which is the same expression as that we get in the case of Normal variance shocks,
except for the intercept term.


C.       Additional variance signal
In our main model, lagged realized variance is the best forecaster of future realized
variance. At the firm-level this is clearly unrealistic as, for instance, earnings an-
nouncements are pre-scheduled and a known source of return variance. Even at the
                                                             72
aggregate level investors may have access to additional sources of information than
just lagged variance that inform their forecasts of future variance.
    In this section we show that it is straightforward to relax this assumption without
altering the main mechanism we highlight in this paper. In particular, let the true
variance dynamics be the same as in the main paper (Equations (5) and (6)). Assume
investors form beliefs based on lagged variance as in the main paper:

                EtS   2 2        2
                  -1  t | t-1 ,  t-2 , ... = v
                                             ¯ + xt-1 ,t
                                        xt = xt-1 + (1 - )  2
                                                            t -v
                                                               ¯ .                  (85)

In addition, however, let agents at time t - 1 also observe a signal that is informative
about the time t shock to variance,  t :

                                   st-1 =  t + k t-1 ,

where   t-1 is a standard Normal shock uncorrelated with all other shocks. Thus,
¯ + xt-1 is a signal about  2
v                                                   2
                               t that has variance  , while st-1 is a signal about  t
that has variance k 2 . Agents' combine these sources of information using Bayes rule:

                                                                   k -2
              EtS   2           2      2
                -1  t |st-1, ,  t-1 ,  t-2 , ... = v
                                                   ¯ + xt-1 +              st-1 .   (86)
                                                                 -2 + k -2
Note that lagged values of the signal s are not useful as lagged  2
                                                                  t-j are observed.
   If agents are risk-neutral, we have that:

                                                     k -2
                        V IXt2-1 = v
                                   ¯ + xt-1 +                st-1 .                 (87)
                                                   -2 + k -2
Thus, the V IXt2-1 contains information about  2t not contained in the history of real-
ized variance, namely  t . Since st-1 is orthogonal to the history of realized variance,
a projection of V IX 2 onto lags of realized variance is the same as in the baseline
model.


D.     Expected variance measure and additional data
       sources
There is a large literature on estimating the conditional stock market variance. Early
approaches include the ARCH and GARCH models of Engle (1982) and Bollerslev
(1986). More recently, attention has focused on the use of multifrequency data in
variance forecasting (see, e.g., Corsi (2009), Chen and Ghysels (2012)).
    Bekaert and Hoerova (2014) compare a wide array of variance forecasting models to
find the best forecaster of monthly realized market variance, including multifrequency
models, models that consider asymmetric response of variance to stock returns, and
models that separately include jump and diffusion components in realized variance.
                                            73
In the sample from 1990, which is the sample where the VIX is available that we
also focus on in our analysis, the leading model is the Heterogeneous Autoregressive
(HAR) model of Corsi (2009), which uses different frequency lags of realized stock
market variance, extended to include the squared VIX as a predictor variable, which
they denote CV8. Since the VIX is a key endogenous variable in our model, we use the
HAR model without the VIX as our baseline model for estimating expected market
variance. However, in this appendix we show that our results are not driven by this
specific model, but are essentially unchanged when using the CV8 model as well as
simply using lags of monthly realized variance.
    The baseline version of the HAR model considered in Bekaert and Hoerova (2014)
is:
                     (22)             (1)       (5)       (22)
                 RVt+1 =  +  1 RVt +  2 RVt +  3 RVt + t+1 ,                    (88)
                                              (k)
where t measures time in months and RVt is the sum of the last k days' realized
variance. Daily realized variance is measured using 5-minute S&P500 futures returns.
In words, the conditional monthly stock market variance for next month is assumed to
be affine in the realized variance the last day, the last five days, and the last twenty-two
days of the current month. The CV8 model adds the end of month squared VIX to
this projection. The time t forecast we use in our baseline analysis (see Table 14) is
then:
                       2          ^ 1t RVt(1) + ^ 2t RVt(5) + ^ 3t RVt(22) ,
                         t = ^t +                                                       (89)
where the t subscripts on the parameter estimates highlights that we re-estimate the
model each month, using only data up until time t to form the time t variance forecast.
In Panels A and B of Table 14 we show the same regressions as in Table 3 in the main
paper using the CV8 measure estimated in the same way using an expanding sample.
To allow reasonable estimation of the initial coefficients, the first variance forecasts
are for January 1992. The data for the traded variance claims starts in 1996, which
implies a six-year initial estimation period.

D.1     Survey Data
Our main survey measure comes from the Duke-CFO Survey (Graham and Harvey).
   Each quarter respondents are asked the following questions.
   Over the next year, I expect the annual S&P 500 return will be:
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be less than %.
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be greater than %.

   We take the difference of these two numbers as the 80% confidence interval for
CFOs which we average across respondents. Importantly, this is not disagreement but
the difference between the mean of the 90th and 10th percentiles. We square this to
convert to a measure proportional to variance.



                                            74
D.1.1      Relation to GARCH (1,1)
Note that if we write:                      
                            rvt+1 = a + b          j rvt-j + t+1
                                            j =0

we have:
                                                    
                     rvt+1 = a + brvt + b                 j rvt-1-j + t+1
                                                   j =0
                            = a + brvt +  (rvt - a - t ) + t+1
                              ~ + ( + b) rvt - t + t+1
                            = a

   Thus, the survey expectations and those that we use in our model can be thought of
as a GARCH(1,1) process. This suggests another interpretation for how agents form
expectations, as using a GARCH process is a reasonable way to forecast volatility.
However, our results suggest that while this is a plausible motivation, it would still
mean agents use too large a number for  relative to a rational or objective forecast
as we show in the survey evidence.

D.2     Additional Data Sources
The table below details our international data sources including starting time periods
for each series.

                        Table 10: Data Sources.
 Country     Index      Volatility                                  Source              History
 USA         SP500      VIX                                         WRDS                From 1/2/1990
 France      CAC 40     VCAC                                        Bloomberg           Fron 1/3/2000
 Canada      sptsx60    VIXC                                        Montreal Exchange   From 10/2010
 UK          FTSE 100 VFTSE                                         Bloomberg           From 1/4/2000
 Germany     DAX        DAX New Volatility (V1XI)                   Bloomberg           From 1/2/1992
 Japan       Nikkei 225 VXJ                                         Bloomberg           From 1/5/1998
 South Korea KOSPI      VKOSPI                                      Bloomberg           From 1/2/2003
 Netherlands AEX        VAEX                                        Bloomberg           From 1/2000
 Switzerland SMI        V3X                                         Bloomberg           From 6/28/1999



E.      Appendix Tables and Figures: Robustness Checks
In Panels A and B of Table 11 we show the same regressions volatility instead of
variances, where volatility is formed as the square root of variance.
   Panel A and B of Table 12 show a weighted least squares version of Table 3. In
particular, we first run the OLS regressions in Table 3, next we for each regression run
                                            75
a GARCH(1,1) on the residuals, and then we re-run the regression using the inverse
of the conditional variance estimate as weights. Thus, these regressions down weight
period with high estimated conditional variance of the estimated residuals from the
OLS regressions. The results are qualitatively the same across the board and, though
most of the coefficients remain significant, we note that the significance levels are
typically lower. Since the standard errors in Table 3 are heteroskedasticity consistent,
these results indicate that high variance periods (and periods with high variance of
variance, which itself is correlated with variance) indeed are periods where the bias is
stronger. That said, the results are not driven exclusively by, say, the financial crisis.
    Panels A and B of Table 13 show the results from same regressions again, splitting
the sample into before and after 2010. We note that the results are in fact stronger in
the period after the financial crisis than before.




                                           76
Table 11: Stylized Facts: Robustness to using volatility. We repeat our anal-
ysis using volatility (standard deviation) in place of variance. Panel A runs predictive
regressions of variance dependent returns, the VIX, and future realized variance on
expected volatility (^ t-1 ), a weighted average of expected volatility over the past six
months (1 - )k=1 k-1 
                 6
                          ^ t-k , and implied volatility V IX . In our notation  t represents
the realized standard deviation of daily market returns in month t. The returns on
variance swaps, straddles, and VIX futures have a negative sign, thus representing the
premium for insuring against future increases in VIX or variance (so that the variance
risk premium is positive on average). Data are monthly from 1990-2020, the variance
swap, VIX futures, and straddle return data are 1996-2017, 2004-2020, and 1996-2020,
respectively. Standard errors in parentheses use Newey West correction with 12 lags.

                                         Panel A: Variance Returns

                  (1)         (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)          (6)        (7)
                Vix Fut    Straddle       Var Swap      Var Swap (TJ)      V IXt-1 -  t     t       V IXt-1

 ^ t-1          -5.04***   -7.88***       -10.29***        -14.78***         -0.90***     1.39***   0.51***
                 (1.78)      (2.07)         (3.88)           (4.39)           (0.33)       (0.33)    (0.11)
      j
 6
 j =1   ^ t-j    5.11**     9.66***        10.94**          15.20***         0.92***        -0.39   0.52***
                 (2.13)      (2.67)         (4.64)           (3.83)           (0.31)       (0.31)    (0.09)

 N                194           292          264             282               334          334       335
 R2             0.0523        0.0438       0.0104           0.0102            0.101        0.560     0.805

                                       Panel B: Stock Market Returns
                                           (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
                                          Market      Market     Market     Market

                      ^ t-1                -0.04                  -0.52       -0.41
                                          (0.18)                 (0.35)      (0.29)
                      V IXt-1                           0.06                 0.39*
                                                       (0.15)                (0.22)
                           j
                      6
                      j =1   ^ t-j                                0.60
                                                                 (0.40)

                      N                     340          363       335        340
                      R2                 -0.00252     -0.00193   0.00196    0.00345




                                                      77
Table 12: Stylized Facts: Robustness using Weighted Least Squares. Panel A
runs predictive regressions of variance dependent returns, the VIX, and future realized
variance on expected variance (^  2 t-1 ) and a weighted average of expected variance over
                                   k-1 2
the past six months (1-)k=1   6
                                       ^ t-k . ^2
                                                t-1 represents expected variance at time t-1
while  2
       t is the realized variance of daily  market   returns in month t. Variance dependent
returns are short positions in VIX Futures, straddles, and variance swaps. Theses
returns represent the premium for insuring against future increases in VIX, variance,
or volatility (so that the variance risk premium is positive on average). Panel B runs
excess stock returns (market returns over the risk free rate) on expected variance, the
average of past expected variance, and the implied variance from the VIX. Data are
monthly from 1992-2020, the variance swap, VIX futures, and straddle return data
are 1996-2019, 2004-2020, 1996-2020, respectively. We estimate a GARCH(1,1) for
each set of first pass residuals and then in the second stage regressions use the inverse
conditional variance as the weight. Standard errors in parentheses use Newey West
correction with 12 lags.

                                        Panel A: Variance Returns

                 (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)                (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                                             2      2
               Vix Fut       Straddle   Var Swap     Var Swap (TJ)       V IXt-1 -  t    2 t     V IXt 2
                                                                                                        -1


 ^2
  t-1          -3.58*        -24.05**     -26.13*        -22.14**            -0.52      1.55**   0.40***
               (2.14)         (11.22)     (14.79)         (10.40)           (0.51)      (0.63)    (0.11)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j   3.74*         31.12**       31.52          30.58*             0.65        -0.38   0.72***
               (2.19)         (13.64)     (19.73)         (15.70)           (0.46)      (0.50)    (0.09)

 N              194             292        264               282             334         334       335

                                      Panel B: Stock Market Returns
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
                                         Market     Market     Market    Market

                         ^2
                          t-1              -1.12                -3.21     -2.62*
                                          (0.87)               (2.25)     (1.40)
                             2
                         V IXt -1                    -0.22                 1.61
                                                    (0.98)                (1.46)
                              j 2
                         6
                         j =1  ^ t-j                            2.78
                                                               (3.10)

                         N                 340       363           335     340




                                                    78
Table 13: Stylized Facts: Robustness to Sample Splits. We repeat the analysis
from Table 3 in the main text but split the sample into pre and post 2010 (Panels A
and C). This shows robustness to the post financial crisis and roughly splits the sample
for the variance returns (variance swap and VIX futures). Panel B additionally shows
the Results dropping the COVID crisis by omitting 2020.

                                       Panel A: Post 2010

                 (1)          (2)        (3)                (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)
               Vix Fut     Straddle   Var Swap         Var Swap (TJ)    Market     Market     Market       Market

 ^2
  t-1          -9.03***   -99.93***     -126.42            -79.28         0.93               -14.49**     -11.28***
                (4.20)     (24.16)      (87.15)           (49.02)        (1.16)                (6.25)       (4.04)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j   12.60***   137.01***    181.23*           137.67**                             23.81**
                (4.83)     (32.71)     (107.73)           (55.99)                              (9.85)
     2
 V IXt-1                                                                           2.58***                11.66***
                                                                                    (0.90)                 (3.68)

 N                123         123         95                113           123        123       123          123
 R2             0.0786      0.0702      0.0103            0.00410      -0.00492     0.0253    0.0926       0.0951

                             Panel B: Post 2010 (Excluding COVID)

                 (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
               Vix Fut    Straddle    Var Swap     Var Swap (TJ)       Market     Market     Market      Market

 ^2
  t-1            -3.57     -61.49**    -126.42             -79.28        1.37                  -8.28     -7.34**
                (3.36)      (24.81)    (87.15)            (49.02)       (1.75)                (5.27)      (3.41)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j   7.35***    103.73***   181.23*            137.67**                            13.78**
                (3.15)      (29.41)   (107.73)            (55.99)                             (5.40)
     2
 V IXt-1                                                                          3.26***                7.96***
                                                                                   (1.12)                 (1.77)

 N              120         120          95                113            120       120       120         120
 R2            0.0305      0.0284      0.0103            0.00410       -0.00517    0.0234    0.0240      0.0437

                                       Panel C: Pre 2010
                 (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)
               Vix Fut    Straddle    Var Swap     Var Swap (TJ)       Market     Market      Market       Market

 ^2
  t-1          -3.99***   -21.73***   -36.54***         -56.20***       -0.83                  -1.52      -2.70***
                (1.05)      (5.79)       (9.66)           (14.35)      (0.71)                 (1.27)       (0.69)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j   3.15***    28.42***     39.27***          59.87***                               0.89
                (1.05)      (7.80)      (13.02)           (15.06)                             (1.52)
     2
 V IXt-1                                                                            -0.15                  2.59**
                                                                                   (1.19)                  (1.13)

 N                71         169        169                169           217         240        212         217
 R2             0.101      0.0157     0.00497            0.00157       0.00297    -0.00404   -0.000777     0.0117

                                                  79
Table 14: Stylized Facts: Robustness to Alternative Measure of Expected
Variance. We proxy for expected variance using the "CV8" model of Bekaert and
Hoerova (2014). Panel A runs predictive regressions of variance dependent returns, the
VIX, and future realized variance on expected variance (^  2 t-1 ) and a weighted average
of expected variance over the past six months (1 - )k=1 k-1 
                                                           6
                                                                     ^2
                                                                      t-k . ^2
                                                                             t-1 represents
                                        2
expected variance at time t - 1 while  t is the realized variance of daily market returns
in month t. Variance dependent returns are short positions in VIX Futures, straddles,
and variance swaps. Theses returns represent the premium for insuring against future
increases in VIX, variance, or volatility (so that the variance risk premium is positive
on average). Panel B runs excess stock returns (market returns over the risk free rate)
on expected variance, the average of past expected variance, and the implied variance
from the VIX. Data are monthly from 1992-2020, the variance swap, VIX futures,
and straddle return data are 1996-2019, 2004-2020, 1996-2020, respectively. Standard
errors in parentheses use Newey West correction with 12 lags.

                                      Panel A: Variance Returns

                  (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)            (5)          (6)        (7)
                                                                            2      2
                Vix Fut    Straddle     Var Swap        Var Swap (TJ)   V IXt-1 -  t     2 t     V IXt 2
                                                                                                        -1


 ^2
  t-1           -4.83***   -28.51**     -37.8***          -48.87***       -1.25**      1.58***    0.36**
                 (1.89)     (11.97)      (13.65)            (12.91)        (0.52)       (0.59)    (0.15)
      j 2
 6
 j =1  ^ t-j     5.04**     36.59**     41.79**            55.14***        1.26**        -0.63   0.62***
                 (2.10)     (14.64)      (20.16)            (16.71)        (0.49)       (0.51)    (0.08)

 Observations     194       292            264               282            334          334       335
 R2             0.0466     0.0219        0.00401           0.00145         0.155        0.457     0.828

                                  Panel B: Stock Market Returns
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)
                                        Mkt         Mkt         Mkt       Mkt

                    ^2
                     t-1                -0.49                  -2.50*   -3.72***
                                       (0.79)                  (1.38)    (1.12)
                        2
                    V IXt-1                          0.41                3.97**
                                                    (1.16)               (1.61)
                         j 2
                    6
                    j =1  ^ t-j                                 2.70
                                                               (2.26)

                    Observations         340          363       335        340
                    R2                -0.00102     -0.00170   0.00186    0.0193




                                                   80
Table 15: Higher Frequency Weekly Data. We run the same predictive re-
gression of variance dependent returns (straddles, VIX futures, and variance swaps)
using weekly return data rather than monthly. We regress future returns at the 1 to
4 week horizon, with column numbers representing the lead in weekly returns (non-
cumulative). The right hand side variables are  ^2t-1 ) and a weighted average of ex-
                                                                   k-1 2
pected variance over the past six months (26 weeks) (1 - )26  k=1     ^ t-k . Our value
           1/4
of  = 0.5 to be consistent with higher frequency data compared to our monthly
regressions. Data are weekly from 1992-2019, the variance swap and straddle returns
are from 2004-2019 and VIX futures data are from 1996-2019. Standard errors in
parentheses use Newey West correction with a 6 month lag.

                             Panel A: Straddle Returns by Horizon

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

                   ^2
                    t-1            -6.50***    -6.32***    -3.60***     -2.24*
                                    (1.35)      (1.14)       (1.24)     (1.23)
                        j 2
                   26
                   j =1  ^ t-j     7.15***     7.44***      5.08***    3.93***
                                    (1.69)      (1.62)       (1.50)     (1.52)

                   N                 1,222       1,222     1,222        1,222
                   R2               0.0127      0.0125     0.0043      0.0022

                           Panel B: VIX Futures Returns by Horizon

                                      (1)            (2)     (3)        (4)

                    ^2
                     t-1            -3.47***    -4.12***   -2.57**    -2.25**
                                     (1.23)      (1.29)     (1.04)     (1.01)
                         j 2
                    26
                    j =1  ^ t-j      2.86**      3.79**     2.48**     2.34*
                                     (1.27)      (1.50)     (1.11)     (1.20)

                    N                  716         716       716        716
                    R2               0.0130      0.0176     0.0050     0.0031

                           Panel C: Variance Swap Returns by Horizon

                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)

                    ^2
                     t-1            -7.57**    -12.06***   -5.72*      -3.12
                                     (3.49)      (3.22)    (3.19)     (3.12)
                         j 2
                    26
                    j =1  ^ t-j      7.64**    12.88***    7.18**       4.89
                                     (3.56)      (4.09)    (3.36)     (3.46)

                    N                1,222       1,222      1,222      1,222
                    R2              0.0018      0.0072     0.0006     -0.0006




                                                81
Table 16: Shiller Survey. We fit the actual volatility process and the survey
expectations to an exponential weighted average on past realized variance. That is,
                              i-1 2
we fit: yt,t+k = a + bJ  i=1      t-i + t and report the estimated  where we choose
J to be 12 periods, and k as the horizon at which investors forecast variance in the
survey (six months). We then repeat this replacing  2    t on the left hand side with
the expectation of variance from the survey over the same horizon. A higher  from
the expectations data signifies that expectations rely more on variance farther in the
past compared to the optimal forecast for volatility. The Shiller survey is available
monthly and corresponds to a six month forecast horizon. Standard errors are below
in parentheses.
                   Shiller Survey: Dependence on Past Variance ()
                       Survey              Future Variance
                             
                    0.73                         0.03
                        (0.04)                  (0.29)
                   N      193                    193



Table 17: Long Sample. This Table regresses excess stock returns (market returns
over the risk free rate) on lagged realized variance and the lagged weighted average of
                                       k-1 2
past expected variance (1 - )6    k=1     ^ t-k . Data are monthly the first two columns
(Post War) are post 1945 US data while the last two columns are post 1926. Standard
errors in parentheses use Newey West correction with 12 lags.
                                 Post War Data        Great Depression
                                  (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)

                ^2
                 t-1          -0.98***   -1.34*** -0.18        -0.33
                               (0.43)     (0.46)  (0.73)      (0.69)
                     j 2
                6
                j =1  ^ t-j              1.50***                0.52
                                          (0.67)              (0.54)

                N                878        878     1,111     1,111
                R2              0.006      0.013     0.00     0.00




                                          82
Table 18: Change in volatility, equity risk premium, and variance risk
premium. We run three predictive regressions yi,t+1 = ai + b6  t + i,t+1 where
6  i,t is the 6 month change in volatility of the stock market index for country i. As
dependent variables, y , we use the equity risk premium (future index return over the
                          f
risk free rate, ri,t+1 - ri,t labeled ERP), future volatility ( i,t+1 ), and the volatility risk
premium (difference between volatility index and future realized volatility, V IXi,t -
 i,t+1 labeled VRP). Data are monthly. The first columns use all countries, the last
use only US data. In our panel regressions standard errors are clustered by time.
                                       Panel A: Volatility
                               All Countries                         US Only
                        (1)         (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)
                       ERP          Vol      VRP           ERP           Vol      VRP

      6  t           -0.15*     0.27***    -0.06***      -0.25***    0.32***    -0.09***
                     (0.09)      (0.08)     (0.02)        (0.08)      (0.05)     (0.02)

      N              1,786     1,786     1,786             340         340        340
      R-squared      0.01       0.15     0.05              0.03        0.13       0.04
      Country         All       All       All              USA         USA        USA
                                   Panel B: Variance
                           All Countries                            US Only
                       (1)      (2)       (3)               (4)       (5)          (6)
                      ERP       Vol      VRP               ERP        Vol         VRP

      6  2
         t          -0.88***    0.23**       0.04        -1.66***    0.36***    -0.13***
                     (0.34)     (0.10)      (0.10)        (0.39)      (0.04)     (0.03)

      N              1,786       1,786      1,786          340         340        340
      R-squared      0.02         0.10      0.01           0.05        0.19       0.05
      Country         All         All        All           USA         USA        USA




                                              83
Figure 4: Impulse Response to Variance Shock: Robustness. We run a
first order VAR of expected variance, market excess returns (denoted ERP for equity
risk premium), the variance risk premium (VRP), and the log price dividend ratio,
following Figure 2 in the main text, and plot the response to an expected variance
shock. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence intervals constructed using bootstrap.
Panel A uses volatility in place of variance. Panel B weights the observations by the
inverse of lagged volatility (weighted least squares). See text for more detail.
                              Panel A: Volatility in place of variance
                                                        VRP
               0.1

                 0

               -0.1

               -0.2

               -0.3

               -0.4
                      0         2           4            6            8        10        12
                                                    Months

                                                        ERP
               0.4

               0.2

                 0

               -0.2

               -0.4

               -0.6

               -0.8
                      1   2         3   4       5   6         7   8       9   10    11   12
                                                    Months

                                        Panel B: Weighted VAR
                                                        VRP
               0.1


                 0


               -0.1


               -0.2


               -0.3
                      0         2           4            6            8        10        12
                                                    Months

                                                        ERP
               0.4

               0.2

                 0

               -0.2

               -0.4

               -0.6

               -0.8
                      1   2         3   4       5   6         7   8       9   10    11   12
                                                    Months



                                                    84
