                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 NON-FUNDAMENTAL DEMAND AND STYLE RETURNS

                                        Itzhak Ben-David
                                             Jiacui Li
                                           Andrea Rossi
                                            Yang Song

                                       Working Paper 28103
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28103


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We thank Sylvester Flood (Morningstar), Paul Kaplan (Morningstar), Nick Barberis, John
Campbell, Alex Chinco, Darrell Duffie, Bing Han, Martin Lettau, Juhani Linnainmaa, Andrei
Shleifer, Xin Wang, and Motohiro Yogo for helpful comments. We thank seminar participants at
The Ohio State University, the University of Utah, University of Washington, Arrowstreet
Capital, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, as well as participants in the Pacific
Northwest Finance Conference, the NBER Summer Institute (Asset Pricing), and the NBER
Behavior Finance Workshop for comments. Ben-David is with The Ohio State University and the
NBER; Li is with University of Utah; Rossi is with the University of Arizona; and Song is with
the University of Washington. Ben-David is a co-founder and a partner in an investment advisor.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Itzhak Ben-David, Jiacui Li, Andrea Rossi, and Yang Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Non-Fundamental Demand and Style Returns
Itzhak Ben-David, Jiacui Li, Andrea Rossi, and Yang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 28103
November 2020
JEL No. G11,G24,G41

                                         ABSTRACT

We present causal evidence that non-fundamental correlated demand exerts a first-order impact
on style returns. Mutual fund investors chase fund performance via Morningstar ratings,
regardless of the rating methodology. Until June 2002, ratings depended on fund returns without
any style adjustment, and thus mutual funds with the same investment style had highly correlated
ratings. This methodology led rating chasing investors to direct capital into winning styles,
exacerbating return chasing behavior. Capital flows exerted non-fundamental price pressure on
the underlying stocks, creating style-momentum that reverted over time. In June 2002,
Morningstar reformed its rating methodology so that ratings became equalized across styles. The
reform demonstrates the causal impact of rating chasing: once the reform was implemented,
style-level price pressures via the mutual fund channel immediately became muted. Furthermore,
the dispersion in style performance declined sharply, and style momentum and reversal
disappeared. We estimate that Morningstar rating chasing explains a substantial part of the size
and value factors' time-series variation.

Itzhak Ben-David                               Andrea Rossi
The Ohio State University                      University of Arizona
Fisher College of Business                     Eller College of Management
606A Fisher Hall                               Department of Finance
Columbus, OH 43210-1144                        1130 E. Helen St.
and NBER                                       Tucson, AZ 85721
ben-david.1@osu.edu                            rossi2@email.arizona.edu

Jiacui Li                                      Yang Song
David Eccles School of Business                Foster School of Business
University of Utah                             University of Washington
SFEBB 8123, 1655 Campus Center Dr              Seattle, WA 98195
Salt Lake City, UT 84112                       songy18@uw.edu
jiacui.li@eccles.utah.edu
1         Introduction
        Economists agree that asset prices reflect investor demand. What is subject to debate is
the extent to which security prices are elastic and the nature of investor demand. On one
extreme, elastic prices and rational expectations about future cash flows yield an efficient
market. On the other extreme, inelastic prices and non-fundamental demand result in mis-
priced assets. Furthermore, if the non-fundamental demand is systematic in nature, e.g.,
correlated at the style level (such as value or growth), then systematic mispricings can occur
(Barberis and Shleifer, 2003). In the words of the economist Paul Samuelson, markets can
become "macro-inefficient" (Samuelson, 1998).
        Existing evidence suggests that capital flows impact security prices. Some studies show lo-
calized price pressure due to institutional reasons such as portfolio rebalancing.1 Other stud-
ies find that flows to investment vehicles create price pressure.2 Yet, there is limited under-
standing of the drivers of these flows and thus it is difficult to differentiate non-fundamental
demand from preference- or information-driven trading.
        In this study, we present causal evidence that non-fundamental correlated demand--
driven by mutual fund investors' tendency to chase Morningstar ratings--creates systematic
style-level price patterns. We identify the link between capital flows and style returns by
exploiting a reform in Morningstar's rating methodology that took place in June 2002. By
balancing the distribution of ratings across mutual fund investment styles, the reform altered
the allocation of immense capital flows across styles. We show that this shock to style-level
demand reshaped systematic properties of style portfolios in the stock market.
        A priori, the mutual fund sector is sufficiently large to plausibly generate systematic
non-fundamental price patterns. In recent decades, mutual funds have been the primary
conduit for equity investment by U.S. households. In 1991, when our sample begins, equity
mutual funds held about 9% of the U.S. stock market capitalization. Their ownership had
    1
     See, for example, rebalancing due to index inclusion/deletion (Shleifer, 1986; Harris and Gurel, 1986;
Wurgler and Zhuravskaya, 2002; Chang, Hong, and Liskovich, 2015).
   2
     For instance, mutual funds (Teo and Woo, 2004; Coval and Stafford, 2007; Lou, 2012; Huang, Song, and
Xiang, 2020), institutional investors (Koijen and Yogo, 2019; Gabaix and Koijen, 2020b; Ben-David, Franzoni,
Moussawi, and Sedunov, 2020), and exchange-traded funds (Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi, 2018;
Brown, Davies, and Ringgenberg, 2020) trade and generate price pressure as they balance their portfolios
and respond to fund flows.



                                                     1
tripled to nearly 30% by 2005 and has remained steady since then. Furthermore, because
mutual funds are mostly owned by retail investors, fund flows are likely unsophisticated and
not motivated by fundamental value.3 In turn, mutual fund managers trade in response to
capital flows and thus channel the investors' demand, whether informed or not, into the stock
market. Indeed, prior studies have documented that flow-induced trades create stock-level
price pressures.4
    The Morningstar rating reform provides an ideal setting to evaluate the effect of non-
fundamental demand. While mutual fund investors have relied heavily on Morningstar rat-
ings to guide their flows throughout the sample period,5 ratings have a different economic
meaning before and after June 2002 due to a methodology reform. Hence the reform dra-
matically rerouted flows across mutual funds and, therefore, to the underlying securities.
    Prior to June 2002, Morningstar ratings were broadly aligned with mutual funds' past
performance. In that period, Morningstar rated all mutual funds--regardless of their style
tilts--based on their performance ranking across the entire universe of U.S. equity funds,
with minor adjustments for loads and volatility. Because a significant fraction of fund perfor-
mance is determined by its style exposure (e.g., small cap- or growth-oriented), funds that
pursued similar investment style mandates had highly correlated ratings. Under Morn-
ingstar's pre-June 2002 methodology, chasing ratings was broadly equivalent to chasing
funds' past returns.
    In June 2002, Morningstar revised its rating methodology. Instead of simply ranking
all equity funds against each other, Morningstar began benchmarking funds against peer
funds within their style. The style-peer groups are based on the well-known Morningstar
three-by-three "style box" (value/blend/growth × small/mid/large cap). By design, the
revised methodology removes the style-performance component from the fund ranking, and
   3
     For example, mutual fund investors allocate money to funds that subsequently underperform (Frazzini
and Lamont, 2008; Song, 2020), invest in high-fee funds (Barber, Odean, and Zheng, 2005; Choi and Robert-
son, 2020), time the market poorly (Akbas, Armstrong, Sorescu, and Subrahmanyam, 2015; Friesen and
Nguyen, 2018), and rely on salient and simple signals (Kaniel and Parham, 2017; Hartzmark and Sussman,
2019).
   4
     For example, fire sales by mutual funds depress stock prices (Coval and Stafford, 2007), and flow-induced
trades can partially explain momentum returns (Lou, 2012).
   5
     In fact, Ben-David, Li, Rossi, and Song (2019) find that Morningstar ratings are the most important
driver of fund flows among all factors hitherto studied.




                                                      2
Figure 1. Morningstar Rating Methodology Change and Style Price Pressures
This figure highlights the main results in the paper. Panel (a) plots the average mutual fund rating by the
3 × 3 size-value Morningstar styles. The vertical dashed line marks the June 2002 methodology change event.
Panel (b) plots the average monthly fund flow by one- to five-star Morningstar ratings. In Panels (c) and (d),
we sort the 3 × 3 style portfolios by their lagged rating changes (ExpSum(Rating), defined in Section 4.2).
Then we plot the cumulative differences in flows and returns between the top and bottom styles for the
subsequent three years. The shaded areas are 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.
                                                        (a) Morningstar fund rating by style                                                                                           (b) Fund flow by Morningstar rating

                                                                                             Large Blend      Large Growth                                                      4%                             1 star      2 star   3 star     4 star          5 star
                                      4.5
                                                                                             Large Value      Mid Blend
                                                                                             Mid Growth       Mid Value
                                                                                                                                                                                3%
                                                  4                                          Small Blend      Small Growth
                                                                                             Small Value
                                                                                                                                                                                2%
                                      3.5




                                                                                                                                     Monthly fund flow
     Average fund rating




                                                                                                                                                                                1%

                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                0%

                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                           -1%


                                                  2                                                                                                                        -2%


                                                                                                                                                                           -3%
                                      1.5                                                                                                                                            1991   1994   1997     2000    2003     2006   2009     2012       2015      2018
                                         1991               1994   1997   2000    2003     2006   2009     2012     2015     2018




                                                                        (c) Style fund flows                                                                                                              (d) Style returns

                                                  30%                                        Before 2002          After 2002                                                    20%                                            Before 2002          After 2002
                                                                                                                                    Cumulative return: top minus bottom style
        Cumulative flow: top minus bottom style




                                                  25%
                                                                                                                                                                                15%
                                                  20%

                                                  15%                                                                                                                           10%

                                                  10%
                                                                                                                                                                                 5%
                                                      5%

                                                      0%
                                                                                                                                                                                 0%
                                                      -5%

                                                  -10%                                                                                                                          -5%
                                                            0       5        11           17       23         29           35                                                           0          5         11          17         23         29              35
                                                                                         Months                                                                                                                         Months




therefore fund ratings immediately became balanced across styles. Panel (a) of Figure 1
shows how the dispersion of average ratings across styles suddenly collapsed in June 2002 as
a consequence of the reform.
    Our paper analyzes the systematic impact of this reform on the stock market. The
empirical analysis has four parts. In the first part, we trace the key mechanisms: investor
flows chase ratings and flow-induced trades create price pressures. First, we document that



                                                                                                                                3
investors chase ratings regardless of the rating methodology.6 This finding is evident in
Panel (b) of Figure 1: monthly fund flows to mutual funds strongly depend on Morningstar
ratings, and the dependence magnitude is stable over the 28 years in our sample.7 Second, we
use impulse responses to show that a rating upgrade results in a surge in mutual fund flows,
and that flow increases lead to contemporaneous stock price appreciation and subsequent
reversals.
       In the second part, we turn to examine the impact of the reform on style performance.
Before the reform, ratings were concentrated at the style level and thus led to correlated
style-level flows. Hence, flows hit a small subset of winning styles and price pressures formed
at the style level. Indeed, before June 2002, the most upgraded styles (i.e., styles with highest
recent changes in ratings) drew large fund inflows, and their returns exhibited momentum
and subsequent reversals. Opposite patterns were observed for the most downgraded styles.
After June 2002, ratings became evenly distributed across styles, and therefore rating-chasing
flows were distributed across the entire spectrum of styles. Since ratings-chasing investors
stopped applying price pressure on a small subset of winning styles, style-level momentum
and reversal largely disappeared.
       These results are illustrated in Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 1. Panel (c) shows that
before 2002, the most upgraded style attracted approximately 15% more flows than the
most downgraded style over the subsequent 12 months. Once the reform was enacted and
ratings became evenly distributed across styles, the spread in flows to the most upgraded
versus downgraded styles disappeared, demonstrating the power of Morningstar ratings in
driving flows. Panel (d) shows that the return difference between upgraded and downgraded
styles mirrors the pattern observed for rating-induced flows. We show later that these price
pressure effects are stronger in stocks with higher mutual fund ownership, consistent with
our fund flow-based channel.
       Morningstar's rating reform also led to a decrease in the profitability of style momentum
   6
     Ben-David et al. (2019) and Evans and Sun (2020) make similar observations. These findings are most
consistent with the explanation that investors view Morningstar's ratings as a recommendation about the
best funds from a trusted advisor (e.g., as in the "money doctors" model proposed by Gennaioli, Shleifer,
and Vishny, 2015).
   7
     Over a typical two-year period, five-star funds receive inflows equal to more than 75% of their initial
AUM (assets under management), while one-star funds shrink by over one-third due to outflows.



                                                     4
strategies after June 2002. Because Morningstar fund ratings depend on past returns, the pre-
2002 rating methodology exacerbated the positive feedback at the style level. For instance,
high past performance of a style led to rating upgrades, which attracted inflows to funds
in that style and led to further price appreciation due to buying pressure. This style-level
positive feedback loop was severed in June 2002, and style momentum became weaker after
that date: long/short style momentum strategies generated a considerable return of 70 to
90 basis points per month before June 2002 and became entirely unprofitable afterwards.
       In addition, the 2002 reform altered the dispersion of style flows and style returns. As
ratings became more homogeneous across styles due to Morningstar's reform, so did flows
and returns. The average monthly style-level flow spread (top minus bottom) dropped from
3.3% before June 2002 to 1.4% after June 2002, and the return spread dropped from 5.5% to
3.0%. The general finding that return and flow dispersion collapsed after the rating reform is
robust to using alternative dispersion measures or shorter time windows around the reform
event.
       In the third part, we provide sharper identification for the effects of the reform on the
style-level return properties by zooming into a 12-month window around June 2002. Using a
shorter window reduces the chance that our results arise from forces other than the reform. In
the months leading to June 2002, funds in top-rated styles gathered flows and the underlying
stocks performed well. Accordingly, funds in bottom-rated styles experienced outflows and
the underlying stocks performed poorly. The methodology reform caused rating dispersion
across styles to sharply collapse, and so did flow dispersion. As predicted, the style return
patterns before the reform also immediately halted and even slightly reversed.8
       We carry out a battery of tests to tackle possible alternative explanations for the event
study results. First, using all other years as placebo tests, we confirm that the observed
sharp changes in style flows and returns are unique to 2002.9 Second, we show that other
fundamental factors, such as measures of stock fundamentals and trading by non-mutual
fund institutions, did not change materially around June 2002. Thus, it is unlikely that our
findings are driven by unobserved shocks fortuitously happening at the same time. Third, to
   8
     This exercise is not subject to concerns about mean-reversion in returns because we sort styles using
predicted reform-induced rating changes computed using data before the start of the event window.
   9
     This test also alleviates the concern that the 2002 result is simply driven by mean-reversion.


                                                    5
further ease the concern about characteristics-related returns driven by unspecified reasons,
we show that rating changes orthogonal to size and book/market characteristics also had
a similar impact on characteristics-controlled stock returns in the event window. Finally,
our estimate of the price impact coefficient is similar to existing estimates in the literature.
Taken together, these results are all supportive of our interpretation that the rating reform
causally impacted style-level flows and returns.
       In the final part of our analysis, we study the explanatory power of ratings-induced de-
mand on fluctuations in the common risk factors related to size and value (Fama and French,
1993). These factors are defined as long-short portfolios along the two style dimensions, size
and book/market, and are considered by many financial economists as reflecting fundamental
risk. To quantify the impact of rating-induced demand, we first use the Morningstar reform
as an instrument to estimate the price pressure coefficient of style ratings on future style
returns over a short window around June 2002. Focusing on this window allows us to cleanly
isolate variation in ratings that is caused by the methodology change, therefore mitigating
endogeneity concerns. We then apply the estimated parameter to quantify the effect of style
ratings on style returns for the entire sample period of 1991­2018. Admittedly, this is a
crude estimate, but it is informative about the size of the potential impact of rating-induced
demand on factors. Our analysis shows that rating-induced price pressure can explain on
average 10% to 30% of the variation in monthly factor returns before 2002. As expected,
the explanatory power dropped precipitously after June 2002.10
       To summarize, we find that a sizeable fraction of the common variation in stock returns
can be empirically linked to non-fundamental correlated demand. We document that a
seemingly innocuous reform implemented by a single rating firm created a long-lasting impact
on the allocation of investors' capital across styles. In turn, the reallocation of capital flows
altered the cross-sectional variation of style returns, style-level momentum, and widely-
used return factors. While style-level return chasing may have taken place on a smaller
scale before our sample period, the introduction of fund ratings--which coincided with the
exponential growth of the retail mutual fund sector--made it easier for investors to chase
  10
    Because ratings are persistent, in untabulated results, we find that the explanatory power of rating-
induced price pressure for the size and value factor returns before 2002 rises to an average of 40% at the
quarterly frequency.


                                                    6
style-level returns and thus potentially amplified flow-induced feedback trading at the style
level. The fact that style return dynamics changed dramatically after the reform highlights
the importance of non-fundamental demand in shaping systematic returns.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data set. Section 3
describes the Morningstar rating methodology change in June 2002. Section 4 shows that
investors chase Morningstar ratings to a similar extent after June 2002 and rating-induced
flows to funds indeed exert a large price impact on the underlying stocks. Section 5 demon-
strates that style return dynamics changed dramatically since 2002. Section 6 studies ratings,
flows, and returns around June 2002 through an event study approach. Section 7 quanti-
fies the influence of correlated demand on the size and value factors. Section 8 concludes.
Additional results and robustness checks are provided in the appendices.



2     Data and Variable Construction
    In this section, we describe the data set and explain how we construct the rating and
flow variables.


2.1    Mutual Fund Sample

    Mutual funds are one of the largest classes of equity investors in the U.S. and a prime
investment vehicle for retail investors. When our sample begins in 1991, U.S. equity mutual
funds held a total AUM of $326 billion, which was 8.9% of the entire market capitalization.
Their ownership fraction grew steadily, reaching about 30% in 2005 and has remained steady
since then. By the end of our sample period in 2018, equity mutual funds owned $10,849
billion, which represented 29.3% of the entire market capitalization (Panel (a) of Figure 2).
    We obtain monthly fund return and total net assets (TNA) from the CRSP survivorship-
bias-free mutual fund data set. We use all U.S. domestic equity mutual funds. While funds
are often marketed to different clients through different share classes, they invest in the
same portfolio and typically only differ in the fee structure. Therefore, we aggregate all
share classes at the fund level using Russ Wermer's MFLINKS (Wermers, 2000). We also
obtain quarterly fund holdings from Thomson Reuters' S12 data. We augment the holdings

                                               7
data with stock returns and characteristics from the CRSP/Compustat merged database.
                          Our monthly sample starts in January 1991 and ends in December 2018. The starting
date is based on data availability: Monthly AUM (which is required to calculate monthly
flows) from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) starts in 1990, and some
measures require one year of lagged data to construct.

Figure 2. Summary Statistics of Mutual Funds
Panel (a) shows the aggregate domestic mutual fund holding of U.S. stocks as a fraction of the overall
market. The blue line is based on the CRSP mutual fund database and the red line is based on Federal
Reserve Board flow of fund reports (L.223). Panel (b) shows the number of funds in each Morningstar star
rating classification during our sample period of 1991­2018. Appendix Table A.1 further summarizes the
mutual fund sample used in this paper.
                                (a) Aggregate mutual fund ownership                                      (b) Number of mutual funds
% Market capitalization




                                                                                                 2,000                                      5   stars
                          30%
                                                                               Number of funds
                                                                                                                                            4   stars
                                                                                                                                            3   stars
                          20%                                                                                                               2   stars
                                                                                                 1,000                                      1   star

                          10%
                                                       CRSP-based estimate
                           0%                          Fed-based estimate                           0
                                  1995   2000   2005     2010     2015                                   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015



                          Following the mutual fund literature (e.g., Coval and Stafford, 2007), the fund flow for
fund j in month t is defined as the net flow into the fund divided by lagged TNA:

                                                                          TNAj,t
                                                         Flowj,t =                - (1 + Retj,t ).                                          (1)
                                                                         TNAj,t-1

                          We obtain Morningstar ratings and style categories from Morningstar Direct and merge
them with the CRSP mutual fund data using the matching table from Pastor, Stambaugh,
and Taylor (2020).11 Morningstar assigns ratings at the share class level. We follow Barber,
Huang, and Odean (2016) and aggregate them at the fund level by TNA-weighting different
share classes. We restrict our analysis to mutual funds with at least $1 million TNA and
winsorize fund flows at the 0.5% and 99.5% levels within each month. We require the
existence of 12 lags of monthly flows, returns, and ratings. The resulting sample comprises
a total of 3,305 funds with 454,787 fund-month observations.
              11
                          We thank the authors for kindly providing the matching table.


                                                                                8
       Panel (b) of Figure 2 summarizes the time series of the number of funds per Morn-
ingstar rating. The number of funds quadrupled from 1991 to 2005, and then plateaued
before slightly declining from 2009 onward. Additional summary statistics are provided in
Appendix A.1.


2.2        Stock- and Style-Level Ratings

       As the main focus of this study is the effects of rating-induced demand on stocks and
style portfolios, we summarize ratings and changes in ratings both at stock and style levels.
       We define the level of and change in Morningstar rating of stock i in month t as the
holdings-weighted average rating of all funds J that hold the stock i as of the end of the
prior month:12

                                      fundj J SharesHeldi,j,t-1 · Ratingj,t
                   Ratingstock
                         i,t   =                                            ,                      (2)
                                            fundj J SharesHeldi,j,t-1

                                      fundj J   SharesHeldi,j,t-1 · (Ratingj,t - Ratingj,t-1 )
                Ratingstock
                      i,t   =                                                                  .   (3)
                                                      fundj J SharesHeldi,j,t-1


       We now define ratings and rating changes at the style level. For a given style  , we
aggregate up the stock-level ratings:


                                   Ratingstyle
                                         ,t =
                                                           
                                                          wi,t            stock
                                                               -1 · Ratingi,t ,                    (4)
                                                   istyle 

                                Ratingstyle
                                      ,t =
                                                           
                                                          wi,t            stock
                                                               -1 · Ratingi,t ,                    (5)
                                                   istyle 


       
where wi,t -1 is the portfolio weight of stock i in the corresponding style, based on the

aggregate holdings of mutual funds that are classified by Morningstar as investing in the
style  .
       To measure style-level flows, we compute the TNA-weighted average flows to all funds in
that style. We later drop the superscripts "stock" and "style" when unambiguous. Appendix
Table A.2 presents summary statistics of ratings, flows, and returns for styles.
  12
       We use the latest holdings available in the past 3 months.




                                                         9
3        Morningstar Ratings: Background and 2002 Reform
       In this section, we describe the simple, yet radical, methodological reform in the pop-
ular Morningstar star rating system that took place in June 2002. In later sections, we
demonstrate that this exogenous reform had a far-reaching impact on style return dynamics.
       After launching its mutual fund rating system in 1985, Morningstar quickly became the
industry leader in guiding investors' mutual fund selection. Since its early days, Morn-
ingstar's methodology has been transparent and publicly available. To assign ratings, Morn-
ingstar first summarizes the recent past returns of funds and conducts minor adjustments
for return volatility and expenses. Depending on a fund's age, the lookback horizon for past
performance can be three, five, or 10 years, and more weight is applied to the most recent
three years of returns. Then, Morningstar ranks funds by their performance and assigns a
rating of one to five stars with fixed proportions (10%, 22.5%, 35%, 22.5%, and 10%).
       Morningstar's rating methodology changed abruptly in June 2002. The reason behind the
change is related to the fact that many funds pursue specific investment styles (e.g., large-
cap growth) by mandate.13 Since its inception and until June 2002, Morningstar ranked
all U.S. equity funds against each other. Because style performance is a significant part of
fund performance, fund ratings were highly dependent on style performance. Following the
dot-com crash, many fund managers specializing in large-cap growth stocks complained that
their fund ratings dropped sharply. These managers argued that ratings barely reflected
their own contributions and mostly echoed style-level returns outside of their control. As a
result, the research team at Morningstar, spearheaded by the economist Dr. Paul Kaplan,
redesigned the rating system.14
       The main modification in the post-June 2002 methodology was that funds were ranked
  13
     Historically, mutual funds have followed different investment philosophies in identifying investment op-
portunities ("styles"). For example, managers following Graham and Dodd (1934) look for undervalued firms
("value"), while those following Fisher (1958) search for firms with substantial unrealized growth potential
("growth"). Funds therefore are often classified as value or growth. Funds that invest in the same style
would have more overlapping holdings.
  14
     We learned this information during phone conversations with Morningstar management. Making ratings
more balanced across styles was also one of the stated objectives for the methodology reform. For instance, in
a New York Times interview, Don Phillips, a managing director of Morningstar, said, "Two years ago, every
growth fund looked wonderful. . . Now, none does." See Floyd Norris, Morningstar to Grade on a Curve, New
York Times, April 23, 2002.



                                                     10
Figure 3. Illustration of Morningstar Methodology Pre- and Post-June 2002
The figure presents a hypothetical example of the mapping of mutual fund performance into Morningstar
ratings pre- and post-June 2002. The columns represent different investment styles (large-growth, midcap-
growth, small-growth, large-blend, midcap-blend, small-blend, large-value, midcap-value, small-value). In
Panel (a), the rows represent three-year performance deciles of funds within each style. The colors represent
the performance decile across the entire mutual fund universe: Green indicates top-ranked performance, and
red indicates bottom-ranked performance across the entire mutual fund universe. Panel (b) shows ratings
by Morningstar based on the pre-2002 methodology. Panel (c) shows ratings by Morningstar based on the
post-June 2002 methodology.
                (a) Mutual fund performance         (b) Morningstar ratings pre-2002     (c) Morningstar ratings post-2002

Style       Lrg MidSml Lrg MidSml Lrg MidSml Lrg MidSml Lrg MidSml Lrg Mid Sml Lrg MidSml Lrg MidSml Lrg Mid Sml
decile         Growth      Blend       Value        Growth       Blend           Value   Growth        Blend           Value
 10
 9
 8
 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
         Deciles (universe of mutual funds)              Stars                                 Stars
          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                    10         1 2      3     4   5                  1 2      3     4   5




within style categories,15 as opposed to across the entire universe. Morningstar classifies
diversified U.S. equity funds into the well-known 3 × 3 style matrix based on funds' hold-
ings: combinations of small/midcap/large and value/blend/growth. Since June 2002, the
distribution of star ratings has been the same for funds within each of the 3 × 3 styles for
diversified funds. The modified methodology was announced as early as April 200216 and
was implemented at the end of June 2002. Appendix B provides additional technical details
on the rating methodology.
       Figure 3 illustrates the relation between fund performance and Morningstar ratings.
Before June 2002, Morningstar's mutual fund ratings closely mapped past overall fund per-
formance into star ratings. Panel (a) shows a snapshot of mutual funds' past hypothetical
performance (colors) for funds within styles. The columns represent the different styles, and
the rows represent past fund performance deciles within each style. Funds in the top rows
  15
      The modified methodology also ranked sector funds within their industrial sectors (e.g., financial, utili-
ties). For simplicity, our analysis focuses on ratings and flows of diversified U.S. equity funds which consti-
tuted 87% of all equity mutual funds.
   16
      See http://news.morningstar.com/pdfs/FactSheet_StyleBox_Final.pdf.



                                                              11
performed the best within their styles.
      The pre-reform rating methodology largely mapped past performance into star ratings.
As Panel (a) shows, in this hypothetical example, large-growth funds had the best perfor-
mance. Panel (b) shows that the best-performing funds were ranked the highest by Morn-
ingstar. In other words, before 2002, Morningstar ratings were highly correlated with raw
past returns.
      Since June 2002, Morningstar has ranked funds within style; hence, rankings are indepen-
dent of style performance (Panel (c)). The demand from rating-chasing investors, therefore,
became more evenly spread over all styles.


Discussion: Timing of methodology reform. While the reform was prompted by the
dot-com crash and therefore did not occur on a random date, its exact timing is exogenous--a
fact that we will exploit in Section 6. While the dot-com peak was in March 2000, the designer
of the reform, Dr. Paul Kaplan, was only appointed as the head of Morningstar research
in February 2001.17 While we do not observe the decision process within Morningstar, it
likely took significant work and deliberation before the reform was finalized and approved, as
Morningstar rarely changes its methodology and this reform is arguably the largest change
to date.
      Furthermore, as shown in Section 4, investors' rating-chasing behavior did not change
around the dot-com bust or the 2002 reform. Therefore, even though the reform timing is
not entirely exogenous, it appears unrelated to the specific channel of rating-induced flows
and price pressures that we are interested in.



4       Rating Chasing Behavior and Price Impact
      In this section, we examine the mechanism that links ratings to flows and then to returns.
First, we present evidence that investors chase ratings throughout the sample period. Second,
we use impulse-response analysis to investigate the impact of rating changes on flows and
returns.
 17
    See "Morningstar Appoints Paul Kaplan, Ph.D., CFA, as Director of Research, Vahid Fathi Named
Director of Stock Research" from Morningstar news archive.


                                                12
4.1       Investors Chase Ratings Regardless of Ratings Methodology

       Because our identification relies on the reform in the Morningstar rating methodology,
it is important to examine whether mutual fund investors continued to chase Morningstar
ratings after June 2002.
       We begin by examining simple summary statistics. Panel (b) of Figure 1 plots the average
flows to mutual funds with different Morningstar ratings. Throughout our sample period,
five-star funds receive flows that amount to +2% to +3% of their AUM per month on average.
This is economically large as it implies that the AUM of five-star funds increases by about
25% to 40% over one year. In contrast, one-star funds experience outflows of -1.5% to -2%
of their AUM per month on average. Importantly, these patterns do not appear to differ
before and after June 2002.
       More formally, we then estimate the response of fund flows to lagged fund ratings using
three-year rolling-window TNA-weighted Fama-MacBeth regressions (Fama and MacBeth,
1973) that controls for 12 lags of monthly fund returns. The results are plotted in Panel (b)
of Figure 4. The coefficient estimate only varies slightly over the sample, and there is no
material drop around or following the 2002 reform. For example, the average flow-to-rating
response was 0.52% before June 2002 and 0.59% after June 2002.18
       In summary, these results indicate that mutual fund investors chase Morningstar ratings
regardless of the rating methodology. However, the rating reform led to significant changes
in style-level fund flows. Because ratings are constructed within styles after June 2002, style-
level fund flow dispersion dropped significantly after the methodology reform, as is easily
visible in Panel (a) of Figure 4. As we see later in Section 5.1, the style-level correlated
demand due to rating-chasing behavior mostly disappeared after the reform.


4.2       Stock-Level Rating-Induced Price Pressures

       Next, we confirm that Morningstar ratings can have a large price impact on stocks
through flow-induced trading. This step is necessary before we explore the influence of
rating-induced style demand on style returns in the subsequent analysis.
  18
    See further analysis indicating that investors did not change their rating-chasing behavior in Ben-David
et al. (2019) and Evans and Sun (2020).


                                                    13
Figure 4. The June 2002 Morningstar Methodology Reform
This figure examines the relationship between Morningstar rating and fund flow over the full sample. The
vertical dashed red lines mark the June 2002 methodology change event. Panel (a) plots the TNA-weighted
average quarterly fund flow by Morningstar 3 × 3 styles. Flows are demeaned cross-sectionally to focus on
the dispersion. Panel (b) explores the stability of the relationship between ratings and flows at the fund-
level. Specifically, it plots the regression coefficient of fund flows on lagged ratings estimated using three-year
rolling windows. The regression controls for 12 lags of monthly fund returns. The shaded area is the two
standard error band.
                                           (a) Fund flow, by style                                           (b) Regression coefficient of fund flows on ratings
                                                                  Large Blend     Large Growth                                          1.0%
                       10%                                        Large Value     Mid Blend
                                                                  Mid Growth      Mid Value
                                                                  Small Blend     Small Growth
                                                                  Small Value                                                           0.8%
                        5%




                                                                                                             Flow response to ratings
 Quarterly fund flow




                                                                                                                                        0.6%

                        0%
                                                                                                                                        0.4%


                       -5%
                                                                                                                                        0.2%



                       -10%                                                                                                             0.0%
                           1991   1994     1997   2000   2003   2006   2009     2012   2015      2018                                       1994   1997   2000   2003   2006   2009   2012   2015




                        We assess the price impact of ratings on stock returns by first separately estimating the
two chained effects: (i) the response of fund flows to Morningstar rating changes, and (ii)
the response of stock returns to flow-induced trading. We use Fama-MacBeth regressions
that are value-weighted by lagged fund TNA in fund-level regressions or by lagged stock
market value in stock-level regressions.
                        First, we estimate the fund flow response to lagged fund rating changes:


                                         Flowj,t = a + b1 · Ratingj,t-1 + . . . + b36 · Ratingj,t-36 + Xj,t + uj,t ,                                                                                (6)


where Ratingj,t is the month t rating change of fund j , and controls Xj,t include 36 monthly
lags of fund flows and returns. The cumulative response coefficients (b1 , b1 +b2 , . . .) are plotted
in Panel (a) of Figure 5. In response to a one-star change in rating, funds experience an
average of 6% additional flows, most of which take place over the first 24 months. This result
is consistent with prior research showing that, when controlling for past fund performance,
discrete changes in ratings create sizeable differences in fund flows that last for several months
(Del Guercio and Tkac, 2008; Reuter and Zitzewitz, 2015).


                                                                                                        14
       Second, we estimate the response of stock returns to stock-level flow-induced trading. To
measure the amount of stock-level trading caused by fund flows, we follow Lou (2012) to
calculate flow-induced trading (FIT) for each stock i in each month t:19

                                           fundj J SharesHeldi,j,t-1 · Flowj,t
                             FITi,t =                                          .                             (7)
                                                fundj J SharesHeldi,j,t-1


In short, FIT is the amount of mutual fund trading in stock i that is mechanically caused by
fund flows. As explained in Lou (2012), whereas discretionary trading can reflect managers'
information about fundamentals, FIT isolates the non-discretionary trading that is only
attributable to fund flows and thus likely does not contain fundamental information.20
       We then estimate the response of stocks returns to FIT,


                 Reti,t = a + c0 · FITi,t + c1 · FITi,t-1 + . . . + c36 · FITi,t-36 + ui,t ,                 (8)


and plot the cumulative response (c0 , c0 + c1 , ...) in Panel (b) of Figure 5. An increase
of 1% in mutual fund ownership through FIT (i.e., expected trading due to flows) leads
to immediate price pressure of approximately 0.6% in the contemporaneous month, and a
complete reversion in the subsequent one to two years. This result is consistent with the
findings related to FIT in Lou (2012).
       Combining these two effects, we predict that rating changes (especially recent changes)
should impact stock returns. We expect the impact to come from rating changes rather
than rating levels. This is because while a higher rating level in the more distant past also
generates flows (Figure 5, Panel (a)), the price pressures created by their initial impact are
already embedded in the later part of the "price pressure cycle" and are already reverting
(Figure 5, Panel (b)). For this reason, we use rating changes in the rest of our analysis.21
  19
     Lou (2012) also applies different scaling factors to inflows and outflows. We omit this scaling for sim-
plicity, but our results are robust to using his scaling factors.
  20
     Consistent with this interpretation, Lou finds that FIT leads to price pressures that revert over time.
Wardlaw (2020) recently argued that some flow measures, such as that in Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang
(2012), inadvertently include contemporaneous stock returns. This does not apply to our flow measure,
whose construction follows Lou (2012) and does not use price information.
  21
     Consistent with the patterns discussed here, in unreported results we find that rating levels also tend to
positively predict future stock returns. However, the effect is statistically significant only if we also control
for rating levels lagged by several months--which implies that the effect is better specified by using rating
changes.


                                                       15
Figure 5. Price Impact of Ratings and Flows
Panel (a) shows the cumulative response of fund flows to changes in fund ratings. Panel (b) shows the
cumulative response of stock returns to flow-induced trading (FIT), defined as the nondiscretionary trading
induced by mutual fund managers proportionally adjusting existing portfolio holdings in response to fund
flows. In these two panels, the dashed lines show two standard errors bands. Panel (c) shows the noncumu-
lative response of stock returns to changes in ratings as well as the fitted exponential response (green line).
Panel (d) plots the cumulative value-weighted price path of stocks with top and bottom deciles of the lagged
exponential sum of rating changes (ExpSum(Rating)i,t-1 ). The decile breakpoints are based on NYSE
stocks.
                                                (a) Rating change  Fund flow                                         (b) Flow-induced trading  Stock return

                                         7%                                                                                    0.8
                                         6%
         Cumulative fund flow response




                                                                                                   Cumulative price response
                                         5%                                                                                    0.6

                                         4%
                                                                                                                               0.4
                                         3%
                                         2%                                                                                    0.2

                                         1%
                                                                                                                                 0
                                         0%
                                         -1%                                                                                   -0.2
                                                0    6     12    18      24   30   36                                                 0     5     11    17      23      29     35
                                                                Months                                                                                 Months

                                               (c) Rating change  Stock return                                                            (d) Price paths of stocks

                                1.2%                                                                                  12%
                                1.0%                                                                                                                                 Top decile
                                                                                                                               8%
                                0.8%                                                                                                                                 Bottom decile
                                                                                                                               4%
                                                                                        Cumulative return




                                0.6%
Price response




                                0.4%                                                                                           0%

                                0.2%                                                                                      -4%
                                0.0%
                                                                                                                          -8%
                       -0.2%
                                                                                                               -12%
                       -0.4%
                       -0.6%                                                                                   -16%
                                                0    6     12    18      24   30   36                                                 0     6     12    18      24      30      36
                                                                Months                                                                                 Months




                                         To facilitate our later analysis of rating-induced price impacts, it is convenient to sum-
marize recent rating changes into a weighted average sum such that the weights correspond
to how much each lag impacts returns. We obtain such a weighting scheme by directly
estimating the response of stock returns on the past 36 lags of stock-level rating changes
(defined in Equation (3)) and plot the coefficients in Panel (c) of Figure 5. As expected,
more recent rating changes are more impactful, and the coefficients on more distant rating


                                                                                                      16
changes converge toward zero.
    Because the impact primarily takes place over the first 12 months, we summarize past
rating changes using the following weighted sum:

                                                       12
                          ExpSum(Rating)i,t-1 =              k · Ratingi,t-k ,               (9)
                                                       k=1


            12·(1- )                12
where k =    1- 12
                       ·  k-1 and   k=1 k   = 12. The weights decay with factor  = 0.764, which
is estimated from a least-squares fit to the response (Panel (c) of Figure 5). Because the
weights sum to 12 (months), in terms of units, ExpSum(Rating) should be interpreted as
the rating change over one year. The estimated decay factor  = 0.764 implies a half-life of
-ln(2)/ln( )  2.58 months. Our results are not sensitive to reasonable variations in the
parameter  .
    The results presented so far indicate that recent rating changes cause price pressures. To
further validate the price pressure interpretation, we examine whether the price movements
revert. In Panel (d) of Figure 5, each month we sort stocks into decile portfolios based on
ExpSum(Rating)i,t-1 and track the performance over the following three years. Stocks in
the top decile of past rating changes outperform stocks in the bottom decile by about 20%
over the subsequent 12 to 18 months. Importantly, the cumulative return difference between
the two groups of stocks indeed reverts over the 36-month horizon.
    In short, the results in this section indicate that rating-induced flows generate substantial
price pressure at the stock level.



5     Impact of Rating-Chasing Demand on Style Perfor-
      mance
    So far, we have presented evidence that ratings impact returns at the stock level. In
this section, we move up a level and examine the impact of the Morningstar reform on style
portfolios. To be better aligned with the definition of Morningstar ratings--the key driver
of results--we use Morningstar style classifications to define stock styles. For instance, the



                                                  17
large-cap growth style portfolio is defined by the aggregate holdings of all funds in that
category.22 Specifically, for each stock i, its weight in style  is given by23

                                      fund j  style Pricei,t-1 · SharesHeldi,j,t-1
                        wi,t -1 =                                                  .                     (10)
                                                 fund j  style  TNAj,t-1


    We first show that style-level rating-induced price pressures, as well as style-level mo-
mentum and reversal, became muted after June 2002. Then, we document that style return
dispersion declined dramatically following Morningstar's rating reform. To provide sharper
identification, in Section 6, we conduct an event study using a short window to focus exclu-
sively on the reform-induced rating movements in June 2002.


5.1     Style-Level Rating-Induced Price Pressures

    To start, we examine the effects of the Morningstar reform on style-level demand and
return dynamics. To this end, we first calculate the style-level changes in Morningstar
ratings. We aggregate up the stock-level rating changes for each style portfolio  :

                                                         
                 ExpSum(Rating),t-1 =                   wi,t -1 · ExpSum(Rating)i,t-1 ,                  (11)
                                              stock i style 


where the stock-level lagged 12-month rating change, ExpSum(Rating),t-1 , is as defined
                      
in Equation (9), and wi,t -1 is the portfolio weight of stock i in style  .

    To examine the effects of rating changes, we rank styles by ExpSum(Rating),t-1 within
each month and track average cumulative flows and returns over the following months. The
results were presented graphically in Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 1, and are tabulated here
in Table 1. Panel A shows statistics for the top- versus bottom-ranked styles over horizons
of up to 36 months, and Panel B repeats the analysis for the three top-ranked versus three
  22
     We use this classification because it is the basis of the style-level adjustments in Morningstar ratings.
Lettau, Ludvigson, and Manoel (2019) document that fund-based style classification in the financial indus-
try does not map exactly to the size and value definitions used by academics that are based on market
capitalization and book-to-market ratios (Fama and French, 1993). Appendix A.2 shows that the industry
classification is a "smoothed" version of the academic style definitions. In Appendix A.3, we present results
repeating the main analyses for styles based on the academic definition. The results generally extend to the
academic-based styles qualitatively, though with weaker magnitudes, as expected.
  23                                                                                
     Because TNAj,t-1 = stock i Pricei,t-1 · SharesHeldi,j,t-1 , we have stock i wi,t -1 = 1.




                                                       18
Table 1. Rating-Induced Price Pressures in Style Portfolios
We sort style portfolios using the lagged exponential sum of rating changes (ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ) and
tabulate their average monthly fund flow and return over the subsequent 36 months. Panel A shows the
difference between the top and bottom styles. Panel B shows the difference between the averages of the top
three and the bottom three styles. Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                          Panel A: Top 1 Minus Bottom 1
                                          Months:                  1­6      7­12     13­24     25­36
                                          Before June 2002       1.14      0.92      0.38      -0.25
                                                                  (0.33)    (0.28)   (0.23)    (0.19)
                                          After June 2002          0.09    -0.09     -0.04     -0.02
           Monthly Flow (%)
                                                                  (0.07)    (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.05)
                                          Before - After         1.05      1.01      0.42      -0.22
                                                                  (0.34)    (0.29)   (0.23)    (0.19)
                                          Before June 2002       0.76       0.39     -0.04    -0.58
                                                                  (0.31)   (0.35)    (0.22)    (0.22)
                                          After June 2002        -0.07     -0.04     -0.05      0.04
           Monthly Return (%)
                                                                  (0.04)   (0.06)    (0.05)    (0.04)
                                          Before - After         0.83       0.43      0.02    -0.62
                                                                  (0.32)   (0.36)    (0.23)    (0.23)
                                          Panel B: Top 3 Minus Bottom 3
                                          Months:                  1­6      7­12     13­24     25­36
                                          Before June 2002       0.81      0.66       0.14     -0.14
                                                                  (0.22)    (0.19)   (0.16)    (0.09)
                                          After June 2002        0.10      -0.08     -0.04    -0.05
           Monthly Flow (%)
                                                                  (0.04)    (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                                          Before - After         0.71      0.74       0.17     -0.09
                                                                  (0.23)    (0.20)   (0.16)    (0.10)
                                          Before June 2002        0.47      0.28     -0.10    -0.39
                                                                  (0.21)   (0.22)    (0.17)    (0.13)
                                          After June 2002        -0.08     -0.04     -0.05      0.03
           Monthly Return (%)
                                                                  (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)
                                          Before - After          0.55      0.31     -0.05    -0.42
                                                                  (0.22)   (0.22)    (0.17)    (0.13)
             p   < 1%,    p   < 5%,   p   < 10%



bottom-ranked styles. The standard errors are bootstrapped by randomly permuting the
style portfolios in each year.
   Before 2002, the top style experienced approximately 1% higher flows per month relative
to the bottom style over the next 12 months. As expected, the spread in flows for the top
three and bottom three styles is smaller, at about 0.7%. After the rating reform in 2002
eliminated style-level rating differences, the spread in flows disappeared.
   Table 1 also shows that the patterns observed in style flows are mirrored in style returns.


                                                            19
Before June 2002, the top style outperformed the bottom style by about 10% in total over
the next 12 to 18 months, and the return spread reverted subsequently. Strikingly, the return
spread is effectively zero after June 2002. Again, we find similar patterns when comparing
the top-three and bottom-three styles (Panel B). Overall, these results are consistent with
style-level ratings creating flow-induced price pressures and subsequent reversals before June
2002 but not after that date as flows spread out across styles after the reform.


Heterogeneous exposure to Morningstar ratings within styles. To further sharpen
the test, we make use of the fact that stocks more heavily held by mutual funds should
experience larger rating-induced price pressures. In each style portfolio, we further sort
stocks into three equal-stock-count terciles based on the lagged fraction of shares held by
mutual funds. On average, mutual funds hold 30.6% of the stocks in the top tercile, followed
by 18.8% and 11.6% for the next two terciles.
       We then repeat the same exercise--sorting styles using ExpSumt-1 and examining the
difference between the top and bottom styles--for each of the three mutual-fund-holding
terciles. As predicted, the price effect before June 2002 is stronger in the style portfolios
constructed by stocks with higher mutual fund holdings and relatively muted in those con-
structed by stocks with low mutual fund holdings.24 There is no effect in any of the terciles
after June 2002.


5.2       Rating Chasing and Style Momentum Strategy

       These price pressure results suggest the existence of a rating-induced style-level positive
feedback trading loop before June 2002. That is, high past performance of a particular style
leads to rating upgrade, which in turn attracts inflows to mutual funds in that style. As
those funds buy more stocks, that further pushes up the price of the underlying stocks. Due
  24
    The style portfolios with higher mutual-fund-holding stocks in fact have more overlap in their portfolio
constituents. As higher overlap mechanically leads to less return dispersion (100% overlap means zero return
dispersion), this goes against us finding a result. To examine this, we compute the pairwise overlap of each
two portfolios j and k , defined as stock i | min(wi,portfolio j , wi,portfolio k )| where wi,portfolio l is the weight of
portfolio l in stock i. We then take an average across all pairs of style portfolios within each tercile. The
average overlap for the highest, mid, and lowest mutual fund holding terciles are 24.2%, 17.0%, and 11.9%,
respectively.



                                                           20
Figure 6. Rating-Induced Style Returns: Splitting on Mutual Fund Holding
As in Panel (d) in Figure 1, we sort the 3 × 3 style portfolios by their lagged rating changes
(ExpSum(Rating)) and plot the cumulative differences in returns between the top and bottom styles
for the subsequent 36 months. Both bottom- and top-ranked styles are split to three subsets of stocks,
based on the fraction of total shares held by mutual funds. The shaded areas are based on bootstrapped
two-standard-error bands.
                                                             (a) Before June 2002                                                                                    (b) After June 2002

                                               15%                                                                                                     15%                      Highest mutual fund holding
                                                                                                                                                                                Mid mutual fund holding




                                                                                                           Cumulative return: top minus bottom style
   Cumulative return: top minus bottom style




                                                                                                                                                                                Lowest mutual fund holding
                                               10%                                                                                                     10%



                                               5%                                                                                                      5%



                                               0%                                                                                                      0%
                                                         Highest mutual fund holding
                                                         Mid mutual fund holding
                                               -5%       Lowest mutual fund holding                                                                    -5%
                                                     0      5        11       17       23   29   35                                                          0   5       11    17       23       29          35
                                                                            Months                                                                                            Months




to the Morningstar methodology reform, this positive feedback loop via the mutual fund
channel should be severed in June 2002.
   Thus, style momentum should be stronger prior to June 2002 and become weaker after
that date. This is indeed the case. In Figure 7, we plot monthly flows and returns of style
portfolios in a long-short style-momentum strategy based on lagged returns or the lagged
exponential sum of rating changes (ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ). Panels (a) and (c) show that,
prior to June 2002, flows were highly correlated with style sorts based on past performance
and rating changes. After June 2002, the flow spread shrank significantly. Panels (b) and (d)
plot style returns and show that the style momentum strategy (top minus bottom style) was
profitable before June 2002 with a large positive return of about 70 to 90 bps per month.
However, after June 2002, the style momentum strategy became entirely unprofitable.


5.3                                              Cross-Sectional Dispersion in Style Returns

   The sharp decline in the style rating dispersion after June 2002 (Panel (a) of Figure 1)
also implies that the dispersion in style flows and returns should decrease.


                                                                                                      21
Figure 7. Style Momentum Before and After June 2002
This figure shows monthly flows and returns for a momentum strategy based on styles. We sort the 3 × 3
styles each month using past-12-month style returns (Panels (a) and (b)) and the lagged exponential sum of
rating changes (ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ) (Panels (c) and (d)). Panels (a) and (c) show the average monthly
flow and Panels (b) and (d) show the average monthly return. The bars plot the average monthly flows
and returns of those style portfolios before and after June 2002. All variables are demeaned to focus on the
cross-sectional difference.
                                             (a) Flow, by lagged return                                                                    (b) Return, by lagged return
                             1.5%                                                                                          0.4%
                                            Before 2002                                                                                     Before 2002
                                            After 2002                                                                                      After 2002
                             1.0%
                                                                                                                           0.2%
         Monthly fund flow




                                                                                                       Monthly return
                             0.5%
                                                                                                                           0.0%
                             0.0%


                                                                                                                        -0.2%
                             -0.5%


                             -1.0%                                                                                      -0.4%
                                       Bot      2       3       4      5      6     7      8    Top                                       Bot     2       3       4      5      6     7      8   Top
                                                    Styles, ranked by past 12 month return                                                            Styles, ranked by past 12 month return



                                     (c) Flow, by lagged rating changes                                                               (d) Return, by lagged rating changes
                             0.8%                                                                                                 0.6%
                                             Before 2002     After 2002                                                                          Before 2002      After 2002
                             0.6%
                                                                                                                                  0.4%
                             0.4%
     Monthly fund flow




                                                                                                                                  0.2%
                                                                                                                 Monthly return




                             0.2%

                             0.0%                                                                                                 0.0%

                         -0.2%
                                                                                                                                  -0.2%
                         -0.4%
                                                                                                                                  -0.4%
                         -0.6%

                         -0.8%                                                                                                    -0.6%
                                      Bot       2     3       4     5      6       7     8     Top                                         Bot        2    3       4     5      6       7    8   Top
                                                     Styles, ranked by lagged ratings                                                                     Styles, ranked by lagged ratings




    To test this prediction, we use two definitions of dispersion: the spread between the
styles with highest and lowest realizations, and the standard deviation across all styles.
We calculate style-level dispersion in ratings, flows, and returns. We then regress these
dispersion measures on an indicator that equals one after June 2002. In addition to using
the full sample, to account for the impact of the dot-com bust, we also use a four-year window
centered on the methodology change event, as well as a full sample window that excludes



                                                                                                      22
the four years surrounding the event. Standard errors are adjusted using the Newey-West
procedure.

Table 2. Dispersion of Style Ratings, Flows, and Returns
We regress dispersion measures of monthly ratings, flows, and returns of style portfolios on a dummy that
equals one after June 2002. We report the coefficient on the dummy variable in this table. In Columns (1), (3),
and (5), we measure dispersion using the spread between the styles with the highest and lowest realizations.
In Columns (2), (4), and (6), we measure dispersion using the standard deviation of those variables. Across
the different rows, we vary the sample size used in the regressions. Newey-West standard errors are reported
in parentheses.

                                  Regression coefficient on the post-June 2002 dummy
                                                Rating                     Flow (%)           Return (%)
    Dependent variables:
                                      Spread        Std Dev            Spread    Std Dev   Spread    Std Dev
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                                                                               
    Full sample                       -0.61         -0.22              -1.88     -0.60     -2.54     -0.90
                                       (0.22)        (0.11)             (0.23)    (0.08)    (0.68)    (0.25)
    2000Q3­2004Q2                     -0.53         -0.20              -1.74     -0.63     -4.45     -1.53
                                       (0.19)        (0.06)             (0.45)    (0.17)    (0.85)    (0.31)
    Exclude 2000Q3­2004Q2             -0.62          -0.22             -1.91     -0.59     -2.11     -0.76
                                       (0.26)        (0.13)             (0.27)    (0.09)    (0.73)    (0.25)
     p   < 1%,    p   < 5%,   p   < 10%



    The regression coefficients on the post-June-2002 dummy variable are shown in Table 2.
As predicted, regardless of the dispersion measures used, we find that ratings, flows, and
returns of styles became less dispersed after June 2002. Columns (1) to (4) show that the
dispersion in ratings and flows declined dramatically regardless of the time window.
    Columns (5) and (6) show that style return dispersion also dropped precipitously after
June 2002. Over the entire sample, the monthly return spread between top and bottom
styles dropped by 2.54% after June 2002 (from 5.5% to 2.9%).When excluding the sample
period from 2000Q3 to 2004Q2 to alleviate the concern about the dot-com bust, the monthly
return spread between the top and bottom styles dropped by 2.1% (from 5.0% to 2.9%). The
result are qualitatively similar when dispersion is measured using the standard deviation of
returns.
    Overall, the results in this section indicate that the Morningstar reform has significantly
changed style flow and return dynamics after June 2002. We now conduct an event study
around the 2002 shock to further zoom in on the event.


                                                                  23
6     Event Study Around the Morningstar Reform
    To provide a sharper test of rating-induced demand effects on style returns, we conduct
an event study using a one-year window (January to December 2002) around the reform
implementation date. By focusing on a short window and by relying on the degree of exposure
of the different styles to the Morningstar reform, we can ensure that the rating changes
are primarily caused by the methodology change (as opposed to by managerial skill, for
instance). In addition, we examine other variables around that date to verify that the effects
we document do not stem from shocks to the fundamentals of the stocks forming the style
portfolios or from the trading behavior of market participants other than mutual funds.


6.1    Performance of Styles, by Predicted Rating Impact

    Our analysis tracks style ratings, flows, and returns in 2002; the styles are sorted by
their exposure to Morningstar's methodology reform. The reform caused the style ratings
to shrink towards three stars. Thus, styles that had ratings greater than three stars as of
May 2002 experienced a drop in their ratings due to the methodology reform. In contrast,
styles that had ratings lower than three stars experienced an increase. The objective of our
analysis is to compare the ratings, flows, and returns of the styles that experience the largest
changes in ratings due to the reform.
    Our ranking of the exposure of styles to the Morningstar reform relies on pre-window
information. Specifically, since the change in ratings between May and June includes com-
ponents that are related both to the methodology reform and to style performance, we rank
styles by the predicted rating change due to the reform, computed using December 2001
data. We calculate the predicted rating changes in the following fashion. For each fund j ,
we compute:


                      Ratingj = Ratingcounterfactual
                                      j,Dec 2001     - Ratingactual
                                                             j,Dec 2001 ,                  (12)


where Ratingcounterfactual
            j,Dec 2001     is our estimate of what its December 2001 rating would have been




                                              24
under the post-2002 methodology.25 Ratingj thus measures how the fund's rating would
have changed in December 2001 had the reform happened then. We then aggregate up these
fund-level predictions at the style level.
    When we sort the nine styles by the predicted rating change, we find that this proce-
dure correctly predicts which style portfolios experienced the largest changes in June 2002.
Specifically, the small-value style enjoys the highest rating in December 2001 and is predicted
to experience the largest decline; the large-growth style has the lowest rating in December
2001 and is predicted to experience the largest increase. The success of this prediction using
data six months earlier is due to the slow-moving nature of ratings.26
    In Figure 8, we plot the evolution of style ratings, flows, and returns in 2002. Panel (a),
which plots average style ratings (demeaned cross-sectionally), shows a sharp methodology-
induced rating collapse exactly at the event. The style most negatively affected by the reform
suffered a drop of about 0.4 stars, while the most positively affected style experienced an
increase of about 0.4 stars. Similar patterns can be observed when comparing the flows to
the second positively and negatively affected style.
    Next, we look at flows. Panel (c) shows that in the months leading up to the event,
the top-rated style (expected to be most negatively affected by the reform) experienced
approximately 23% additional flows relative to the bottom-rated style. After June 2002,
flows equalized across styles.
    Finally, we examine cumulative style returns in Panel (e). Pre-event style returns lined
up with pre-event ratings and flows. Following the June 2002 event, return differences leveled
off with a slight reversal. The most negatively affected style had returns of 2.6% per month
during the pre-event period and reverted to -0.5% after the event. The most positively
affected style had a -1.9% monthly return before the event and 0.3% after.
    To put the size of the price impact into perspective, a back-of-envelope exercise shows
that the style-level price impact coefficient in our results is slightly smaller than the estimate
  25
     Appendix A.5 provides more details about how the counterfactual ratings are computed in a bottom-up
fashion using past fund returns.
  26
     As explained in Appendix B, ratings are slow-moving because they are based on three, five, and 10 years
of past fund returns.




                                                    25
Figure 8. Event Study Around June 2002
We perform event studies on the 3 × 3 size-value Morningstar style portfolios during the six months before
and after the June 2002 methodology change. In the left panels, we sort styles by their predicted rating
change at the June 2002 event using December 2001 data, and then plot the evolution of their ratings in
Panel (a), cumulative flows in Panel (c), and cumulative returns in Panel (e). The dashed vertical line is the
June 2002 event. The right panels conduct the same exercises in years other than 2002 as a placebo test.
The blue bars plot the average rating, flow, and return changes after June 2002 (average of July to December
2002 minus average of January to June 2002), while the orange bars plot the corresponding results for years
other than 2002. The whiskers represent two standard error bands. To focus on cross-sectional dispersion,
all variables--ratings, returns, and flows--are demeaned cross-sectionally.
                                                                 (a) Ratings, 2002                                                                           (b) Ratings change: 2002 vs. placebo

                                                 0.8                                                                                                    0.3
                                                                                     Most negatively affected
                                                                                     Second neg                                                         0.2
                                                 0.6                                                                                                                                                            2002
                                                                                     Second pos
                                                                                     Most positively affected                                           0.1                                                     Other years
                                                 0.4




                                                                                                                                Average Rating change
                                                                                                                                                          0
                               Demeaned rating




                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                        -0.1

                                                   0                                                                                                    -0.2

                                                 -0.2                                                                                                   -0.3

                                                                                                                                                        -0.4
                                                 -0.4
                                                                                                                                                        -0.5
                                                 -0.6
                                                                                                                                                        -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                Pos    2          3      4      5      6       7      8      Neg
                                                 -0.8
                                                        Jan-02    Apr-02    Jul-02           Oct-02                                                                         Styles, ranked by predicted rating change



                                                                  (c) Flow, 2002                                                                                (d) Flow change: 2002 vs. placebo
                                                                                      Most negatively affected
                                             20%                                                                                                        1.5%
                                                                                      Second neg                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                      Second pos                                                        1.0%                                                      Other years
                                             15%                                      Most positively affected
                                                                                                                                                        0.5%
                                                                                                                       Monthly flow change




                                             10%                                                                                                        0.0%
                   Cumulative fund flow




                                                                                                                                                 -0.5%
                                                 5%
                                                                                                                                                 -1.0%
                                                 0%
                                                                                                                                                 -1.5%

                                                 -5%                                                                                             -2.0%

                                                                                                                                                 -2.5%
                                          -10%
                                                                                                                                                 -3.0%
                                                                                                                                                                 Pos       2      3      4      5      6       7     8       Neg
                                          -15%
                                                        Jan-02    Apr-02    Jul-02           Oct-02                                                                         Styles, ranked by predicted rating change



                                                                 (e) Return, 2002                                                                              (f) Return change: 2002 vs. placebo
                                                                                     Most negatively affected
                                          20%                                                                                                           3%
                                                                                     Second neg
                                                                                     Second pos
                                                                                                                                                        2%                                                     2002
                                          15%                                        Most positively affected
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other years
                                                                                                                                                        1%
                                                                                                                      Monthly return change




                                          10%
             Cumulative log return




                                                                                                                                                        0%
                                                 5%
                                                                                                                                               -1%
                                                 0%
                                                                                                                                               -2%
                                           -5%
                                                                                                                                               -3%
                                     -10%
                                                                                                                                               -4%
                                                                                                                                                                Pos    2         3      4      5      6       7      8    Neg
                                     -15%
                                                        Jan-02   Apr-02    Jul-02           Oct-02                                                                         Styles, ranked by predicted rating change




                                                                                                                 26
obtained by Gabaix and Koijen (2020b).27 In sum, the patterns in Panels (a), (c), and (e)
of Figure 8 are consistent with style-level rating and flow changes having a causal impact on
returns.


6.2       Testing Alternative Explanations

       We conduct three further tests around the June 2002 event window to examine alternative
explanations. The results do not support any of the alternative hypotheses.


Placebo test: Other years. First, to alleviate the concern that the style flow and return
patterns occur mechanically due to regression to the mean, we conduct a placebo test by
rerunning an identical exercise in all years other than 2002. Panels (b), (d), and (f) of
Figure 8 show that the patterns observed in 2002 did not take place in other years. The
orange bars show the same exercise in other years together with two-standard-error bands.
Clearly, the sharp changes in style ratings, flows, and returns are unique to 2002.


Other measures that may impact style returns around 2002. Our event study
methodology assumes that no other sudden style-level shocks occurred around June 2002
that could have caused the patterns we observe. Such shocks would need to impact flows
and returns of styles in a manner that is aligned with how Morningstar reform impacted
ratings across styles. While we are not aware of similar shocks around June 2002, this is a
key assumption that merits further validation.
       For this purpose, in Figure 9 we examine whether there are sudden changes in a number of
other variables. Theoretically speaking, asset prices can move due to changes in fundamentals
or due to trading behaviors,28 and thus we investigate these two possibilities separately.
  27
      Gabaix and Koijen (2020b) use the granular instrument approach of Gabaix and Koijen (2020a) to
estimate the price impact coefficient (reciprocal of demand elasticity) at the market level. Their estimate
is in the range of 5.28 to 7.08. In our exercise, the cumulative fund flow difference between the top and
bottom-ranked styles is 22.4% in the six months leading up to the event (Panel (c) of Figure 8). The return
difference is 27.2%. As mutual fund holds approximately 22.8% of the U.S. stock market in 2002, this implies
a style-level price impact coefficient of 27 .2%     1
                                           22.5% × 22.8%  5.3.
   28
      It is unlikely that rationally-determined discount rate can vary so much in a short period of time, so we
do not investigate this possibility. Note that 2002 is not a recession period; the U.S. economy is already out
of the dot-com-related recession by November 2001, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                      27
   To investigate changes in fundamentals, we compute return on assets (ROA) and return
on equity (ROE) using quarterly Compustat data and plot their evolution at the style-level
(value-weighted) in Panels (a) and (b). While the fundamentals of different styles do differ
and fluctuate, there is no discernible sudden change around June 2002 that is correlated with
the style-level return movements.
   To investigate trading behaviors of institutions, we examine trades by 13F institutions at
the style level. We obtain quarterly 13F holdings data from Thomson Reuters and aggregate
by the legal types of institution obtained from Brian Bushee's website. We then plot the
cumulative trading by different types of institutions as a fraction of market capitalization in
Panels (c) to (e).
   Panel (c) plots the trading by investment companies and independent investor advisors--
two categories that include the mutual fund sector. Consistent with our mechanism, these
institutions indeed trade in a matter aligned with the flow patterns depicted in Figure 8(a):
they traded into (out of) styles with high (low) pre-2002 ratings until a sudden halt right
after June 2002. Panel (d) plots the trading of banks, insurance companies, and pension
funds. Panel (e) plots the trading of endowment funds and other institutions. There is
no discernible "kink" in the trading of any of those non-mutual fund institutions. Finally,
because 13F data only records long positions, we also examine the evolution of aggregate
short interest in Panel (f). While there is a general slow rise of short interest over the
window, there is no clear change around the event.


Controlling for stock characteristics. The previous two tests show that there were
no sudden changes in fundamentals or trading behaviors of non-mutual-fund institutions
around 2002. However, one might still argue that our results could be driven by sudden
characteristics-related return changes that happen for other reasons. For example, one might
hypothesize that investor sentiment suddenly decreased for small-value stocks after June
2002, and this can cause returns to decrease for those stocks.
   To further alleviate this concern, we show that our results--that predicted rating changes
explain return changes--also take place at the stock level after controlling for size and
book/market, the most commonly-used characteristics. Specifically, for each stock i, we


                                              28
Figure 9. Event Study Around June 2002: Alternative Explanations
We perform event studies on the 3 × 3 Morningstar style portfolios around the June 2002 methodology change.
As in Figure 8, we sort styles by their predicted rating change at the June 2002 event using December 2001
data, and then plot the evolution of various variables. To assess changes in fundamentals, Panels (a) and (b)
plot the evolution of return on assets and return on equity. Panels (c) to (e) plot the cumulative trading (as
a fraction of overall market capitalization) by different types of 13F institutions. Panel (c) plots trading by
investment companies and advisors which include the mutual fund sector. Panel (d) plots trading by banks,
insurance companies, and pension funds; Panel (e) plots trading by endowment funds and other institutions.
To focus on cross-sectional dispersion, the trading measures in Panels (c) to (e) are demeaned by period.
Panel (f) plots the evolution of aggregate short interest. The vertical dashed line indicates the June 2002
methodology change event.
                                                 (a) Return on assets (ROA)                                                                                (b) Return on equity (ROE)

                                         2%          Most negatively affected                                                                   5%
                                                     Second neg
                                                     Second pos                                                                                 4%
                                                     Most positively affected

                                                                                                                                                3%
                                         1%




                                                                                                                           Return on equity
                    Return on assets




                                                                                                                                                2%


                                                                                                                                                1%

                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                0%


                                                                                                                                                -1%


                                         -1%                                                                                                    -2%
                                            Jun-01         Dec-01         Jun-02        Dec-02         Jun-03                                      Jun-01       Dec-01   Jun-02     Dec-02   Jun-03


              (c) Trading: Investment companies and advisors                                                               (d) Trading: Banks, insurance, pension funds

                                         2%                                                                                                     2%



                                         1%                                                                                                     1%

                                                                                   Most negatively affected
                    Cumulative trading




                                                                                                                           Cumulative trading




                                                                                   Second neg
                                         0%                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                   Second pos
                                                                                   Most positively affected

                                         -1%                                                                                                    -1%



                                         -2%                                                                                                    -2%



                                         -3%                                                                                                    -3%
                                            Jun-01         Dec-01         Jun-02        Dec-02         Jun-03                                      Jun-01       Dec-01   Jun-02     Dec-02   Jun-03


                             (e) Trading: Endowment funds and others                                                                                           (f) Short interest

                                         2%                                                                                             10%

                                                                                                                                                9%

                                         1%                                                                                                     8%

                                                                                                                                                7%
               Cumulatbei trading




                                         0%                                                                                                     6%
                                                                                                                     Short interest




                                                                                                                                                5%

                                    -1%                                                                                                         4%
                                                 Most negatively affected
                                                                                                                                                3%
                                                 Second neg
                                    -2%          Second pos                                                                                     2%
                                                 Most positively affected
                                                                                                                                                1%

                                    -3%                                                                                                         0%
                                       Jun-01              Dec-01         Jun-02       Dec-02         Jun-03                                      Jun-01       Dec-01    Jun-02     Dec-02   Jun-03




                                                                                                                29
define:


                   Ratingidiosyncratic
                         i,t           = Ratingi,t - Ratingsize-book/market portfolio p,t ,                                                                  (13)

                      Retidiosyncratic
                         i,t           = Reti,t - Retsize-book/market portfolio p,t ,                                                                        (14)


where p is the 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 size and book/market sorted portfolio (constructed using
NYSE cutoffs) that stock i belongs to. We compute the rating and return of those portfolios
by aggregating from the underlying stocks using market cap-weights. We choose size and
book/market because they are the most commonly-used characteristics in the literature.
Thus, Ratingidiosyncratic
            i,t           and Retidiosyncratic
                                 i,t           measure the components of rating and return that
are not explained by characteristics.

Figure 10. Return Change Around June 2002: Controlling for Characteristics
We first subtract value-weighted average ratings and returns of 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 size-book/market portfolios to
obtain idiosyncratic ratings and returns for each stock (see Equations (13) and (14)). Then, we sort stocks
into quintiles based on their predicted idiosyncratic rating changes at the June 2002 event using December
2001 data. The top (bottom) quintile are stocks that are expected to experience the largest decline (increase)
of idiosyncratic ratings. The figure plots the difference between the average 6 month idiosyncratic return
after the event (July to December 2002) and the average 6 month idiosyncratic return before the event
(January to June 2002).

                                                                  3%

                                                                                                                            Controlling for 3x3 styles
                         Change of monthly idiosyncratic return




                                                                  2%
                                                                                                                            Controlling for 5x5 styles

                                                                  1%


                                                                  0%


                                                                  -1%


                                                                  -2%


                                                                  -3%
                                                                        Positive change         2                3                 4       Negative change
                                                                                       Stocks sorted by prediced idiosyncratic rating change




       We then sort on the predicted idiosyncratic rating change (using data in December 2001)29
and examine the change in idiosyncratic stock returns after the event in Figure 10. Note
  29
    Specifically, we first compute counterfactual ratings for each fund in December 2001 under the post-
reform Morningstar methodology. We then aggregate those at the stock and portfolio levels and subtract
the latter from the former to get the counterfactual idiosyncratic rating at the stock level. The difference
between this counterfactual idiosyncratic rating and the actual idiosyncratic rating in December 2001 is our
prediction of the change.

                                                                                                        30
that our mechanism--that rating changes impact returns--works both at the characteristic-
spanned and characteristic-orthogonal (idiosyncratic) levels. Therefore, even after control-
ling for characteristics, we should still expect to see an effect. Consistent with this prediction,
stocks predicted to experience large upgrade (downgrade) in idiosyncratic rating (Equa-
tion (13)) experience positive (negative) changes in idiosyncratic return (Equation (14)).
The quantitative relationship between rating changes and return changes is also comparable
to that found at the style level (Panel (f) in Figure 8). These results further suggests that our
style-level findings around June 2002 are unlikely to be driven by unspecified characteristics-
level return movements.



7        Demand Effects Shaping the Asset Pricing Factors
       So far, we have seen that rating-induced demand creates large price pressures on style
returns. In this section, we explore the relation between ratings-chasing demand and the
size and value factors, which are defined as long-short portfolios on styles. Here we ask: to
what extent the returns of the size and value factors can be explained by ratings-induced
correlated demand? To be consistent with the earlier sections, we present findings based on
Morningstar style but the results based on styles in academic studies (following Fama and
French, 1993) are similar (Appendix A.3).
       To answer this question, we first use the 12-month short window around June 2002 to
estimate the price impact coefficient of Morningstar ratings on style returns--the building
blocks of the size and value factors. We choose a short window for two reasons. First, we
want to ensure that rating changes primarily come from the methodology change.30 Second,
we want to avoid the impact of other market-level changes, such as the dot-com bubble burst
in early 2000, the decimalization event in 2001 (Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Tong, 2014),
or the "momentum crash" period in 2008 (Daniel and Moskowitz, 2016).
       Formally, we estimate a forecasting panel regression using the same twelve months around
  30
    This is not true if we use a longer sample as ratings are (albeit complex) functions of past returns. Recent
studies find that return factors can exhibit momentum (Arnott, Clements, Kalesnik, and Linnainmaa, 2019;
Gupta and Kelly, 2019); earlier papers found that returns tend to exhibit long-term reversion (De Bondt
and Thaler, 1985). Thus, running a regression of style returns on lagged ratings may be picking up both
momentum and reversal effects.


                                                      31
the event (January 2001 to December 2001):


                      Ret,t =  · ExpSum(Rating),t-1 + Controls,t-1 +                               ,t ,          (15)


where the controls include style returns over t - 1, t - 2 to t - 6, and t - 7 to t - 12 months
as well as style and time fixed effects. By controlling for past returns, we can better capture
the marginal effect of rating changes in addition to possible style momentum effects (Ehsani
and Linnainmaa, 2019; Gupta and Kelly, 2019). Standard errors are clustered by month.


Table 3. Estimating the Price Impact of Ratings () Around June 2002
We estimate the rating price impact coefficient  through a forecasting panel regression of monthly returns
of the 3 × 3 styles on lagged ratings changes (ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ). We also control for past style returns
over t - 1, t - 2 to t - 6, and t - 7 to t - 12 months, as well as style and time fixed effects in some specifications.
The sample spans the six months before to six months after the methodology change. Columns (1) and (2)
are estimated in a panel regression and standard errors are clustered by month. Columns (3) and (4) are
estimated using feasible general least squares (FGLS) where we use the empirically estimated covariance
matrix of style returns to adjust for cross-sectional correlations. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.

                       Dependent variable:                   Monthly style return Ret,t (%)
                                                        Panel regression              FGLS
                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)
                       ExpSum(Rating),t-1               2.89        2.63      2.49      1.76
                                                        (1.16)      (1.17)     (0.71)    (0.67)

                       Past Return Controls              Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
                       Style FE                          Yes         No         Yes          No
                       Time FE                           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes

                       Observations                      108         108       108        108
                       Adjusted R2                      93.0%       93.2%     80.6%      78.9%
                        p   < 1%,    p   < 5%,   p   < 10%



    The estimation results are shown in Table 3. For each star rating change, the style-level
price impact is 2.89% per month with a t -statistic of 2.50 (Column (1)). To account for
cross-sectional style return correlation, in Columns (3) and (4), we also adjust the standard




                                                               32
errors using a feasible generalized least squares (FGLS) approach.31 When using FGLS,
the estimated price impact is 2.49% (t = 3.50). The estimates are both statistically and
economically significant. Our estimates do not change materially if we use shorter or longer
event-time windows, and we present those robustness checks in Appendix Table A.3.
       We now use the estimated  = 2.89% in Column (1) to quantify the influence of ratings
on style and factor returns. Specifically, we use the following price-impact specifications:


                     RetSMB,t =  · ExpSum(Rating)SMB,t-1 +Retcounterfactual
                                                             SMB,t                                          (16)
                                        Rating-induced price pressure




                     RetHML,t =  · ExpSum(Rating)HML,t-1 +Retcounterfactual
                                                             HML,t          ,                               (17)
                                        Rating-induced price pressure


where
                ExpSum(Rating)SMB,t-1                        -          ExpSum(Rating),t-1
                                                        S         B



               ExpSum(Rating)HML,t-1                         -          ExpSum(Rating),t-1 .
                                                        V         G

In the equations above, we use S , B , V , and G to denote the three small-cap styles, the
three large-cap styles, the three value styles, and the three growth styles, respectively. For
  31
     We use the full sample of style returns to estimate the covariance matrix of style returns and incorporate
it into the estimation. Specifically, let y be the vector of style returns stacked together so that the first nine
entries are the first month, the next nine entries are the second month, and so forth. Then, we estimate the
covariance matrix of y to be
                                              ^                       
                                              C         0    ...    0
                                              0         ^
                                                        C    ...    0
                                           ^ =
                                              .         .           . ,
                                                                      
                                              .         .    ..     .
                                               .        .       .   .
                                               0        0    ...    ^
                                                                    C

      ^ is the estimated contemporaneous return variance-covariance matrix of the nine styles. Let X denote
where C
the matrix of independent variables. Then, we estimate the regression coefficients and variance-covariance
matrix using
                                              ^
                                              b = (X ^ -1 X )-1 X ^ -1 y,

                                        V ar(^
                                             b) = (X ^ -1 X )-1 .




                                                        33
example, S combines the value-small, blend-small, and growth-small portfolios.
       To visualize the influence of rating-induced price pressure on the factors, in Panels (a)
and (b) of Figure 11, we plot the cumulative returns of factors against the cumulative rating-
induced returns ( · ExpSum(Rating)t-1 ). To capture value and size premia in one single
strategy, in Panel (c), we also plot the returns of the "diagonal" portfolio (SVMBG) that
is long the small-value style and short the large-growth style. The plots suggest that that
rating-induced price pressures can explain a large portion of factor return variation before
2002. After June 2002, rating-induced demand largely loses explanatory power, as expected.
       To quantify the explanatory power on factor return variation, we compute the modified
"R-squared" of rating-induced price pressures by using the cleanly identified  estimate in
Equation (15):

                                           V ar( · ExpSum(Rating)f,t-1 )
                          R-squaredf =                                   ,
                                                     V ar(Retf,t )
                              where f  {SMB, HML, SVMBG}.


       We compute this "R-squared" measure for both before and after June 2002. Before 2002,
we find that R-squaredSMB = 34.7%, R-squaredHML = 11.1%, and R-squaredSVMBG = 27.0%.
After June 2002, these figures drop to 9.5%, 3.3%, and 9.2%, respectively.32               33


       While this exercise admittedly delivers a crude estimate, the results suggest that corre-
lated demand of styles can explain a sizeable fraction of factor return variation.




  32
     If we only use the residual of ExpSum(Rating),t-1 after partialling out the various past return controls
in regression (15), then the "R-squared" for SMB, HML, and SVMBG becomes 29.0%, 7.7%, and 20.5%
before June 2002 and 9.2%, 4.0%, and 9.8% after June 2002.
  33
     While the estimate of  based on the 2002 shock is better identified, one may be worried that the price
impact could vary over time. Therefore, we also repeat the exercise using  estimated using five-year rolling
window regressions (Figure A.5). As expected, the estimated  is larger before 2002 and becomes statistically
insignificant after June 2002. When using this rolling-window  as a conservative estimate, for the period
before 2002, the "R-squared" for SMB, HML, and SVMBG becomes 12.4%, 3.5%, and 9.5%, respectively.
After June 2002, it declines to 2.3%, 0.7%, and 1.9%, respectively.


                                                     34
Figure 11. Explanatory Power of Ratings on Size and Value Factors
We quantify the explanatory power of rating pressures on long-short factor portfolios based on the 3 × 3
styles. Panel (a) plots the average returns of the three small capitalization styles minus the three large
capitalization styles ("small-minus-big"). Panel (b) plots the average of the three value styles minus the
average of the three growth styles ("high-minus-low"), while Panel (c) plots the small-value style minus the
large-growth style. The black solid lines are the actual cumulative log returns while the red dashed lines are
the returns explained by ratings ( · ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ) where  is estimated in Column (1) of Table 3.
                                                                          (a) Small Cap - Large Cap
                                        80%


                                        60%
                Cumulative log return




                                        40%


                                        20%


                                         0%
                                                                                                                          Return

                                                                                                                          Explained by ratings
                                        -20%


                                        -40%
                                            1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011        2013       2015   2017




                                                                               (b) Value - Growth
                                        40%


                                        20%


                                         0%
       Cumulative log return




                                        -20%


                                        -40%


                                        -60%                                                                              Return

                                                                                                                          Explained by ratings
                                        -80%


                                -100%
                                     1991          1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011        2013       2015   2017




                                                                        (c) Small-Value - Large-Growth
                                        80%

                                        60%

                                        40%
                Cumulative log return




                                        20%

                                         0%

                                        -20%
                                                                                                                          Return
                                        -40%
                                                                                                                          Explained by ratings
                                        -60%

                                        -80%
                                            1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011        2013       2015   2017




                                                                                         35
8     Conclusion
    In recent years, evidence has mounted that investor demand can exert significant pressure
on asset prices. However, it is difficult to identify demand that is non-fundamental, large
enough to impact a broad set of securities, and that also clearly causes systematic price
fluctuations. Our study presents evidence that demand fueled by mutual fund investors'
rating-chasing behavior can impact large-scale price patterns, including style returns, style
momentum, and style dispersion.
    The identification of the effects comes from Morningstar's June 2002 reform to its method-
ology for rating mutual funds. The reform equalized ratings across styles, causing capital
flows to spread more evenly across styles. Prior to the reform, style-level rating imbalances
created style-level price pressures and increased return dispersion across styles. Moreover,
because ratings depend on past returns, rating chasing caused a positive feedback loop in-
volving style returns and fund flows; thus, style portfolios displayed momentum and reversal
in both flows and returns. After the reform, these patterns disappeared, consistent with the
removal of style-level rating-induced price pressures. Using an event study around the exact
reform date, we achieve sharper identification of the effects of rating-induced demand on
style returns. Finally, we estimate that rating-induced price pressures can explain a sizeable
fraction of the time-series variation in the size and value factors.
    Our results show that one specific source of non-fundamental demand--mutual fund
investors naively chasing ratings irrespective of rating definition--can drive significant fluc-
tuations in style-level performance. The overall role of correlated demand in determining
asset prices is likely greater than what is documented here. Correlated demand can also arise
from other sources such as demand for certain styles driven by institutional frictions (Froot
and Teo, 2008; Koijen and Yogo, 2019) and performance chasing in index-linked products
(Broman, 2016; Dannhauser and Pontiff, 2019). Taken together, these findings should alter
the way economists interpret systematic price movements: instead of reflecting fundamental
risk, they may also be determined by non-fundamental demand.




                                              36
References
Akbas, Ferhat, Will J. Armstrong, Sorin Sorescu, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2015,
 Smart money, dumb money, and capital market anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics
 118, 355­382.

Arnott, Robert D., Mark Clements, Vitali Kalesnik, and Juhani T. Linnainmaa, 2019, Factor
  momentum, Working paper, Dartmouth College.

Barber, Brad M., Xing Huang, and Terrance Odean, 2016, Which factors matter to investors?
  Evidence from mutual fund flows, Review of Financial Studies 29, 2600­2642.

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005, Out of sight, out of mind: The
  effects of expenses on mutual fund flows, Journal of Business 78, 2095­2120.

Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 68, 161­199.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi, 2018, Do ETFs increase
  volatility?, Journal of Finance 73, 2471­2535.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi, and John Sedunov, 2020, The
  granular nature of large institutional investors, Management Science forthcoming.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Jiacui Li, Andrea Rossi, and Yang Song, 2019, What do investors really
  care about?, Working paper, The Ohio State University.

Blume, Marshall E., 1998, An anatomy of Morningstar ratings, Financial Analysts Journal
  54, 19­27.

Broman, Markus S., 2016, Liquidity, style investing and excess comovement of exchange-
  traded fund returns, Journal of Financial Markets 30, 27­53.

Brown, David C, Shaun Davies, and Matthew Ringgenberg, 2020, ETF arbitrage and return
  predictability, Review of Finance forthcoming.

Chang, Yen-Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich, 2015, Regression discontinuity and
 the price effects of stock market indexing, Review of Financial Studies 28, 212­246.

Choi, James J., and Adriana Z. Robertson, 2020, What matters to individual investors?
 Evidence from the horse's mouth, Journal of Finance 75, 1965­2020.

Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Qing Tong, 2014, Have capital market
 anomalies attenuated in the recent era of high liquidity and trading activity?, Journal of
 Accounting and Economics 58, 41­58.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets,
  Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479­512.



                                            37
Daniel, Kent D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2016, Momentum crashes, Journal of Financial
 Economics 122, 221­247.
Dannhauser, Caitlin D., and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2019, Flow, Working paper, Boston University.
De Bondt, Werner FM, and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?, Journal
  of Finance 40, 793­805.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A Tkac, 2008, Star power: The effect of Morningstar ratings
  on mutual fund flow, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907­936.
Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012, The real effects of financial markets:
  The impact of prices on takeovers, Journal of Finance 67, 933­971.
Ehsani, Sina, and Juhani T. Linnainmaa, 2019, Factor momentum and the momentum factor,
  Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Evans, Richard B., and Yang Sun, 2020, Models or stars: The role of asset pricing models
  and heuristics in investor risk adjustment, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
  stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.
Fama, Eugene F, and James D MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
  tests, Journal of Political Economy 81, 607­636.
Fisher, Philip A., 1958, Common stocks and uncommon profits (Harper).
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A Lamont, 2008, Dumb money: Mutual fund flows and the
  cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299­322.
Friesen, Geoffrey C., and Viet Nguyen, 2018, The economic impact of mutual fund investor
  behaviors, Working paper, University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
Froot, Kenneth, and Melvyn Teo, 2008, Style investing and institutional investors, Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 883­906.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Ralph S.J. Koijen, 2020a, Granular instrumental variables, Working
 paper, Harvard University.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Ralph S.J. Koijen, 2020b, In search of the origins of financial fluctua-
 tions: The inelastic markets hypothesis, Working paper, Harvard University.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2015, Money doctors, Journal of
 Finance 70, 91­114.
Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security analysis , 7th edition (Whittlesey
  House, McGraw-Hill, New York).
Gupta, Tarun, and Bryan Kelly, 2019, Factor momentum everywhere, Journal of Portfolio
 Management 45, 13­36.

                                            38
Harris, Lawrence, and Eitan Gurel, 1986, Price and volume effects associated with changes
  in the S&P 500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pressures, Journal of Finance
  41, 815­829.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail Sussman, 2019, Do investors value sustainability? A
  natural experiment examining ranking and fund flows, Journal of Finance 76, 2789­2837.

Huang, Shiyang, Yang Song, and Hong Xiang, 2020, Noise trading and asset pricing factors,
 Working paper, University of Washington.

Kaniel, Ron, and Robert Parham, 2017, WSJ category kings: The impact of media attention
 on consumer and mutual fund investment decisions, Journal of Financial Economics 123,
 337­356.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., and Motohiro Yogo, 2019, A demand system approach to asset pricing,
 Journal of Political Economy 127, 1475­1515.

Lettau, Martin, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Paulo Manoel, 2019, Characteristics of mutual
  fund portfolios: Where are the value funds?, Working paper, University of California at
  Berkeley.

Lou, Dong, 2012, A flow-based explanation for return predictability, Review of Financial
  Studies 25, 3457­3489.

Pastor, Lubos, Robert F Stambaugh, and Lucian A Taylor, 2020, Fund tradeoffs, Journal of
  Financial Economics forthcoming.

Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2015, How much does size erode mutual fund perfor-
  mance? A regression discontinuity approach, Working paper, Boston College.

Samuelson, Paul A, 1998, Summing up on business cycles: Opening address, in Conference
  Series-Federal Reserve Bank of Boston , volume 42, 33­36, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do demand curves for stocks slope down?, Journal of Finance 41,
  579­590.

Song, Yang, 2020, The mismatch between mutual fund scale and skill, Journal of Finance
  75, 2555­2589.

Teo, Melvyn, and Sung-Jun Woo, 2004, Style effects in the cross-section of stock returns,
  Journal of Financial Economics 74, 367­398.

Wardlaw, Malcolm, 2020, Measuring mutual fund flow pressure as shock to stock returns,
 Journal of Finance 75, 3221­3243.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
 picking talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655­1695.

Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves
 for stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583­608.

                                            39
Appendix A              Additional Results
   In this section, we provide additional results and robustness checks for the analysis pre-
sented in the main body of the paper.


A.1     Sample Statistics

   Table A.1 shows detailed statistics of our mutual fund sample from 1991 to 2018. Our
sample includes 433 mutual funds at the beginning of our sample period, and the number
peaked in 2008 at 2,062. Since then, the number of funds decreased slightly, whereas total
assets under management increased from 2009 onward, reaching about $4 trillion by the end
of our sample period in 2018. Columns (4) to (8) report the distribution of funds in each
rating category; Column (9) shows the fraction of sector funds; Columns (10) to (13) report
the fraction of funds in different styles. Table A.2 shows the summary statistics of the nine
Morningstar fund-based styles.


A.2     Morningstar vs. Academic Style Classification

   In the main text, we used Morningstar funds to define 3 × 3 size-value stock portfolios.
These definitions are related to, but different from, the academic style definitions. For
instance, Lettau et al. (2019) point out that "value funds" in the industry hold few stocks
with high book/market ratios--the value stocks defined by academia. This section explores
the difference between the Morningstar and the academic style definitions.
   In Figure A.1, we sort stocks by market capitalization and book/market into 10 × 10
portfolios using NYSE breakpoints. The heat maps in Panel (a) show the academic style
definitions which are strictly based on stock characteristics. By construction, the stocks
in those style portfolios are concentrated in a "rectangular region." Panel (b) presents the
distribution of stocks in Morningstar-based styles, which turn out to be "smoothed" versions
of the academic styles. For instance, while the academic large-cap growth style only holds
stocks with large market capitalization and low book-to-market ratios, the Morningstar-
based style can also hold some, albeit fewer, stocks with other characteristics.



                                             40
Table A.1. Summary Statistics of Mutual Funds, by Year
Columns (1) to (3) show the year, the number of mutual funds, and their aggregate AUM. Columns (4)
to (8) indicate the fraction of funds assigned to each Morningstar star rating. Note that these fractions can
differ from (10%, 22.5%, 35%, 22.5%, 10%) because Morningstar assigns those fixed fractions of ratings at
the share-class level, but we follow Barber et al. (2016) in aggregating ratings at the fund level by value-
weighting different share classes and rounding to the nearest integer. Column (9) indicates the fraction that
are sector funds. The other U.S. domestic equity funds that are considered diversified are classified into
the 3 × 3 style box categories, and Columns (10) to (13) indicate the fraction of funds that fall within the
different styles.

           Number   AUM             Fraction by rating     Sector    Diversified fund style
    Year
            funds ($ billion) 1 star 2      3     4 5 star funds Large Small Growth Value
    (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)   (5)    (6)   (7)    (8)     (9)    (10)   (11)     (12)     (13)
    1991     433       458.2     9%     23%   36%    23%   10%     19%     51%    16%      30%     28%
    1992     466       600.8     9%     25%   32%    23%   11%     18%     52%    17%      29%     29%
    1993     525       733.6     8%     22%   38%    23%    9%     17%     54%    16%      27%     30%
    1994     587       748.8     7%     23%   34%    25%   10%     16%     54%    17%      27%     30%
    1995     702       971.8     9%     22%   32%    27%   11%     15%     53%    17%      28%     28%
    1996     826      1,177.6    8%     21%   31%    28%   13%     15%     51%    20%      30%     28%
    1997     942      1,416.0    9%     22%   30%    26%   13%     14%     53%    20%      30%     29%
    1998    1,069     1,524.5    10%    22%   28%    25%   14%     14%     55%    20%      33%     28%
    1999    1,238     1,721.4    12%    21%   27%    26%   14%     14%     55%    22%      37%     27%
    2000    1,454     1,510.0    10%    20%   30%    26%   14%     14%     57%    23%      37%     28%
    2001    1,595     1,238.7    9%     20%   34%    23%   15%     15%     57%    22%      38%     27%
    2002    1,731      964.3     8%     21%   36%    25%   10%     15%     57%    22%      41%     23%
    2003    1,948     1,072.5    8%     22%   36%    24%    9%     16%     56%    22%      43%     22%
    2004    2,020     1,224.5    8%     22%   37%    24%    8%     16%     56%    22%      43%     22%
    2005    2,021     1,366.5    6%     25%   39%    23%    7%     15%     56%    22%      42%     23%
    2006    1,997     1,567.6    8%     24%   38%    23%    7%     15%     56%    22%      41%     23%
    2007    2,019     1,681.6    8%     25%   38%    22%    7%     15%     56%    23%      41%     23%
    2008    2,062      946.6     8%     24%   37%    23%    8%     15%     55%    23%      41%     23%
    2009    2,019     1,249.2    8%     23%   38%    23%    7%     14%     54%    23%      42%     23%
    2010    1,912     1,472.2    7%     23%   38%    24%    8%     14%     55%    23%      41%     23%
    2011    1,853     1,574.3    6%     23%   38%    26%    6%     14%     56%    23%      40%     23%
    2012    1,778     1,819.9    7%     23%   37%    26%    7%     14%     56%    23%      41%     22%
    2013    1,700     2,503.1    6%     24%   38%    26%    6%     15%     56%    23%      42%     23%
    2014    1,651     2,924.7    7%     21%   38%    28%    7%     15%     56%    24%      41%     24%
    2015    1,635     2,969.2    8%     21%   37%    27%    8%     15%     55%    24%      40%     25%
    2016    1,666     3,046.6    6%     22%   37%    27%    7%     16%     55%    24%      40%     25%
    2017    1,633     3,723.2    6%     22%   37%    28%    8%     16%     54%    25%      38%     25%
    2018    1,563     3,820.4    7%     21%   36%    28%    9%     16%     54%    26%      38%     26%




                                                     41
Table A.2. Summary Statistics of Styles, by Year
There are a total of nine stock styles (small/mid/large cap × value/blend/growth) used in this study.
Columns (2) and (3) summarize the mean and standard deviation of Morningstar ratings for each style.
Columns (4) and (5) summarize the lagged-12-month rating changes (ExpSum(Rating)). Columns (6) and
(7) summarize monthly fund flows in the styles, and Columns (8) and (9) summarize monthly style returns.

                      Rating     ExpSum(Rating) Monthly fund flow Monthly return
          Year
                 Average Std Dev Average Std Dev Average Std Dev Average Std Dev
          (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
          1991    3.17      0.67     -0.03      0.27     0.59%     1.10%     3.20%    5.15%
          1992    3.33      0.45     -0.05      0.34     1.24%     1.69%     1.10%    3.25%
          1993    3.51      0.50     0.06       0.24     1.08%     1.67%     1.41%    2.74%
          1994    3.68      0.44     0.04       0.17     0.98%     0.89%     0.04%    3.29%
          1995    3.84      0.43     0.07       0.19     1.18%     0.82%     2.65%    2.50%
          1996    3.75      0.40     -0.21      0.28     1.24%     1.06%     1.75%    3.81%
          1997    3.58      0.63     -0.18      0.40     1.08%     1.04%     2.16%    4.72%
          1998    3.39      0.71     -0.12      0.41     0.12%     1.08%     1.33%    7.47%
          1999    3.23      0.82     -0.01      0.38    -0.49%     1.51%     2.12%    5.19%
          2000    3.38      0.67     0.01       0.47     0.15%     1.37%     0.38%    7.47%
          2001    3.67      0.51     -0.03      0.52     0.84%     1.23%    -0.18%    6.83%
          2002    3.69      0.46     -0.16      0.35     0.46%     1.50%    -1.70%    5.86%
          2003    3.58      0.23     -0.08      0.12     0.76%     0.76%     2.88%    3.91%
          2004    3.57      0.19     -0.09      0.09     0.53%     0.79%     1.37%    3.17%
          2005    3.58      0.20     -0.09      0.11     0.13%     0.60%     0.81%    3.23%
          2006    3.65      0.20     -0.03      0.09     0.01%     0.55%     1.19%    2.85%
          2007    3.64      0.23     -0.13      0.14    -0.17%     0.69%     0.51%    3.11%
          2008    3.50      0.24     -0.21      0.16    -0.39%     0.73%    -3.79%    7.52%
          2009    3.42      0.25     -0.14      0.12    -0.06%     0.74%     2.76%    6.95%
          2010    3.41      0.19     -0.04      0.10    -0.19%     0.55%     1.92%    6.04%
          2011    3.49      0.15     0.04       0.14    -0.28%     0.58%     0.08%    5.67%
          2012    3.59      0.12     0.04       0.10    -0.33%     0.36%     1.41%    3.30%
          2013    3.66      0.14     -0.01      0.07     0.23%     0.45%     2.76%    2.72%
          2014    3.71      0.15     0.01       0.07    -0.13%     0.71%     0.84%    3.27%
          2015    3.74      0.11     -0.04      0.10    -0.26%     0.48%    -0.02%    3.74%
          2016    3.77      0.17     -0.01      0.16    -0.37%     0.54%     1.32%    4.01%
          2017    3.83      0.15     -0.02      0.14    -0.22%     0.55%     1.57%    1.62%
          2018    3.87      0.15     0.04       0.16    -0.19%     0.42%     1.43%    2.93%




                                                  42
Figure A.1. Comparison of Morningstar and Academic Stock Style Definitions
We sort stocks into 10 × 10 portfolios based on NYSE size and book/market break points. Panel (a) plots
the distribution of holdings in academic style definitions. Panel (b) plots the distribution of holdings by
funds in different styles. The heat map colors indicate the distribution of these style portfolios in each bin
with red indicating high weights and green indicating low weights.
                                                                                         (a) Academic Style Definition
                                         Academic Style: Growth                                                             Academic Style: Blend                                                             Academic Style: Value
                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%
             2      11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%
             3      11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%
 Academic    4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
  Style:     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%

  Large-     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%

   Cap       7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
            Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%


                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             4      8.3%     8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%
 Academic
             5      8.3%     8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%
  Style:     6      8.3%     8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%
 Mid-Cap     7      8.3%     8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   6.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%
             8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
            Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%


                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     3      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
 Academic    4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     4      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
  Style:     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     5      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%

  Small-     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%

   Cap       7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             8      11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%
             9      11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%
            Small   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%      0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   8.3%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   11.1% 11.1% 11.1%




                                                                       (b) Morningstar Fund-based Style Definition
                                           Fund Style: Growth                                                                 Fund Style: Blend                                                                 Fund Style: Value
                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   17.2% 10.9%     9.1%   8.3%   5.4%   4.5%   3.8%   2.6%   2.4%   2.8%    Large   10.6%    9.0%   8.4%    8.4%   7.7%   6.8%   6.4%   5.5%   4.5%   5.1%    Large   5.0%     5.3%   6.3%    6.8%   7.8%   7.8%   8.0%   8.3%   7.3%   7.9%
             2      4.7%     3.2%   2.2%   1.6%   1.4%   1.2%   1.0%   0.7%   0.5%   0.5%     2      2.1%     1.7%   1.6%    1.5%   1.5%   1.4%   1.4%   1.3%   1.2%   1.3%     2      0.9%     0.9%   1.2%    1.5%   1.8%   1.8%   1.9%   2.2%   2.4%   2.6%
             3      2.4%     1.4%   0.9%   0.8%   0.8%   0.6%   0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%     3      0.8%     0.7%   0.7%    0.6%   0.7%   0.6%   0.5%   0.5%   0.5%   0.5%     3      0.5%     0.4%   0.6%    0.5%   0.6%   0.7%   0.7%   0.8%   0.8%   1.0%
  Fund       4      1.0%     0.6%   0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%     4      0.4%     0.3%   0.3%    0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.3%     4      0.2%     0.2%   0.2%    0.2%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.4%   0.3%   0.4%
  Style:     5      0.6%     0.3%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     5      0.2%     0.2%   0.2%    0.1%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     5      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%

  Large-     6      0.4%     0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.1%     6      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     6      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%

   Cap       7      0.2%     0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     7      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.1%
             8      0.1%     0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.1%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     8      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
             9      0.1%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     9      0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%
            Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%


                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   4.2%     1.9%   1.5%   1.4%   1.3%   1.0%   0.8%   0.7%   0.7%   0.7%    Large   2.3%     1.9%   2.6%    2.7%   2.7%   2.1%   2.1%   1.8%   1.6%   1.8%    Large   0.6%     0.8%   1.3%    1.4%   1.6%   2.0%   2.0%   2.4%   2.2%   2.6%
             2      6.4%     3.4%   2.5%   2.2%   1.5%   1.2%   1.0%   0.8%   0.5%   0.5%     2      2.5%     1.9%   1.8%    2.0%   1.7%   1.7%   1.9%   1.4%   1.3%   1.4%     2      1.6%     1.3%   2.0%    2.7%   2.7%   2.7%   3.1%   3.3%   3.1%   3.1%
             3      6.2%     3.6%   2.5%   2.4%   2.1%   1.4%   1.1%   0.8%   0.8%   0.5%     3      2.9%     2.2%   2.0%    2.0%   2.1%   1.9%   1.7%   1.4%   1.5%   1.6%     3      1.3%     1.6%   1.8%    2.1%   2.3%   2.3%   2.2%   2.3%   2.4%   3.1%
             4      4.7%     3.1%   2.0%   1.5%   1.4%   0.9%   0.8%   0.7%   0.5%   0.4%     4      1.9%     1.8%   1.6%    1.4%   1.5%   1.3%   1.2%   1.2%   1.1%   1.2%     4      0.7%     1.0%   1.3%    1.5%   1.6%   1.6%   1.5%   1.8%   1.7%   2.3%
  Fund
             5      3.3%     2.0%   1.5%   1.0%   0.9%   0.6%   0.5%   0.4%   0.4%   0.3%     5      1.2%     1.1%   1.2%    1.0%   1.1%   0.9%   0.8%   0.8%   0.7%   0.8%     5      0.6%     0.7%   0.8%    0.9%   1.0%   1.1%   1.2%   1.1%   1.0%   1.4%
  Style:     6      2.2%     1.4%   0.9%   0.8%   0.6%   0.4%   0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%     6      0.9%     0.8%   0.8%    0.8%   0.7%   0.6%   0.6%   0.5%   0.6%   0.6%     6      0.3%     0.4%   0.4%    0.5%   0.5%   0.5%   0.5%   0.6%   0.6%   0.7%
 Mid-Cap     7      1.8%     0.9%   0.6%   0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%     7      0.7%     0.6%   0.5%    0.5%   0.4%   0.4%   0.4%   0.4%   0.4%   0.3%     7      0.2%     0.3%   0.3%    0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.4%   0.4%
             8      1.1%     0.5%   0.3%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     8      0.6%     0.4%   0.3%    0.3%   0.2%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%   0.2%     8      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.3%
             9      0.6%     0.3%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.1%     9      0.4%     0.3%   0.2%    0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     9      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%
            Small   0.2%     0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Small   0.3%     0.2%   0.1%    0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.0%    Small   0.1%     0.0%   0.0%    0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%


                    Growth    2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value           Growth    2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9     Value
            Large   0.3%     0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%    Large   0.1%     0.1%   0.0%    0.0%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.0%   0.1%   0.1%    Large   0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.2%
             2      1.1%     0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%   0.1%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%   0.0%     2      0.2%     0.1%   0.2%    0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%     2      0.1%     0.1%   0.1%    0.1%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%   0.2%
             3      2.5%     1.1%   0.7%   0.7%   0.5%   0.3%   0.4%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%     3      0.6%     0.4%   0.5%    0.5%   0.5%   0.4%   0.5%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%     3      0.3%     0.3%   0.3%    0.3%   0.3%   0.4%   0.5%   0.4%   0.4%   0.4%
  Fund       4      4.0%     2.6%   1.8%   1.3%   1.2%   0.8%   0.7%   0.6%   0.4%   0.3%     4      1.4%     1.3%   1.3%    1.1%   1.1%   1.0%   0.9%   0.9%   0.6%   0.6%     4      0.4%     0.5%   0.7%    0.7%   0.8%   0.9%   1.0%   1.0%   0.8%   1.0%
  Style:     5      5.3%     3.4%   2.5%   1.7%   1.4%   1.0%   0.8%   0.7%   0.5%   0.4%     5      2.3%     2.2%   1.9%    1.7%   1.5%   1.4%   1.3%   1.3%   1.2%   1.0%     5      0.6%     0.9%   1.0%    1.1%   1.3%   1.3%   1.6%   1.7%   1.7%   1.5%

  Small-     6      5.2%     3.5%   2.3%   2.0%   1.4%   1.1%   0.9%   0.7%   0.7%   0.5%     6      2.5%     2.5%   2.2%    2.1%   1.9%   1.8%   1.5%   1.5%   1.5%   1.0%     6      0.8%     1.2%   1.3%    1.6%   1.6%   1.8%   2.0%   2.2%   2.4%   1.7%

   Cap       7      5.2%     3.1%   2.2%   1.6%   1.1%   0.9%   0.7%   0.7%   0.6%   0.3%     7      2.6%     2.3%   2.2%    2.0%   1.8%   1.5%   1.5%   1.4%   1.3%   0.8%     7      1.0%     1.3%   1.6%    1.6%   1.8%   1.8%   1.9%   2.2%   2.4%   1.7%
             8      4.5%     2.2%   1.6%   1.2%   0.8%   0.7%   0.6%   0.5%   0.4%   0.3%     8      2.4%     1.9%   1.7%    1.7%   1.3%   1.3%   1.2%   1.2%   0.9%   0.7%     8      1.1%     1.2%   1.3%    1.7%   1.6%   1.7%   1.8%   2.1%   1.7%   1.3%
             9      3.0%     1.5%   1.0%   0.7%   0.5%   0.4%   0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.2%     9      2.1%     1.5%   1.4%    1.1%   1.1%   1.0%   0.9%   0.8%   0.7%   0.5%     9      1.2%     1.3%   1.4%    1.2%   1.5%   1.6%   1.6%   1.4%   1.2%   1.1%
            Small   1.4%     0.6%   0.4%   0.2%   0.2%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%   0.1%    Small   1.4%     1.0%   0.9%    0.8%   0.6%   0.5%   0.4%   0.4%   0.3%   0.2%    Small   1.0%     1.1%   1.3%    1.2%   1.1%   1.0%   1.0%   0.9%   0.6%   0.5%




                                                                                                                          43
A.3                               Empirical Results Using Academic Styles

       This section shows that the key results based on Morningstar-defined styles also extend
to the academic-defined styles using size and book/market characteristics.
       Figure A.2 reproduces Panels (c) and (d) in Figure 1 with academic-defined styles. The
general patterns are similar.34

Figure A.2. Price Pressure in Academic Style Portfolios
This is similar to Panels (c) and (d) in Figure 1 but performed using style portfolios defined using stock
characteristics. Stocks are sorted into 3 × 3 size-value styles using NYSE breakpoints of market cap and book-
to-market ratios. In each month, we rank styles by their lagged ExpSum(Rating) and plot the subsequent
cumulative flow-induced trading (Panel (a)) and returns (Panel (b)). We create separate estimates for the
sample period before June 2002 and after June 2002. The shaded areas are 95% bootstrapped confidence
intervals.
                                                      (a) Flow-induced trading                                                                              (b) Return

                                            20%                      Before 2002    After 2002                                                15%                    Before 2002    After 2002
                                                                                                  Cumulative return: top minus bottom style
         Cumulative flow-induced trading:




                                            15%                                                                                               10%
             top minus bottom style




                                            10%                                                                                               5%



                                            5%                                                                                                0%


                                            0%                                                                                                -5%


                                            -5%                                                                                         -10%
                                                  0      5    11    17      23     29      35                                                       0   5   11    17      23       29      35
                                                                   Months                                                                                        Months




       We also conduct an event study based on the academic-defined styles as in Section 6.
Figure A.3 illustrates the ratings and returns of the academic styles within this one-year
window when sorted on the predicted rating changes. The patterns are similar to those
depicted in Figure 8, where style portfolios are instead based on Morningstar-defined styles.
       We also quantify the influence of rating-induced demand on the size and value factors that
are constructed using the academic-defined styles. In Figure A.4, we plot the cumulative
returns of the "academic" factors together with the price pressure driven by the rating-
chasing demand as in Figure 11. We find that the rating-induced demand also explains a
  34
    Results based on Morningstar-defined styles are slightly sharper, consistent with the fact that ratings--
the source of change around 2002--are computed using Morningstar style definitions.


                                                                                                 44
Figure A.3. Behavior of Academic Styles Around the June 2002 Event
We perform event studies on the 3 × 3 size-value academic style portfolios during the six months before and
after the June 2002 methodology change. The styles are sorted by their predicted rating change at the June
2002 event using December 2001 data. These style portfolios use the standard academic definition by sorting
on size and value stock characteristics (Fama and French, 1993). To focus on cross-sectional dispersion, all
variables are demeaned cross-sectionally.
                                         (a) Ratings                                                                                (b) Returns

                       0.6                                                                                  25%       Most negatively affected
                                                                                                                      Second neg
                                                                                                            20%       Second pos
                       0.4
                                                                                                                      Most positively affected
                                                                                                            15%
                       0.2




                                                                                    Cumulative log return
                                                                                                            10%
      Average rating




                         0
                                                                                                             5%
                       -0.2
                                                                                                             0%
                       -0.4                         Most negatively affected
                                                                                                            -5%
                                                    Second neg
                       -0.6                         Second pos
                                                                                                            -10%
                                                    Most positively affected
                       -0.8                                                                                 -15%
                              Jan-02   Apr-02    Jul-02        Oct-02                                              Jan-02        Apr-02          Jul-02   Oct-02




large part of the variation in academic factors before 2002. The explanatory power disappears
after June 2002 as the demand is spread out across styles.


A.4                     Estimating Price Impact 

    This section provides additional results for the estimation of price impact parameter 
in Section 7. Table A.3 estimates the price-pressure coefficient in Equation (15) using two
alternative time windows. The results do not change materially if we decrease or increase
the length of the estimation window.
    Figure A.5 shows the estimate of the price impact  using five-year rolling windows.
Compared to the short-window estimate of  (see Table A.3), the coefficient estimated using
rolling-window regressions is slightly lower before 2002 and significantly lower after June
2002. These results are entirely expected for two reasons. First, in a typical month, only
around 14% of funds experience a change in rating (Ben-David et al., 2019; Evans and Sun,
2020), whereas in June 2002 54% of funds experienced a long-lasting change in rating. Thus,
the estimates from windows that do not contain June 2002 likely understate the true price


                                                                               45
Figure A.4. Explanatory Power of Ratings on Academic Size and Value Factors
We quantify the explanatory power of rating pressure on long-short portfolios based on the 3 × 3 academic
styles. Panel (a) plots the average returns of the three small capitalization styles minus the three large
capitalization styles ("small-minus-big"). Panel (b) plots the average of the three value styles minus the
average of the three growth styles ("high-minus-low"), and Panel (c) plots the small-value style minus the
large-growth style. The solid black lines are the actual cumulative log returns, and the red dashed lines are
the returns explained by ratings ( · ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ), where  is estimated in Column (1) of Table 3.
                                                                          (a) Small cap - Large cap
                                   80%


                                   60%


                                   40%
           Cumulative log return




                                   20%


                                    0%

                                   -20%                                                                                 Return

                                                                                                                        Explained by ratings
                                   -40%

                                   -60%
                                       1991   1993   1995   1997   1999      2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011       2013       2015    2017




                                                                            (b) Value - Growth
                                   80%


                                   60%
           Cumulative log return




                                   40%


                                   20%


                                    0%
                                                                                                                        Return

                                                                                                                        Explained by ratings
                                   -20%


                                   -40%
                                       1991   1993   1995   1997   1999      2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011       2013       2015    2017




                                                                     (c) Small value - Big growth
                                   160%

                                   140%

                                   120%
        Cumulative log return




                                   100%

                                   80%

                                   60%

                                   40%
                                                                                                                        Return
                                   20%                                                                                  Explained by ratings

                                    0%

                                   -20%
                                       1991   1993   1995   1997   1999      2001   2003    2005   2007   2009   2011       2013       2015    2017




                                                                                       46
impact due to noise in the measurement of the right-hand-side variable. Second, a corollary
of the hypothesis we explore in this paper is that changes in average style-level ratings should
have a smaller price impact after the rating methodology reform. This is exactly what we
observe in Figure A.5.

Table A.3. Estimating the Price Impact of Ratings () Around June 2002
This robustness check of Table 3 uses alternative sample window lengths. We estimate the rating price
impact coefficient  through a forecasting panel regression of monthly returns of the 3 × 3 styles on lagged
rating changes (ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ), controlling for past style returns. Columns (1) to (3) are estimated
using panel regressions with standard errors clustered by month, while Columns (4) to (6) are estimated
using feasible general least squares (FGLS).

  Dependent variable:                                       Monthly style return Ret,t (%)
                                              Panel regression                                FGLS
                                   6 months     12 months     18 months      6 months    12 months     18 months
                                        (1)        (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
                                                                                                 
  ExpSum(Rating),t-1               3.29           2.89            2.77        2.32           2.49       2.20
                                    (1.20)        (1.16)           (0.90)      (0.86)         (0.71)     (0.60)

  Past Return Controls                  Yes        Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
  Style, Time FE                        Yes        Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes

  Observations                        54           108             162           54           108        162
  Adjusted R2                       84.5%         93.0%           91.7%        63.6%         80.6%      75.2%
   p   < 1%,    p   < 5%,   p   < 10%




A.5      Predicting Rating Changes

    We follow Morningstar's methodology in Section B to estimate fund ratings using fund
returns and style categories data. In other words, we redo all the calculations done by
Morningstar using the data we have.
    Because we do not have access to the exact data set historically used by Morningstar,
we cannot exactly reproduce all fund ratings. However, the computations are good enough
for our purposes because when aggregated at the style-level, we can predict rating changes
fairly accurately. Figure A.6 plots the actual style-level rating change in June 2002 against
our predictions (computed following the method in Section 6.1). As shown in the figure, we
correctly predict that small-value is the most negatively affected style and small-blend is the


                                                             47
Figure A.5. Price Impact Parameter () Estimated from Rolling Five-Year Win-
dows
We estimate panel regressions of style returns on the exponential sum of past rating changes
(ExpSum(Rating),t-1 ) using five-year rolling windows. The windows are centered so that the estimate on
month t uses data from month t - 29 to month t + 30. The dashed lines indicate two standard error bands.
                                                    6

                                                    5

                                                    4
                                                    3
                      Lambda coefficient estimate




                                                    2

                                                    1
                                                    0

                                                    -1
                                                    -2

                                                    -3
                                                    -4
                                                    -5
                                                         1994   1997   2000   2003    2006   2009   2012   2015




Figure A.6. Predicting June 2002 Style Rating Change using End of 2001 Data
We follow Morningstar's rating methodology to calculate what fund ratings would have changed to in De-
cember 2001 under the new methodology. The fund ratings are aggregated up at the style level. We use
the difference between this counterfactual rating and the actual rating as our prediction, and then plot the
actual style-level rating changes against the predicted changes. The style portfolios are labeled and the
dashed diagonal line indicates perfect match.




                                                                                 48
second negatively affected, while large-growth is the most positively affected and large-blend
is the second. The predictions are also reasonably accurate in magnitudes.




                                             49
Appendix B              Morningstar Methodology
   In this section, we explain the construction of Morningstar ratings and the June 2002
methodology change in detail.
   Morningstar ratings are updated every month. There are two steps in Morningstar's
rating calculation:

   1. For each fund with sufficient data, calculate performance measures using past returns,
      with some adjustments based on return volatility and fund loads.

   2. Rank funds by the performance measure and assign ratings.

   In June 2002, Morningstar changed both steps of the methodology. The steps are consec-
utive, though independent. Our analysis shows that the change to the second step (described
in Section B.2) made the biggest difference to the issues of interest in the study.


B.1     Step One: Calculate Performance Measures

   The pre-2002 methodology is described in detail in Blume (1998), and we summarize it
here. First, the cumulative return is computed over three horizons (36, 60, 120 months):

                                 T
                         T
                        Ri   =         (1 + ri,t ) - 1,   T  {36, 60, 120},              (18)
                                 t=1


where the monthly fund returns ri,t are net of management fees but unadjusted for loads.
Then, the cumulative return is adjusted for loads to get a load-adjusted return over the
risk-free rate:
                                       LoadRetT    T       T
                                              i = Ri Li - Rf ,                           (19)

where the load adjustment Li equals to 1 minus the sum of the front- and back-end loads.
 T
Rf is defined as the cumulative risk-free rate return for horizon T using three-month T-bills.
The measure is standardized to:

                                                     LoadRetT
                         MnLoadRetT
                                  i           =               i
                                                                       ,                 (20)
                                                max(Rf , AvgLoadRetT )

                                                     50
where AvgLoadRetT is the average of LoadRateT
                                            i across all funds in the same investment

class (equity, corporate bonds, etc.).
    Second, Morningstar derives the final performance measure by subtracting a risk-adjustment
term:


                             Performancei,t = MnLoadRetT           T
                                                       i,t - MnRiski,t .                                    (21)


    The risk-adjustment term is defined as a normalized average downward return deviation.
Concretely, Morningstar calculates:

                                                  T                     f
                                                          - min(ri,t - rt , 0)
                                    RiskT
                                        i =
                                                  t=1
                                                                                                            (22)
                                                              T

Then, the measure is normalized it by the relevant average risk:

                                                             RiskT
                                          MnRiskT
                                                t =
                                                                 i
                                                                     .                                      (23)
                                                            AvgRiskT

    After June 2002, Morningstar changed the way it adjusts for risk.35 Morningstar sum-
marizes a fund's past performance using the so-called Morningstar risk-adjusted return
(MRAR):
                                                      T                      - 12
                                                                               
                                       1                               f -
                           MRART
                               i ( ) =                    (1 + ri,t - rt )          - 1,                    (24)
                                       T           t=1

              f
where ri,t - rt is the geometric return in excess of the risk-free rate after adjusting for loads,36
and  = 2 is the risk aversion coefficient.
    The formula penalizes funds with higher return volatility. To see this, notice that when
  35
     Morningstar explains its post-June 2002 rating methodology in a publicly available manual,
available at https://corporate.morningstar.com/US/documents/MethodologyDocuments/FactSheets/
MorningstarRatingForFunds_FactSheet.pdf. See also Blume (1998).
  36                                                                                                raw
     For funds with loads, Morningstar uses the load-adjusted return rt , defined as rt = a · (1 + rt   ) - 1. The
                                                1/T
                                          V
                                        adj
adjustment factor a is defined as a = Vunadj  , where Vadj (and Vunadj ) is the load-adjusted (unadjusted)
cumulative fund return over the past T months. For details, see "The Morningstar Rating Methodology,"
June 2006.




                                                          51
 converges to 0, MRART (0) is equal to the annualized geometric mean of excess returns.37
When  is set to be greater than 0, holding the geometric mean return constant, the formula
yields a lower MRAR value for funds whose monthly returns deviate more from their mean.
Specifically, the risk adjustment can be expressed as MRART (0) - MRART (2).


B.2        Step Two: Rank Funds and Assign Ratings

       Given rankings of funds, Morningstar calculates three-year, five-year, and 10-year ratings
for funds with the necessary number of historical returns at those horizons, and then takes
a weighted average of them (rounded to the nearest integer) to form an overall rating--the
rating most commonly reported and used. For funds with more than three years but less
than five years of data, the overall rating is just the three-year rating. For funds with more
than five years but less than 10 years of data, the overall rating assigns 60% and 40% weights
on the five-year and three-year ratings.38 For those with 10 years of data, 50%, 30%, and
20% weights are assigned on the 10-year, five-year, and three-year ratings, respectively.
       The ratings are based on rankings of funds. Before June 2002, Morningstar ranked
the past performance of all equity funds together and assigned them ratings with fixed
proportions: 10%, 22.5%, 35%, 22.5%, and 10%. Since June 2002, Morningstar has ranked
funds within each style ("Morningstar category") and assigned ratings based on the within-
style ranking. Styles include the standard 3 × 3 size-value categories in the Morningstar style
box and also a number of specialized sector categories (e.g., financial, technology).




  37
     Morningstar motivates the MRAR formula using expected utility theory. Specifically, consider an in-
vestor with a power utility and relative risk aversion of  + 1. A standard feature of the power utility is that
when risk aversion decreases to 1 ( = 0), it becomes log utility. Therefore, MRAR(0) simply calculates the
geometric mean return.
  38
     Because the five-year history contains the three-year history, the three most recent years are effectively
given more weight than more distant history.


                                                      52
