                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECTS OF INCENTIVIZING EARLY PRENATAL CARE ON INFANT HEALTH

                                    Kamila Cygan-Rehm
                                    Krzysztof Karbownik

                                      Working Paper 28116
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28116


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




Kamila Cygan-Rehm gratefully acknowledges funding by the Joachim Herz Stiftung. We thank
Silke Anger, Pietro Biroli, Marianne Bitler, Reyn van Ewijk, Christina Felfe, David Figlio,
Libertad González, Nabanita Datta Gupta, Hilary Hoynes, Regina T. Riphahn, Katharina C.
Spieß, and seminar participants at Emory University, the University Erlangen-Nürnberg, the
Ausschuss für Sozialpolitik in Halle, the IRLE Visitors Workshop at the UC Berkeley, the EEA,
and the VfS Virtual Congresses 2020 for helpful comments. We are extremely grateful to Andrzej
Wojtyla and Cezary Wojtyla for providing access to Pol-Prams data. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kamila Cygan-Rehm and Krzysztof Karbownik. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Incentivizing Early Prenatal Care on Infant Health
Kamila Cygan-Rehm and Krzysztof Karbownik
NBER Working Paper No. 28116
November 2020
JEL No. I12,I18,J13

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigated the effects of the timing of early prenatal care on infant health by exploiting a
reform that required expectant mothers to initiate prenatal care during the first ten weeks of
gestation to obtain a one-time monetary transfer paid after childbirth. Applying a difference-in-
differences design to individual-level data on the population of births and fetal deaths, we
identified small but statistically significant positive effects of the policy on neonatal health. We
further provide suggestive evidence that improved maternal health-related knowledge and
behaviors during pregnancy are plausible channels through which the reform might have affected
fetal health.


Kamila Cygan-Rehm
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg
Lange Gasse 20
Nürnberg 90403
Germany
kamila.cygan-rehm@fau.de

Krzysztof Karbownik
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
krzysztof.karbownik@emory.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

Prenatal care is a central component of public policy since it targets both maternal and child
health. Its main goals include improving maternal health knowledge, preventive monitoring of
pregnancy, and early diagnosis of infections and fetal abnormalities, as well as their potential
treatment. Specific regulations regarding the quality, content, and timing of medical care during
pregnancy differ considerably across countries (Bernloehr et al., 2005); however, there seems
to be a consensus that prenatal care should begin as early as possible (Alwan et al., 2016). For
example, the World Health Organization (2016) recommends its initiation at the latest in the
12th week of gestation, arguing that the first trimester of pregnancy lays the foundations for a
child s future development. Specifically, visits during the first trimester have long been
endorsed as a means to prevent problems that may occur later in the pregnancy and to advise
expectant mothers on beneficial behaviors, such as eliminating smoking and alcohol (Alexander
and Korenbrot, 1995; Currie and Grogger, 2002). However, to date, we do not know much
about the causal link between the exact timing of prenatal care and child health and in particular,
about shifting its initiation to earlier in pregnancy.
        Most economists who study the link between prenatal care and birth outcomes draw on
the theoretical framework by Grossman (1972), where prenatal care enters the infant health
production function simultaneously with maternal health endowments, behaviors, and other
inputs. Thus, a key empirical challenge is the potential endogeneity of the demand for prenatal
care, which is likely correlated with unobserved maternal characteristics and other parental
inputs that simultaneously affect infant health. Early empirical research addressed this
endogeneity problem and estimated the production functions using a two-stage approach that
used a set of individual level and local-area instrumental variables (IV), such as goods prices,
health infrastructure, public expenditures, and labor market conditions (e.g., Rosenzweig and
Schultz, 1983 or Grossman and Joyce, 1990). These studies generally find that prenatal care
moderately improves neonatal health. More recent literature has increasingly used quasi-
experimental designs that exploit sources of exogenous variation from changes in Medicaid
policies (e.g., Joyce 1999; Gray, 2001; Currie and Grogger, 2002) or bus strikes (Evans and
Lien, 2005). These studies focus primarily on socioeconomically disadvantaged mothers and
the effects of extended access to prenatal care and its utilization, rather than the timing of its
commencement. Evans and Lien (2005) provide suggestive evidence that a loss of a prenatal
visit early on in the pregnancy is more detrimental than visits lost later on, but their delineation
happens only at the 6th month of pregnancy. Generally, the literature is silent on the possible
gains from shifting prenatal care initiation to much earlier stages in the pregnancy. Furthermore,
                                                  1
there is little causal evidence on the effects of prenatal care or its timing from outside the U.S.,
in particular for countries with universal health care insurance systems that provide all mothers
eligibility for free prenatal care.1
         Recent literature reviews support these notions and conclude that we still know
relatively little about the causal effect of prenatal care on child outcomes, especially the role of
its timing (Almond and Currie, 2011; Currie and Rossin-Slater, 2015; Corman et al., 2019). On
the other hand, prenatal care should be viewed as one of the earliest investments in a child s
development, and growing evidence documents that health status at birth has long-term
consequences for socioeconomic outcomes, such as education (Almond and Currie, 2011;
Figlio et al., 2014), employment and wages (Black et al., 2007), mortality (Bharadwaj et al.,
2017), and other adult outcomes (Almond et al., 2018). The question of whether the timing of
prenatal care causally affects neonatal health becomes particularly important in light of self-
productivity of human capital and dynamic complementarities of skills (Cunha and Heckman,
2007).
         From a policy perspective, parallel to a discussion about the effects of prenatal care is
the question of whether and how governments can encourage mothers to begin care as early as
possible. Two commonly suggested policy tools that could help to promote such behavior are
information and monetary incentives. In the former case, governments or NGOs provide
information to the public in the interest of changing a suboptimal behavior. For example, it has
been shown that such interventions can be successful in educational (Wiswall and Zafar, 2015)
and health (Keskin et al., 2017) decisions. Providing only information or guidance, however,
may not be sufficient since its reception and understanding may vary across different
educational or socioeconomic groups (de Walque, 2010; Lange, 2011), or it simply may not
induce the expected behavioral change (Prina and Royer, 2014).2 Monetary incentives, in turn,
have gained popularity in the developing world as an effective policy tool (Lagarde et al., 2007),
and more recently, they have started being employed in developed countries (Fryer, 2017).3
Their main premise is a contract between a principal (government) and the agent (recipient)
that payment will be made upon fulfilling a priori specified conditions.


1
  There is also some evidence on the effectiveness of prenatal care access in lower income countries e.g., Gajate-
Garrido (2013) for Philippines or Gonzalez and Kumar (2018) for Mexico. In the context of the U.S., Yan (2020)
shows that within-sibling variation in prenatal care utilization is predictive of birth outcomes. However, none of
these studies focus on the timing of prenatal care.
2
  Buckles and Guldi (2017) suggest that information can be effective if it is provided to doctors rather than patients.
3 Related more directly to birth outcomes, there is evidence from variation in taxation and benefits availability that

expectant mothers respond to financial incentives when it comes to scheduling births (e.g., Dickert-Conlin and
Chandra, 1999; Gans and Leigh, 2009; Tamm, 2012; Schulkind and Shapiro, 2014; Lalumia et al., 2015; Brunner
and Kuhn, 2015; Borra et al., 2019).
                                                          2
        In this paper, we evaluate the effects of a novel policy implemented in 2009 in Poland,
which directly speaks to the questions of whether the timing of prenatal care matters and
whether mothers respond to financial incentives. Specifically, the reform required mothers to
obtain a medical certificate of having the first prenatal visit by the 10th week of gestation in
order to be entitled to a one-time cash transfer paid after childbirth. Before the reform, no such
certification was required, making the benefit unconditional. Given the universal coverage by
public health insurance, the reform did not affect the eligibility for or the access to prenatal care
itself. Rather, for many mothers, it effectively shifted the timing of their first prenatal visit
towards earlier in the pregnancy. Polish parliament passed the legislation on 6th December 2008
but the law was only effective for births on or after 1st November 2009. This unique hold-up in
policy implementation allows us to separately identify the effects of providing unconditional
public information versus a joint effect of monetary incentive and public information about the
benefits of early initiation of prenatal care.
        To estimate effects of the reform on infant health, we used data on all births and fetal
deaths in Poland between 2006 and 2011 paired with a difference-in-differences identification
strategy. In that, we compare mothers whose conceptions happened shortly before and shortly
after the policy-relevant cutoffs to mothers who conceived in the same weeks but in nonreform
years. Overall, we observed statistically significant positive effects of the reform on neonatal
outcomes, such as decreased fetal deaths and increased birth weight. On the other hand, we did
not identify economically meaningful effects on gestational age. We show that these results are
not driven by potential selection issues and that the estimates are remarkably robust to
alternative econometric specifications and sample restrictions. Due to the sequential nature of
the legislation, we further document that financial conditionality is essential to generating the
observed gains in neonatal health. Using auxiliary survey data, we also document postreform
improvements in maternal knowledge and behaviors related to drinking and smoking during
pregnancy, which are consistent with the observed gains in neonatal health.
        These findings contribute to the existing literature in multiple ways. First, we show that
the timing of prenatal care, even relatively early in pregnancy, causally affects infant health.
This is different from prior quasi-experimental work that focused on access to prenatal care and
its utilization per se rather than the timing of its initiation. Thus, our results provide a careful
population-level validation of the prevalent medical recommendations (e.g., by the WHO).
Second, we document that health improvements from prenatal care can be achieved by
introducing conditionality to already existing universal family benefits. In that, our policy in
question is fiscally neutral and does not require any additional funding. Moreover, we show

                                                 3
that public information stemming from the passage of the reform is itself insufficient to affect
birth outcomes, and conditionality of the cash transfer is a critical piece of the legislation that
leads to improvements in neonatal health. To the best of our knowledge, this distinction between
public information and conditional cash transfer has not been previously studied in the context
of prenatal care and infant health. Finally, by exploring the potential channels behind the
uncovered benefits of early prenatal care, we found improvements in maternal health-related
knowledge and less hazardous behaviors during the pregnancy as plausible mechanisms.

2. INSTITUTIONS
2.1 THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM AND PRENATAL CARE IN POLAND

According to the Polish Constitution, everyone has a right to have access to health care and
citizens are granted equal access to the publicly funded health care system that is based on a
mandatory insurance scheme. 4 Premiums are deducted from personal income, while those who
do not work, irrespective of the reason, are fully subsidized by the state. Doctors working in the
public health care system are state employees, and their wages are to a large degree centrally
set. Medical education is provided free of charge, although the number of available slots for
each cohort is limited. The majority of doctors work simultaneously in the public system and
run their own private practices, where patients pay out of pocket. In parallel, a limited number
of private health care centers provide services almost exclusively to patients having an add-on
private insurance. Due to universal coverage by the mandatory public health care insurance and
an insufficient supply of doctors, in particular specialists, rationing of care in the public sector
occurs through queuing and gatekeeping. Importantly, from the perspective of access to prenatal
care, during the study period, a referral from a primary care doctor was not needed to visit an
OB/GYN specialist.

        The excess demand in the public sector creates market space for private health care
provisions. The private market has steadily grown from approximately 30 to 35 percent, as a
fraction of total health care expenditures between 2003 and 2010. For comparison, during the
same period, the total health care expenditure more than doubled ( yso , 2012). The private
health care system comprises primarily services paid out-of-pocket, which are theoretically
available to everyone (approximately 70 percent of private health care spending in 2010), and
private insurance add-ons, which refer to employer-sponsored insurance and are mostly limited
to employees of large private firms (approximately 20 percent of private health care spending


4
  Additional details on the Polish health care system are provided in Girouard and Imai (2000) or Nieszporska
(2017).
                                                     4
in 2010). According to survey data from March 2009, less than 10 percent of households had
an add-on private insurance, but approximately 54 percent reported some out-of-pocket
expenditures on health care services during the past three months. The average monthly
spending of 175 PLN (approximately 55 USD at that time) accounted for approximately 6.4
percent of the net household income (Diagnoza Spo eczna, 2009).5 Even though the private
health care market has been growing during our study period, it was still uncommon to utilize
it for more complex medical procedures (e.g., birth or cardiac surgery), and its primary focus
was on consultations with specialists, dental treatments, tests, and specialized diagnostics not
covered or heavily rationed by the public system.

        The standards of health care services are set and monitored by the Ministry of Health.
In particular, prenatal care standards relevant for our study were issued in 2004 (Dziennik
Ustaw, 2004) and stipulated eight routine consultations with a doctor or a midwife. Each of the
visits included monitoring of maternal weight gain, blood pressure, general and gynecological
examination, pregnancy risk assessment, and promotion of a healthy lifestyle. In addition, these
standards required several basic blood morphology tests, five fetal heart function assessments,
three ultrasound screenings, and a test for gestational diabetes. The first visit was recommended
to occur during the first ten weeks of gestation. Generally, care during delivery and the
postpartum period is also of high quality, and almost all births (99.4 percent in 2008) are
delivered in a hospital and attended by skilled healthcare personnel (UNICEF, 2020).
Comparing information on deliveries in publicly funded clinics in 2009 (earlier data are not
available) with the number of births from the Central Statistical Office for the same year implies
that nearly 90 percent of deliveries occur within the public healthcare system (NFZ, 2020) and
the remaining 10 percent in private hospitals. The same data reveal that in 2009, 27 percent of
births in public hospitals were delivered via caesarian section, and the median duration of a
birth-related hospital stay was four days.

        According to UNICEF indicators (UN IGME, 2019), the neonatal mortality rate in
Poland in 2010 was 3.6 per 1000 live births, which was somewhat higher compared to other
developed Western European countries, e.g., U.K. (3.0), Germany (2.3), Spain (2.1) or Sweden
(1.6), but lower than in the U.S. (4.0) or Russia (4.5). Likewise, the same data suggest that the
mortality of children aged 5-14 does not depart from averages observed in other developed
countries. Therefore, Poland should be viewed as a developed, middle-income country with a


5
 The Diagnoza Spo eczna ( Social Diagnosis ) is a large biannual survey of a representative sample of the Polish
population. Recently, the data have been used e.g., by Becker et al. (2020).
                                                       5
high quality of health care, and thus our results could be generalizable to similar countries with
publicly funded health care systems.

2.2 "BABY BONUS         AND THE INTRODUCTION OF A PRENATAL CARE REQUIREMENT

In February 2006, the Polish government introduced a new one-time post-birth monetary
transfer, which aimed at reversing a historically negative fertility trend. The payment amounted
to 1,000 PLN (ca. 318 USD or 262 EUR at the time), which was substantial and constituted
approximately 40% of average gross monthly earnings. This baby bonus was paid upon
application and eligibility was universal, i.e., independent of family income or any other
conditions. For low-income parents, there was an independent means-tested allowance of an
additional 1,000 PLN. In July 2007, the universal baby bonus                           was subject to slight
modifications, which extended the eligibility to adoptive parents and prolonged the application
period from 3 to 12 months after birth or adoption.
         A substantial change was subsequently passed on 6th December 2008 to promote the
early utilization of prenatal care. The new law stipulated that parents of newborns who applied
for the baby bonus on or after 1st November 2009 needed to document that a mother s first
prenatal visit was at the latest during the 10th week of gestation. The law defined a prenatal visit
as a preventive consultation by a primary health care physician, a specialist in
obstetrics/gynecology, or a hospital treatment during pregnancy.
         The reform effectively introduced a financial penalty for not using early prenatal care
and was motivated by an insufficient utilization of health services early in pregnancy, as well
as by poor knowledge about healthy behaviors during pregnancy. For example, in the mid-
2000s only 58.6 percent of women in urban and 46.0 percent in rural areas had their first
prenatal visit during the first trimester of pregnancy (Kornas-Biela, 2012). These early
utilization rates did not seem to improve over timer since in 1997 they likewise were at 60.4
percent and 44.3 percent in urban and rural areas, respectively (Druki Sejmowe, 1998).
Moreover, about one-third of new mothers declared that they smoked cigarettes or drank
alcohol during pregnancy (Kornas-Biela, 2012). For comparison, since the 1990s, the trend in
early prenatal care utilization was increasing in the U.S., and in 2003, almost 85% of births
were to women who received first-trimester care (Corman et al., 2019), and most European
countries had first-trimester rates of above 90% in the early 2000s (EURO-PERISTAT, 2008).6



6
 In 2004, the rates of first trimester prenatal care were as follows: Germany - 93.9%, France - 95%, Italy - 94.5%,
Finland - 95.9%, and Sweden - 91.5%. Among countries of the former Soviet Bloc these numbers were: Czech
Republic - 92.5%, Latvia - 91.8%, Lithuania - 74.5%, and the Slovak Republic - 79.5%.
                                                        6
         The 10th-week requirement was passed unexpectedly as part of a law package that
primarily focused on future maternity leave regulations.7 As an approximation for the public
interest, as well as information about its prenatal care component and changed eligibility
criteria, Figure A1 in the Appendix illustrates the development of the Google search index for
    baby bonus and week of pregnancy in Poland. The two vertical solid lines correspond to
December 2008 and November 2009                    months when the reform was signed into law and
implemented, respectively. The times series depicts no substantial increase in the search volume
for baby bonus after the law passage in December 2008. Conversely, the searches for week
of pregnancy exhibit a sharp uptick right after the announcement of the new regulation.
         Although the 10th-week threshold was linked to standards of prenatal care already issued
by the Ministry of Health in 2004 (Dziennik Ustaw, 2004), it became a controversial regulation
from the beginning and was often criticized as too restrictive. One particular concern was
related to the ability of the publicly financed, free of charge, health care system to cope with an
expected sudden increase in the demand for early prenatal visits. Indeed, aggregate data do not
exhibit any notable changes in the number of general practitioners or gynecologists and
obstetricians under contract to the public health care system in 2008 or 2009 (see Figure A2 in
the Appendix). Thus, opponents argued that the reform could prolong waiting lines within the
public system, which would prevent some mothers from obtaining the required certificate on
time. To alleviate these concerns, the law permitted the qualifying visit to be with a primary
health care provider, thus relieving excess demand for specialist visits within the public system.
Irrespective of the provider, however, capacity constraints in the timely access to the first doctor
visit could have been particularity relevant for low-income mothers who were unable to afford
any out-of-pocket medical expenses. 8 Otherwise, longer waiting periods in the public system
would induce women to initiate the required early prenatal care in a private practice and to
switch to a public health care facility as soon as possible.
         After a few sensational media reports on mothers who lost the baby bonus due to the
reform, on 5th March 2010, parliament passed an amendment to the legislation relaxing the
eligibility criteria for several months. Specifically, between 31st March 2010 and 31st December
2011, a medical certificate of at least one prenatal visit with a medical doctor or a midwife,
irrespective of its timing, was sufficient to be eligible for the baby bonus . Furthermore,

7
  Specifically, the law passed on 6th December 2008 regulated an extension of maternity leave duration of 20 weeks
for singleton births by two additional weeks starting from 1st January 2010 and two further weeks starting from 1 st
January 2012. More specific regulations applied to multiple births. The law also enacted parental leave reserved
for fathers of one week starting from 1st January 2010 and two weeks starting from 1st January 2012.
8
  Approximate cost of a private visit during this time period was 80 to 100 PLN (36 to 45 USD at that time) and
thus less than 10% of the baby bonus .
                                                         7
mothers who lost eligibility between 1st November 2009 and 30th March 2010 due to a lack of
the required medical certificate could reapply for the baby bonus . In January 2012, the tighter
criterion of the first prenatal visit being at the latest in the 10th gestational week was reinstated.
Finally, in 2013, a major reform abolished the universality of the baby bonus by introducing
an income threshold for eligibility, which suppressed the share of eligible families to
approximately 75%. Irrespective of this change, the payment of the baby bonus remained
conditional on the first prenatal visit occurring by the 10th week of gestation at the latest. Our
focus in this paper is on the law change passed on 6th December 2008 and implemented on 1st
November 2009, which was intended to promote early utilization of prenatal care.
         While the policymakers motivated the 10th-week threshold with a late initiation of early
prenatal care, there are only limited data on the timing of the first prenatal care visit in Poland.
Unlike in the U.S. natality files, Polish birth certificates do not include any information on the
timing of prenatal care initiation. Therefore, it is not possible to estimate by how many weeks
expectant mothers potentially sped up their first visit due to the reform. To shed some light on
the question to what extent pregnant women actually complied with the new regulation, we
needed to rely on aggregate statistics on first-trimester initiation rates (i.e., up to 14 completed
weeks of gestation) from other sources. Figure 1 summarizes all available information from the
publicly funded health care system. The data show that before the reform, on average, only 54%
of expectant mothers initiated prenatal care during the first trimester of pregnancy and that this
share was higher in urban than in rural areas. In contrast, in 2012, the average early initiation
rate reached 79%, suggesting an increase of approximately 25 percentage points after the
reform. It is important, however, to keep in mind that these numbers do not cover visits with
private health care providers, which account for approximately 20 percent of prenatal care visits
in the first trimester. 9

         An indirect source of information on prenatal care utilization in the postreform period
in both the public and private sector is the take-up rate of the baby bonus . Figure A3 presents
official governmental statistics on this issue. Panel A reports the annual number of live births
and bonus payments made, and panel B documents the ratio of paid allowances to births in a

9
  There are no data on private visits, but the almost universal coverage rate of government payments after
introduction of the conditionality in 2009 depicted in Figure A3 paired with approximately 80 percent early
prenatal care utilization in the public insurance sector depicted in Figure 1 leads us to believe that about 20 percent
of women used private providers for their first prenatal visit after the reform. As we note in Section 2.1, at the
same time, approximately 10% of households had an add-on private insurance, which fits the evidence that, in
2009, nearly 10% of women gave birth in private clinics. These women would also most likely use private
providers for prenatal care from the beginning of the pregnancy. The remaining 10% needed to pay out of pocked
for each private prenatal visit and most likely switched to the public system as soon as possible, at the latest for
delivery.
                                                          8
given year. Not surprisingly, between 2006 and 2008, the take-up rates of the unconditional
transfer were close to 100 percent. 10 The coverage rate, however, remained remarkably stable
in 2009 and 2010, when the eligibility was tied to a medical certificate of prenatal care. The
decrease from 99.5 percent in 2008 to 99.1 percent in 2009 corresponds to approximately 1700
mothers who might have lost the benefit due to stricter legislation but in 2010, the coverage
reached 99.9 percent again. 11 Based on this evidence, we conclude that the vast majority of
mothers complied with the 10th-week threshold and that the utilization of early prenatal care
reached almost 100 percent during the postreform period.

3. DATA

We used individual-level data from the Polish natality files for the years 2006-2011. The
Central Statistics Office of Poland collects information on all of the approximately 400,000 live
births and fetal deaths that occur in Poland each year from the original birth certificates. Given
that fetal deaths are tracked after 20 weeks of gestation, the birth registry covers pregnancies
that lasted at least 20 weeks.12 The data files contain detailed demographic information on the
mother, such as age at delivery, place of residence, number of previous births, marital status,
education, and source of income. Children s characteristics comprise birth date, birth weight,
gestational length, and gender, but, unlike for example, U.S. birth records, there is no
information on prenatal care utilization in the data. Importantly though, we do observe the exact
day of birth and completed weeks of gestation, so that we can estimate the day of conception
with a weekly accuracy. We first compute the actual number of completed weeks spent by a
child in utero by subtracting two weeks from the gestation length because it is measured from
the first day of a woman s last menses and not from the day of conception, which typically

10
   In 2006, the coverage rate exceeded 100% because upon its introduction, the benefit was paid retrospectively to
parents of children born after 9th November 2005. Likewise, the excess rate in 2011 reflects the retrospective
payments to mothers who initially lost eligibility in the preceding years and after relaxing the criteria, could re-
apply for the benefit.
11
   The sharp decline in utilization observed between 2012 and 2013 reflects an introduction of income eligibility
criteria for baby bonus , thus changing it from universal to means tested.
12
   We were unable to observe pregnancies that terminated earlier either by a spontaneous or induced abortion.
Early spontaneous abortion is associated with congenial defects rather than with socioeconomic factors (e.g. Currie
and Grogger, 2002). In Poland, since 2000, their annual number was estimated at around 41,000, which translates
to about 11% of pregnancies (UNDP, 2007). Induced abortions are generally prohibited in Poland, except in three
cases: if the pregnancy is a result of rape or incest, if the pregnancy threatens a woman's life, or if the fetus is
irreparably damaged. Even then, an abortion needs to occur no later than in the 12th week of gestation, and a
doctor might refuse to perform an abortion if it is not reconcilable with their conscience. Consequently, the number
of registered abortions in Poland is negligible. For example, there were 499 induced abortions in 2008 (BIP, 2017),
compared to 416,437 births (0.1% of births). International organizations estimate the number of illegal abortions
in Poland in a range of 1.5-5% of births (Zi ba, 2006), but there are no reliable numbers on this issue. Nevertheless,
various validity tests that we performed in Section 4.2 do not support the idea that selective abortion might be a
threat to our empirical strategy. Furthermore, Figure A4 shows that official statistics on abortions and miscarriages
do not exhibit any discontinuous patterns in years when the 10th week threshold was binding (i.e., 2009 and 2010).
                                                          9
occurs two weeks later. Then, we convert the period in utero into days (i.e., multiply the weeks
by seven) and subtract it from a child s birth date to calculate the day of conception. 13
         Our outcomes of interest captured different aspects of neonatal health. Specifically, we
considered a child s birth weight, which is a common measure of the underlying health of
newborns and is predictive of long-term health and economic outcomes (Almond and Currie,
2011). To ease the interpretation, we calculated a natural logarithm of birth weight (in grams).
Following previous studies, we also included an indicator for low birth weight (less than 2500
grams) as a separate outcome since it is a leading risk factor for infant mortality, and those
infants who survive are at elevated risk for many longterm health conditions and
developmental disabilities (Corman et al., 2019). Babies with a low birth weight also tend to be
born prematurely, which motivates us to consider gestational age (in weeks) as an additional
measure of health at birth. Furthermore, given that early prenatal care might decrease the risk
of fetal death (Currie and Grogger 2002), we likewise examined this margin of neonatal health.
To address concerns of multiple hypothesis testing and to increase statistical power, we also
estimated a summary index of neonatal health, which was constructed using the first component
of a principal components analysis (PCA) based on the following variables: an indicator for
fetal death, birth weight in grams, and gestational age in weeks. We document its details in
Table A1 in the Appendix.14
         We restricted our sample to singleton births (97.5%) as multiple births are born at lower
birth weight for reasons unrelated to prenatal care (e.g., Figlio et al., 2014).15 Furthermore, we
focused on mothers between 15 and 50 years old at birth (99.99%) and omitted a small group
(0.14%) of foreign residents. Finally, given the reform s timing, we zoomed in on children
conceived at most up to four weeks before and up to four weeks after 6th December 2008 or 8th
February 2009, and exactly the same weeks in the surrounding years 2005/6                      2009/10.
         Table 1 shows the summary statistics for our primary estimation samples, which we
explain in further detail in Section 4. For comparison, column 1 shows the means for all live
and stillbirths in Poland between 2006 and 2011. Panel A presents maternal background
characteristics, and in the full sample, they are on average approximately 27 years old at the
time of conception and for approximately 50 percent of them, it is the first birth. The vast

13
   Consequently, we assume that a delivery occurred exactly on the next day following the last day of the reported
week of gestation, but our results are substantively unchanged if we alternatively assume a mid-week delivery in
the following gestation week (i.e., if we add three days to the period in utero measured in days). We present these
results in Section 7.
14
   We obtained nearly identical results when we alternatively constructed a summary health index by aggregating
the z-scores of the three outcomes as e.g., Kling et al. (2007).
15
   Our results were nearly identical when we expanded the sample to include multiple births, and the policy itself
did not address mothers of singletons and multiple births differently.
                                                        10
majority, 80 percent, of them are married, and almost 70 percent participate in the labor force.
At the same time, over a quarter of the mothers in this data set have not finished high school,
and more than 40 percent resided in rural areas. Importantly, these descriptive statistics are very
comparable across columns in Table 1, suggesting that a subset of mothers that we are using in
our main analysis is broadly representative of the population of all births. In panel B, we present
our outcomes of interest. Children in our dataset weighed on average 3377 grams at the time of
birth, and the incidence of births below 2500 grams was 4.8 percent. This is comparable to other
developed settings, e.g., in Florida mean birth weight for singletons born between 1992 and
2002 was 3342 grams (Figlio et al., 2014). We also observed a fetal death rate of 0.4 percent
out of 2,327,942 births recorded between 2006 and 2011. We come back to differences in
outcomes across various columns in Table 1 below when we describe our empirical strategy.

4.   METHODS

4.1 EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

We used the law change passed on 6th December 2008 in Poland as a source of exogenous
variation in the timing of the first prenatal care visit and estimated its effects on neonatal health.
Specifically, we exploited the fact that depending on the date of conception, the reforms quasi-
randomly assigned women to the new requirement of the first prenatal visit during the first ten
weeks of gestation. Figure 2 summarizes the legislative timeline and treatment status based on
the date of conception.
        The hold-up in implementation of the reform provides us with two thresholds along the
conception date that we examined using a difference-in-differences (DD) design. The first
threshold, 6th of December 2008, refers to the passage of the law. The latter cutoff, 8th of
February 2009, is determined by the day of the law s implementation (i.e., 1st November 2009),
which applied to births, and the common assumption for establishing the expected birth date is
that typically a fetus spends 38 weeks in the uterus if we count from the day of conception. 16
Thus, for women who conceived a child on 8th February 2009, a physician typically calculates
an expected due date on 1st November 2009, when the new law became binding. We used the
date of conception instead of the birthdate to determine the cutoff because the actual day of
birth might be endogenous if, for example, the reform affected the duration of pregnancy. The
first cutoff induced exogenous variation in public information about the importance of early


16
   Note that common medical standards count the duration of a pregnancy from the first day of a woman s last
menstrual cycle, which typically gives a 40-week gestational period. Nevertheless, a conception is possible only
after ovulation, which usually occurs two weeks later, thereby giving the fetus typically only 38 weeks in the
womb.
                                                      11
prenatal care, while the second was related to real monetary losses in the case of noncompliance
with the policy. Having established the two cutoffs, we used a child s date of conception
inferred from the data to determine whether and how its mother was affected by the reform. 17
         Consequently, we considered three groups of mothers: those who conceived until 6th
December 2008; those who conceived between 6th December 2008 and 7th February 2009; and
finally, those who conceived on 8th February 2009 or later. The first group of mothers was not
affected by any part of the reform. The second group most likely knew that change in legislation
was passed, as evidenced by the Google trends depicted in Figure A1; however, they also
anticipated that most likely they would not be financially affected as their expected due dates
were still before 1st November 2009. Nevertheless, these mothers might have positively reacted
to the information about the benefits of early prenatal care steaming from the law passage spread
by the media and the government. This creates a unique treatment group that potentially
experienced a public information shock but remained unaffected by the conditionality of the
cash transfer. Since the actual length of pregnancy is uncertain (e.g., Jukic et al., 2013), mothers
with calculated due dates approaching 1st November 2009 might have also changed their
behavior regarding prenatal care to avoid the risk of losing the baby bonus . Therefore, we
expect that compliance with the new law among this group was increasing along the conception
date, where mothers who conceived a few weeks after 6th December 2008 comply solely due to
the information channel, while those who conceived a few weeks before 8th February 2009 also
complied to avoid financial losses. Finally, the third group of women comprises those with
expected due dates on or after 1st November 2009 who knew that they would need to provide
an appropriate prenatal care certificate to obtain the monetary transfer from the government
after birth.
         In our empirical analysis, we estimated two sets of regressions intended to uncover
either the joint effect of information and cash transfer or just the impact of public information.
In the first case, we used both cutoffs and a donut-hole sample that compared health outcomes
of children conceived shortly (i.e., up to four weeks) before 6th December 2008 and shortly (i.e.,
up to four weeks) after 8th February 2009 relative to children conceived in the same weeks in
surrounding years. In the second instance, using a difference-in-discontinuities setting, we
compared the outcomes of children conceived up to four weeks before and after 6th December
2008 relative to children conceived in the same weeks in surrounding years.18


17
   As we describe in Section 3, we infer a child s date of conception from its exact day of birth and the actual
gestational age at birth.
18
   Using a similar difference-in-discontinuities setting, one could also consider exploring the 8 th February 2009
cutoff to isolate the effect of the monetary transfer conditional on information. Since the actual length of pregnancy
                                                         12
         Irrespective of the exact setting, we estimated the following equation:19

                                                                                                             (1)

where  is an outcome of a child  conceived on a given day . Our explanatory variable of
interest is the dummy variable  , which is equal to one if a child was conceived on or
after the particular cutoff day during the reform winter of 2008/9 (i.e., up to four weeks after
6th December 2008 or 8th February 2009). Our regressions further include the following fixed
effects: cohort for each winter between 2005/06 and 2009/10 (  ), day of year taking values
from one to 365 for non-leap years ( ), and day of week taking seven values ( ). The
cohort fixed effects ( ) adjusted for any cohort-specific effects being common to children
conceived during a particular winter, such as the business cycle. The day of year ( ) and day
of week ( ) fixed effects captured any unobserved effects associated with conceptions
occurring during holidays, on weekends, or any specific day within a year more generally. For
example, they account for the fact that our estimation samples might comprise holidays (e.g.,
Christmas or New Year s Eve) and that both our policy cutoffs were weekend days. The day of
year fixed effects also flexibly isolate any seasonality effects that are common across cohorts.
Therefore, we did not need a separate dummy variable to control for unobserved differences
between children conceived in the weeks before versus after a particular cutoff. Our
econometric specification, which closely follows Gans and Leigh (2009) and Borra et al.
(2019), also includes an interaction term between the day of week dummies and cohort. We
further included a set of control variables,  , accounting for various sociodemographic
characteristics, such as maternal age at conception (linear and squared), dummies for her marital
status, education, source of income, province of residence, rural areas, number of previous
births, and child s gender. 20 Finally,  is an error term, and we applied day-level clustered
standard errors that adjust for correlation among children conceived on any particular day.

is uncertain, however, women who conceived a few weeks before 8 th February 2009 most likely complied with the
new regulation not only because of the law s announcement but also to avoid financial losses in case their birth
should occur later than expected. Thus, they can be considered as likely treated by both the information and
conditionality of the monetary transfer. For this reason, we view our donut-hole difference-in-differences as less
problematic from interpretation standpoint given that it contrasts individuals who were not affected by the reform
at all with those who were affected by both of its elements.
19
   A similar strategy has been used, e.g., by Lalive and Zweimüller (2009), Dustmann and Schönberg (2012),
Cygan-Rehm (2016), and Huebener et al. (2019), to evaluate the impacts of parental leave reforms. Given that we
use daily-level data, our model specification is particularly close to Borra et al. (2019), who examined the health
consequences of speeding up births for non-medical reasons.
20
   The reform we are studying in this paper coincided with the global financial crisis but this is unlikely to confound
our treatment effects since we focus on births around a relatively narrow time bandwidth surrounding the policy
cutoffs. Nevertheless, in Section 7, we show that our primary results remained unchanged if we additionally
controlled for local unemployment rates, which serve as a proxy for the potential impact of the recession.
Furthermore, our period of analysis also covers some changes in maternity leave duration, but none of these
                                                          13
4.2 IDENTIFICATION

        The key identifying assumption is that net of any potential seasonal effects captured by
the fixed effects outlined above, there are no other factors beyond the policy change that
differentially affected children conceived before and after the policy-related cutoffs. This
implies that the treatments by public information and conditional cash transfer were as good
as randomly assigned by the reform and solely conditional on the conception date. We
performed various validity checks to assess the plausibility of this assumption.
        First, we examined whether children born up to four weeks before and after the policy-
related cutoffs differed in their sociodemographic backgrounds. Table 1 reports summary
statistics and formally tests this balancing assumption. Columns 2 and 3 present sample means
for children born up to four weeks before and up to four weeks after the 6 th December 2008
cutoff. Panel A reveals that mothers birthing right before and right after the day when legislation
was voted in are comparable in their background characteristics. Columns 5 and 6 show the
corresponding sample means for the policy implementation threshold on 8th February 2009, and
here, likewise, we did not observe any striking differences between the two groups of mothers.
In columns 4 and 7, we formally tested whether the covariates were balanced across the cutoffs
by estimating difference-in-differences regressions similar to equation 1 but replacing the
outcome variable with a particular maternal characteristic and excluding the vector of control
variables  . For each regression, we report the point estimates on the reform indicator and the
corresponding p-values.21 Column 9 presents an analogous analysis for our donut-hole
difference-in-differences sample that excludes the period between 6th December and 8th
February in conception-years 2005/6 to 2009/10 from the analysis.
        Results in panel A reveal that, irrespective of the exact cutoff or samples, the treatment
and control groups were balanced on almost all covariates. A single statistically significant
difference was that mothers conceiving after 6th December 2008 were slightly less likely to be
high school graduates; however, this imbalance is small in magnitude and becomes insignificant
if we adjust the p-values for multiple hypothesis testing. Additionally, at the bottom of panel
A, we report F-statistics from three F-tests where in each estimation sample, we regressed the



reforms coincided with the cutoffs for the 10th week threshold along the conception date. Nonetheless, given the
recent evidence that a longer leave may reduce maternal stress during pregnancy (Rossin-Slater, 2018), in a
robustness test in Section 7, we directly controlled for this potential confounder, and our results remained
unchanged. We were able to include these controls only because there is variation in maternity leave provisions
across birth orders. Otherwise, any changes in maternity leave duration would be collinear with cohort fixed
effects.
21
   Columns 4, 7, and 9 present regression adjusted differences and are thus numerically different from the raw
differences that can be computed based on their respective treatment-control dyads in the preceding columns.
                                                      14
treatment indicator on a full set of background characteristics and tested their joint significance.
These F-statistics likewise point to the conclusion that maternal characteristics are not
systematically related to the reform indicator. The descriptive statistics for neonatal outcomes
presented in panel B preview the results of our main analysis where we mostly compare children
who did not receive any treatment (those conceived before 6th December 2008) with those who
were treated by both public information and conditionality of the benefit (those conceived after
8th February 2009). The difference-in-differences estimates in column 9 suggest that both policy
components together generated statistically significant gains in infant health.
        The balancing tests presented in Table 1 argue against the concern that the reform
spawned differential sorting of mothers across thresholds. For example, the law announcement
on 6th December 2008 could have sped up the decision to have a child if some prospective
mothers wanted to avoid the stricter eligibility rules for the baby bonus by bearing a child
before the law went into effect. If true, then we would also expect a sudden increase in the
number of conceptions right after the announcement date. Such immediate effects are unlikely
as a healthy, fertile couple typically needs three to six months to conceive a child when actively
trying (e.g., González, 2013), whereas the time window to avoid the stricter eligibility rules was
limited to two months (between 6th December 2008 and 8th February 2009). Nevertheless, to
mitigate this concern, we tested for discontinuous changes in the number of pregnancies
initiated around both 6th December 2008 and 8th February 2009 by estimating the following
equation:

                     +  +                                                               (2)

which mimics specification from equation (1) but replaces the dependent variable with a (log)
number of conceptions occurring on day  in a given winter (cohort)  . Thus, to estimate this
equation, we aggregated individual-level data to daily level observations using the inferred day
of conception. In this case,   is an indicator equal to one for conceptions taking place
on or after 6th December 2008 (or 8th February 2009), and  captures any excess daily
conceptions occurring shortly after compared to shortly before these dates net of any date-
specific conception patterns differenced out by comparison with surrounding years. If the
reform announcement accelerated conceptions, we expect  to be positive and statistically
significant.

        Panels A and B in Table 2 present the results of this analysis for four different samples
where the time span around the cutoff varies between one and four weeks. Irrespective of the
exact sample chosen, the estimates corresponding to 6th December 2008 cutoff imply between
                                                15
3 and 6 additional conceptions per day, on average, in days following the reform announcement.
This effect is not only statistically insignificant but also small in magnitude given the sample
means of over 1000 conceptions per day. This is confirmed by the specifications using the log
number of conceptions as an outcome, which imply effect sizes between 0.4 and 1.4 percent.
These coefficients are insignificant and much smaller in magnitude than the shifts in births due
to financial incentives reported by Borra et al. (2019) who found effect sizes in the range of 11
to 38 percent. Panel B shows that there are also no statistically significant or sizable changes in
the number of conceptions after 8th February 2009.22

         Another potential composition effect could emerge if mothers with due dates around 1st
November 2009 sped up a delivery (e.g., by labor induction or caesarian section) to apply for
the baby bonus without the additional requirement mandated by the new law. We test ed for
such endogenous shifting of births by estimating the following equation:

                         +  +                                                                           (3)

which is very similar to equation (2), but the dependent variable here is a (log) number of births
occurring on day t in a given winter (cohort) c. Thus, for estimations, we aggregated the data to
daily level observations using the day of birth. In this case,                            is an indicator equal to
one for births taking place on or after 1st November 2009, and thus  captures any changes in
the number of deliveries occurring right after compared to right before the reform s
implementation day and net of any date-specific birth patterns differenced out by comparison
with surrounding years. If the reform s implementation endogenously sped up deliveries, we
would expect  to be negative and statistically significant.
         Panel C in Table 2 presents the regression results for four bandwidths around the 1st
November 2009 cutoff. If anything, the point estimates imply an increased mass of deliveries
right after the new law became effective, which contradicts the prediction outlined above.
Although all estimates are positive, they are quantitatively small and never statistically
significant. In fact, using 95 percent confidence intervals, we can rule out negative effect sizes




22
   Note that any increases in the number of conceptions could be not only due to endogenous delays but also due
to early prenatal care improving the survivability of fetuses beyond the 20th week of gestation, which is the relevant
threshold for filing a birth certificate (i.e., being recorded in the data). Fewer early deaths of the marginal fetuses
would bias our main results in Section 5 downwards because of the negative compositional effect on health
outcomes.
                                                          16
of more than -1.7 percent.23 Using the natural log of the number of births as a dependent variable
leads to similar conclusions.
        Our difference-in-differences approach also requires that, absent the policy change,
conceptions and births around the cutoffs would have followed similar seasonality patterns as
their counterparts for the nonreform years. Only under this assumption, we can net out
seasonality using double differencing. We present graphical evidence in favor of this
assumption in Figure A5, which shows that the number of conceptions and births in reform
years tracks very closely with those in the surrounding years. Although there are clear
seasonality patterns for all years     particularly related to Christmas holidays and New Year s
Day    we did not observe any discontinuities across years around our cutoffs of interest.
        Generally, these various validity checks mitigated our concerns that the reform s
passage and its final implementation might have led to endogenous sorting across the thresholds
or scheduling births before the new law became effective. Furthermore, when analyzing our
primary outcomes, we show that the results are invariant to including a rich set of control
variables, which additionally supports a quasi-experimental design.

5. EFFECTS OF THE REFORM ON NEONATAL HEALTH
5.1 MAIN RESULTS

We begin with estimating the total effect of the policy change, i.e., of public information and
conditionality of the financial benefit jointly, by using a donut-hole difference-in-differences
design. In that, we compared the health outcomes of children conceived up to four weeks before
6th December 2008 and up to four weeks after 8th February 2009 relative to children conceived
in the same weeks in surrounding years. Each panel in Table 3 shows the results for one of the
following outcomes: summary health index at birth (standardized), probability of fetal death,
the log of birth weight, probability of low birth weight, and gestational age in weeks. The
outcomes in panels B, C, and D are multiplied by 100 to increase visibility and enhance
interpretation. In each case, we present the point estimate on the reform indicator across
different sample bandwidths from one to four weeks around the relevant cutoffs, as well as with
and without individual-level controls.

        We observed that the reform significantly increased the summary health index at birth
by 2.0 to 3.5 percent of a standard deviation. Although the effect size varied somewhat across
the different bandwidths, the point estimates were statistically indistinguishable from each other

23
  We are less concerned about the upper bound on these estimates since positive effects may imply that an
announcement of the reform might have prolonged the average duration of the pregnancy, which we view as a
positive outcome. We investigated this issue in more detail in Section 5.1.
                                                   17
as their 95 percent confidence intervals largely overlap. For the other outcomes, the estimates
imply nontrivial reductions in the probability of fetal death of up to almost 40 percent relative
to the sample mean. We also identified significant gains in birth weight of approximately 0.3
to 0.8 percent (or 9 to 21 grams) and corresponding reductions in the probability of low birth
weight from 7 to 18 percent relative to the sample mean. On the other hand, we did not find any
meaningful effects on gestational age, and based on 95 percent confidence intervals, we ruled
out positive effects larger than 0.08 weeks (or 0.2 percent) and negative effects larger than 0.01
weeks (or 0.04 percent).24 Thus, we conclude that the reform led to statistically significant
improvements in neonatal health, which were, however, not solely attributable to extended
gestational age. The results for all outcomes are invariant to including a rich set of control
variables, which supports a quasi-experimental design.

         The hold-up in the implementation of the reform allowed us to estimate the effect of the
information channel separately from the conditionality of the cash transfer. In that, we explored
the policy signing cutoff and compared individuals with and without information on the
government s intentions. The results are documented in Table 4, which mimics the structure of
Table 3. Here, we did not find robust evidence for positive effects of the public information
about the benefits of early prenatal care steaming immediately from the law passage and the
subsequent media coverage. In fact, in the narrower samples, some of the estimates for the
effects on health index, birth weight, or gestational age were wrong-signed but were generally
small and virtually never statistically significant. For example, the statistically significant at 10
percent level (p-value of 0.098) estimate for gestational age in column 2 implies a trivial effect
size of -0.1 percent or about one-quarter of a day. Akin to prior results, control variables do not
change the results. When we focused on the +/- 4 weeks sample, all coefficients were signed in
the expected direction, some were statistically significant, and those tended to converge to the
estimates reported in Table 3. This makes sense given how the reform was implemented and
the fact that compliance with the new legislation must have been increasing along the
conception date. In that, compared to the narrower sample, when we used wider bandwidths,
we potentially had more mothers who started complying with the new requirement to avoid
financial penalties (Figure 2). Overall, we conclude that the direct benefits of the information




24
  We further investigated effects on log gestational age and an indicator for premature birth, but these results are
qualitatively similar to what we present in Table 3 for weeks of gestation. At the same time, we observed reductions
in post-term deliveries, but these estimates are only statistically significant in the one- and two-week bandwidth
samples.
                                                        18
from the law announcement and its subsequent media coverage are minuscule compared to
having both information and conditionality of the transfer.

5.2 DISCUSSION OF THE MAGNITUDES

        All coefficients presented above are reduced-form and correspond to intention-to-treat
(ITT) effects of incentivizing prenatal care during the first ten weeks of gestation. To assess the
magnitude of our estimates, we first compared them to reduced-form impacts of other programs
affecting neonatal health from related literature. For instance, Rossin-Slater (2013) found that
access to the Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program in a neighborhood increased
average birth weight by 0.8 percent, while Hoynes et al. (2015) showed that an expansion in
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) payments reduced the incidence of low birth weight by up
to 5.2 percent.25 Almond et al. (2011) further documented that the introduction of Food Stamps
led to about a 1% decrease in the fraction of births below 2,500 grams. Our estimates are also
in line with Borra et al. (2019), who found that abolishing the Spanish baby bonus
significantly increased the number of early inductions of births, which led to birth weight
reductions of up to 15 grams. Thus, we view our reduced-form estimates as not only plausible
but also comparable in magnitude to what was found in previous studies on other determinants
of neonatal health.

        To compare our results with earlier research on prenatal care, which typically focused
on the availability of first-trimester care in the U.S., we rescaled our reduced-form effects by
the change in first-trimester rates, which is discussed in Section 2. Recall that the Polish reform
likely induced at least a 25-percentage-point increase in the use of first-trimester care. Thus,
scaling up our reduced-form estimates by factor 0.4 yields back-of-the-envelope estimates of
the treatment on the treated (TOT) effects of increasing the utilization of early prenatal care by
ten percentage points.

        Consequently, our results imply that a 10-percentage-point increase in early prenatal
care leads to birth weight gains of up to 0.32 percent and reductions in the probability of birth
weight below 2,500 grams by up to 0.37 percentage points or by 7.3 percent relative to the
sample mean. The latter estimate appears large, but it is not out of the realm of possibility. It
also makes sense if earlier interventions matter more than later ones (Cunha and Heckman,
2007). For example, using Medicaid expansions that increased eligibility for free prenatal care,
Currie and Gruber (1996) observed reductions in the incidence of low birth weight of up to 5.3

25
  Using the same reform, however, Dench and Joyce (2020) documented that EITC might not be causally linked
to neonatal health.
                                                   19
percent for a 10-percentage-point increase in Medicaid take-up due to extensions targeting at
low-income groups.26 Gray (2001) demonstrated a slightly larger impact using the variation in
Medicaid reimbursement rates for prenatal services paid to the physicians, and his estimates
implied that a 10-percentage-point increase in prenatal care reduces the relative risk of low birth
weight by 6.6 percent. This is very close to our largest estimate, and similar to our results, he
did not identify any significant effects on gestational age.

         While most previous studies have focused on birth weight effects for infants born alive,
we also found significant effects on fetal deaths, which are often associated with maternal
complications of pregnancy, such as problems with amniotic fluid levels or blood disorders. If
these conditions are detected early enough, the death of the fetus can be often prevented by
proper treatment during pregnancy or emergency delivery (Currie and Grogger 2002). Our
results imply that a 10-percentage-point increase in early prenatal care utilization reduces the
relative risk of fetal death by 10 to 15 percent. For comparison, Currie and Grogger (2002)
observed substantially larger effects using various administrative measures that increase
eligibility for Medicaid and reduce nonprice barriers to prenatal care utilization in the U.S.
Their results suggested a 40-percent reduction in fetal deaths among black mothers if prenatal
care increased by 10 percentage points. The results for whites were less conclusive, but some
of the effects are even higher in magnitude.

         Taking a longer-term perspective, using the estimates from Figlio et al. (2014) and
Black et al. (2005), our results for birth weight would suggest up to 0.16 percent of a standard
deviation improvement in cognitive development at school or a 0.32 percent increase in adult
income. Compared to other human capital inputs, such as being assigned to a high value-added
teacher (Chetty et al., 2014), we view these potential gains from early prenatal care as modest.
Moreover, given that our scaling exercise does not consider any potential speedups of the first
visit within the first trimester (e.g., from 12th to 10th week of gestation), we likely underestimate
the actual shift in the timing of prenatal care initiation due to the reform. Thus, our TOT
estimates should be treated as an upper bound on the true effect of speeding up the first prenatal
visit. Nevertheless, the small to moderate gains in neonatal health are certainly policy-relevant
given the fiscal neutrality of the Polish reform.




26
   Overall, for targeted changes applied to low-income groups, they identified a 2.6 percent reduction in the
incidence of low birth weight if eligibility for Medicaid increased by 10 percentage points. Since the take-up was
not full but rather about 49 percent, however, this effectively implies a 5.3 percent decrease in the incidence of
low birth weight.
                                                       20
       Our results suggest that financial conditionality baked into the reform was essential to
generating the observed gains in neonatal health. Before the reform, however, the state was
paying the unconditional benefits, and thus, this monetary dimension allowed us to compute
willingness to pay for prenatal health. Previous research on tax incentives and birth timing
suggests that parental private willingness to pay is in the range of 1.2 to 3.1 USD per gram of
birth weight (Schulkind and Shapiro, 2014), and these findings have been confirmed using an
experimental design (Clarke et al., 2017). Our birth weight estimates suggest gains of between
9 and 21 grams due to the reform, which should be further scaled by a factor of four since we
expect that only 1 in 4 mothers shifted their prenatal care earlier as explained above, while the
transfer had a value 1,000 PLN (or 318 USD at the time). Based on these numbers, an implied
willingness to pay for birth weight ranged from 3.8 to 8.8 USD per gram. These estimates are
between previous estimates for private willingness to pay and public willingness to pay
stemming from programs such as WIC or Food stamps (Clarke et al., 2017). Overall, we view
our estimates from an incentivized prenatal health intervention in Poland as remarkably close
to those in prior literature where either private or public monetary valuation of prenatal health
was assessed.

6. HETEROGENEITY

Prior research suggests substantial heterogeneity in the potential gains from prenatal care (e.g.,
Currie and Grogger, 2002; Conway and Deb, 2005; Abrevaya and Dahl, 2008; Sonchak, 2015)
so that most effects are concentrated among socioeconomically disadvantaged groups (e.g.,
blacks, unmarried teen mothers, or school dropouts). Although our policy in question was
universal rather than targeted, for lower-income mothers, the baby bonus constituted a
relatively larger boost to their incomes compared to higher-income mothers. Thus, we might
expect a bigger change in the utilization of early prenatal care by the 10th-week threshold among
socioeconomically disadvantaged groups, which should be reflected by disproportionately
better birth outcomes.

       We present heterogeneity results by maternal education, employment, and place of
residence in Table A2 in the Appendix. Additionally, we also stratify by maternal age and birth
order, hypothesizing that first-time and teen mothers might benefit relatively more from early
prenatal care due to its focus on promoting knowledge about the course of pregnancy and
healthy prenatal behaviors. The analysis in Table A2 is based on our largest donut-hole
estimation sample that yielded the most conservative estimates in Table 3. In each panel, we
extended the primary specification from equation 1 with an interaction term between the reform
                                               21
indicator and a maternal characteristic of interest. We executed the analysis in the way where
arguably the most disadvantaged group represents a reference category, and the interaction
terms yielded the excess losses or gains relative to this reference group. For comparison, in
panel A, we repeat our primary analyses for the entire sample from Table 3.

       In panel B, we observed some evidence for an educational gradient in the reform s
effects on neonatal health. Specifically, the reduced probability of fetal deaths is primarily
driven by mothers with less than a high school education. We observed similar patterns for the
remaining outcomes, but the differences were less pronounced and were usually statistically
insignificant. The estimates by maternal employment (Panel C) and for rural and urban areas
(Panel D) did not yield any notable differences across these groups, but we did find some
significant heterogeneity by maternal age at conception (Panel E). Specifically, teenage mothers
contributed to the decrease in the probability of a low birth weight, but these benefits vanished
for children of mothers who gave birth later in life. Finally, we did not observe any significant
differences between first-born and higher-order children (Panel F). If anything, the point
estimates suggest that higher-order births experience slightly improved birth outcomes over
first-borns. Given that higher-order children generally receive relatively less prenatal care (e.g.,
Brenøe and Molitor, 2018), it could be that the reform incentivized particularly non-first-time
mothers to use early prenatal care, but we cannot verify this conjecture with the available data.
       Earlier research by Abrevaya and Dahl (2008) suggests that the largest beneficial effects
of prenatal care might be concentrated among fetuses most at risk for adverse birth outcomes.
Therefore, we also considered the potential heterogeneity in the treatment effects along the
distribution of (log) birth weight and our summary health index using unconditional quantile
regressions, summarized in Figure A6. We obtained strikingly large point estimates at the very
bottom of the birth weight distribution. Beyond that, however, the point estimates were
generally indistinguishable from the average effects and remained relatively constant and
mostly statistically significant over the entire distribution. We observed a nearly identical
pattern when looking at the distribution of the summary health index.
       Taken together, our heterogeneity analysis indicates slightly larger effects among
children from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds and those at high risk for adverse
birth outcomes. However, the premiums for those more vulnerable children appear limited, and
our estimates are generally underpowered to detect statistically significant differences across
most groups and outcomes. Thus, these results should be treated with caution.



                                                22
7. ROBUSTNESS

So far, we documented that our main results should not be confounded by changes in the
composition of births or conceptions around the policy-relevant cutoffs and that they are robust
to including a rich set of background characteristics. To further strengthen the causal
interpretation of our estimates, Table 5 provides additional robustness checks. Similar to the
heterogeneity analysis, we focused on the +/- 4 weeks bandwidth since these were the most
conservative estimates in Table 3; however, the results for the other bandwidths were likewise
stable and, akin to the main results, larger in magnitude. For comparison in panel A of Table 5,
we repeated our main estimates from Table 3. We also added, in column 6, an indicator for a
child s date of birth being an odd number (even number is the reference category) as a placebo
outcome, which we discuss in more detail below.
         Regarding potential confounding factors, we are not aware of any other
contemporaneous policy changes that could have differentially affected neonatal or maternal
health for conceptions up to four weeks before 6th December 2008 and up to four weeks after
8th February 2009. Nonetheless, the timing of the latter cutoff coincides with the introduction
of the baby bonus three years earlier on 9th February 2006. Since the transfer was always paid
postpartum it should not have affected birth outcomes of children included in our pre-policy
control group. To mitigate any remaining concerns about a potentially confounding impact of
this earlier reform, in panel B, we excluded children conceived up to four weeks before 6th
December 2005 and up to four weeks after 8th February 2006 (i.e., 2005/2006 birth cohort).27
The results were very similar to our preferred specification.
         Following Borra et al. (2019), in the main analysis, we included both pre- and post-
reform cohorts as a control group to difference out seasonality effects. This approach increases
precision (due to a larger sample) and is not problematic so long as the seasonality patterns
remain the same across cohorts, which we have documented in Figure A5. Nevertheless, in
panel C, we present our results after excluding the post-reform cohort 2009/2010 to mitigate
the concern that seasonality could have changed during the post-reform period.28 Again, our
results remained substantively unchanged.
         In the main specification, we used the policy announcement                  6th December 2008          as
a delineation determining the treatment through the public information channel because

27
   We also checked that introduction of the baby bonus did not lead to additional conceptions by con ducting an
analysis akin to what we presented in Table 2 but for a 9th February 2006 cutoff. None of the estimates were
statistically significant nor were they consistently signed.
28
   This exercise further alleviates a concern that our estimates are confounded by any anticipatory effect of the
policy relaxation passed on 5th March 2010 as it is theoretically possible that women who conceived a child shortly
after 8th February 2010 could have already suspected that the 10th week requirement might be repealed soon.
                                                        23
mothers who conceived on or after this cutoff date knew about the new regulation from the very
beginning of the pregnancy. However, mothers who were below the 10th week of gestation on
6th December 2008 found out about the policy sometime during the first ten weeks, and
theoretically, they could have changed their behavior due to this information. If this is the case,
our control group includes some potentially treated women. To mitigate this concern, in panel
D, we backdate this cutoff by 10 weeks (to 27th September 2008) so that no women in the
control group could have initiated their prenatal care according to the new requirement in
response to the policy announcement. Our conclusions remained unchanged, and the estimates
were very similar to those from our preferred specification.
           In Panel E, we applied a different assumption for computing the exact conception date.
As explained in Section 3, we can calculate the date of conception with a weekly accuracy. For
the main analysis, we assumed that each pregnancy ends on the next day following the
completed gestational age in weeks, but this implies a certain degree of measurement error in
our treatment variable. Thus, in panel E, we alternatively added three days to each pregnancy
duration, thereby assuming a mid-week delivery in the last (noncompleted) gestational week.
These estimates, except for the probability of fetal death, remained very similar to our main
results.
           We also investigated whether our estimates were sensitive to the inclusion of flexible
time trends in conception date, which are meant to capture any trends in neonatal health over
time, e.g., due to advances in the quality of health care or the accuracy of pregnancy tests. In
panel F, we present estimates, including quadratic terms. This alternative specification yields
very similar findings, and if anything, the estimates become more precise. While not shown in
the table, we obtained very similar results when we only included a linear trend in conception
date or added higher-order polynomials (up to fourth-order).
           As mentioned in Section 2, the 10th-week threshold for the first prenatal visit was passed
in a bundle of laws that primarily regulated future maternity leave provisions, which became
effective in January 2012. While these regulations happened beyond the sample period, our
analysis covers some earlier changes in maternity leave. It is highly unlikely, however, that
these earlier reforms confound our results because none of them coincided with the cutoffs for
the 10th-week threshold along the conception date. We tested this conjecture in Panel G by
including indicators for the expected maternity leave duration at birth (between 16 and 22
weeks), which is based on a mother s expected due date. Our main results remained unchanged.
           Another concern is that the reform in question was implemented in the year of the Great
Recession. For example, using Icelandic data, Olafsson (2016) shows that exposure to the Great

                                                  24
Recession during the first trimester in utero had detrimental consequences for newborns' health.
On the other hand, Poland has weathered the crisis remarkably well and was the only economy
in the European Union that avoided recession in its aftermath. Moreover, even our widest
bandwidth (+/- 4 weeks) does not cover children conceived in the immediate postcrisis period
as for each included cohort, we began with conceptions in the second week of November (four
weeks before 6th December) and stopped at conceptions in the first week of the following March
(four weeks after 8th February). Our DD strategy should also flexibly capture any cohort-
specific effects. Nevertheless, to account for any differential effects of the crisis across regions,
in Panel H, we additionally controlled for the monthly unemployment rate at the province level.
As expected, given the empirical design, our results were not sensitive to the inclusion of this
additional variable.
        To validate our estimates, we also executed two placebo analyses. First, in panel I, we
challenged the internal validity of our estimates by evaluating the effects of a placebo reform
within the same difference-in-differences design. In that, we moved back the two reform-related
cutoffs by six months to 6th June 2008 and 8th August 2008. In support of our identifying
assumption, these placebo estimates were all close to zero and statistically insignificant.
Furthermore, in all cases but for gestational age, where our main results were the weakest, the
95 percent confidence interval of the placebo estimate excluded our preferred estimates from
Table 3. Second, throughout the table in column 6, we estimate placebo effects on the likelihood
of being born on an odd-numbered day, which should not plausibly be affected by the reform.
Irrespective of the exact model specification or sample restrictions, none of the estimates in the
last column were statistically significant, and they were all minuscule relative to the mean.
        Finally, in Table A3, we present results from an event study analysis, which allows
estimation of the effects beyond the narrow windows around the reform cutoffs and testing of
the internal validity by investigating the pre-trends. Irrespective of the outcome, there were no
clear pre-reform patterns, and we did not observe any sizable or statistically significant
coefficients in the pre-period either. The only exception was a single coefficient on the
probability of low birth weight; however, this estimate strongly departs from its surrounding
coefficients, indicating it is likely a statistical aberration. On the other hand, in the post-period,
and especially in the weeks after the reform s implementation, we observed mostly statistically
significant estimates that mimicked our findings from Table 3. A notable exception to this
pattern represents the effect on fetal mortality, which was concentrated in the first three weeks
after the reform s implementation. For the remaining outcomes, the effects persist well beyond
our preferred estimation windows from Table 3.

                                                 25
         In summary, we conclude that our results are not sensitive to excluding particular
cohorts from the control group, correcting for the potential measurement error in the assignment
of the treatment, or changing the preferred model specification. Likewise, the data do not
exhibit any worrisome differential pre-trends. Furthermore, we did not find any quantitatively
meaningful estimates using fake cutoff dates or placebo outcomes. These additional results
support the causal interpretation of our main estimates from Section 5.1.

8. POTENTIAL MECHANISMS

To shed more light on the potential channels through which the reform might have positively
affected neonatal health, we relied on auxiliary data from the Polish Pregnancy-related
Assessment Monitoring System (Pol-PrAMS). The Pol-PrAMS is a survey conducted during
one defined week of the year in all Polish hospitals among new mothers in the first few days
following childbirth (typically 1-4 days postpartum).29 Importantly, it includes a set of questions
on health-related knowledge and behaviors during pregnancy (Wojty a and Wojty a-Buciora,
2016). The first wave took place in June 2009, i.e., more than six months after the reform was
passed. Importantly, however, the vast majority of interviewed mothers conceived their
newborn in September and the first half of October 2008, i.e., about two months before the
law s announcement. Thus, we view the behavior of these mothers early in pregnancy as
unaffected by the reform.30 In 2010, the data were collected in the second week of August,
which implies that the second survey covers mothers who conceived in November 2009, i.e.,
shortly after the 10th-week threshold became a binding requirement for baby bonus eligibility.
We also included two later surveys from November 2011 and March 2012.
         These additional data allow us to look at changes in maternal health-related knowledge
and behaviors using a before-after design where we compare mothers surveyed in 2009 (control
group) to those surveyed in the years 2010-2012 (treatment group). We estimated the following
equation:
                                         =                                                  (4)
where  is an outcome of a woman , while the post-reform changes of interest are captured by
a series of three dummy variables  which are each equal to one if a woman was
interviewed in the 2010 to 2012 surveys, respectively. If the reform altered maternal behaviors


29
   Because some hospitals and some mothers refused to participate in the study, the final sample covers
approximately 80% of women who gave birth in Poland on the survey day each year (ca. 3,000 mothers).
30
   These mothers could not have reacted by altering their early prenatal care in response to the reform; however, it
is possible that they reported better knowledge and behaviors after birth because they were affected by changing
social expectations due to public discussion related to the reform. Thus, if anything, these estimates should be
treated as the lower bound of changes in behavior and knowledge.
                                                        26
and knowledge, then we would expect statistically significant coefficients on  . Furthermore,
if the estimates are indeed driven by the reform rather than just secular trends in these outcomes,
we would expect all three coefficients on the  dummies to be similar in magnitude.31
         We did two things to ameliorate, at least to some extent, concerns that the results were
driven by other changes over time. First, we estimated both the unconditional changes, as well
as a specification that controls for a rich set of maternal sociodemographic characteristics
(included in ). Specifically, similar to our main analysis for neonatal outcomes, we controlled
for maternal age, marital status, education, province of residence, town size, number of previous
births, and child s gender. These covariates are themselves strong and statistically significant
predictors of health knowledge and behaviors. Second, we used a placebo outcome exposure
to smoking at work         that arguably should not have been affected by the policy (or at least not
to the same extent as other analyzed outcomes) but has been shown to affect birth outcomes
(Bharadwaj et al., 2014; McGeary et al., 2020). Thus, if we found any significant changes in
exposure to smoking at work over time, they should reflect general trends in healthy behaviors,
which would imply that our before-after comparisons for other outcomes are most likely
confounded.
         Results are presented in Table 6. The outcomes in columns (1) to (5) are associated with
health-related knowledge, while those in columns (6) to (8) with risky behaviors during
pregnancy. Column (9) investigates passive smoking at the workplace, which we view as a
placebo outcome. All outcomes are indicator variables. Panel A shows the means of the
outcomes for mothers who conceived in the pre-reform period. Thus, for example, we observe
that before the reform, approximately 88 percent of mothers knew that small alcohol amounts
during pregnancy are harmful for maternal and fetal health, and 95 percent knew that large
alcohol amounts are detrimental. Most but not all were aware that active (97 percent) and
second-hand smoking (92 percent) are also harmful. Furthermore, nearly 13 percent of mothers
surveyed in 2009 admitted to alcohol consumption and 17 percent to smoking during
pregnancy.
         Panel B shows the before-after differences compared to the baseline mean without any
additional covariates, and the estimates remained remarkably stable when we added a rich set
of demographic controls in Panel C. Generally, in columns 1 to 5, we found statistically
significant improvements in the awareness that alcohol consumption and smoking are harmful


31
   From an identification standpoint, to interpret  as causal effects, we needed the outcomes to be the same in
2009 and in later years absent the reform requiring the 10th week prenatal care certification. In that, no other factors
affecting the outcomes could have changed across these years.
                                                          27
to maternal and a newborn s health. This appears to be accompanied by reductions in admitted
drinking and smoking during pregnancy documented in columns 6 to 8. Such changes are
consistent with increased exposure to early prenatal care, which usually focuses on educating
women about the course of pregnancy and on promoting healthy behaviors. 32 Importantly, the
estimates are very similar across all post-reform years, which mitigates the concern that we are
picking up secular improvements in health knowledge and behaviors. Furthermore, in column
9, we did not observe any sizable or statistically significant changes in exposure to passive
smoking at work        even though mothers reported knowing about its harmful effects                 which
likewise suggests that our estimates do not simply reflect confounding trends in improved
healthy behaviors over time.
        Assuming that the estimates in Table 6 do indeed reflect changes induced by the 10th-
week policy, improved maternal behavior during pregnancy seems to be a candidate channel
through which the reform affected neonatal health. This would be in line with prior work on the
detrimental effects of smoking and drinking in pregnancy on birth outcomes (Abrvaya, 2006;
Fertig and Watson, 2009; Bharadwaj et al., 2014).33 Specifically, our results in column 7 imply
that the rate of maternal smoking during pregnancy dropped by, at most, 6.9 percentage points.
Extrapolating this estimate through the lens of Abrevaya (2006) would imply increases in birth
weight in the range of 9 to 13 grams and decreases in low birth weight rates in the range of 0.17
to 0.21 percentage points. The former estimates are on the lower end of our effects in Table 3,
while the latter estimates are approximately 50 percent smaller than the smallest coefficients
reported in Table 3. Our point estimate on a decrease in drinking during pregnancy is at most
6.2 percentage points (column 6 in Table 6), which when paired with small effect sizes reported
by Fertig and Watson (2009) can explain relatively little of the potential effect of a decrease in
drinking on observed improvements in birth outcomes. Nonetheless, we view both of these
channels as plausibly jointly contributing to the observed gains in health at birth.
         Overall, the magnitudes implied by the extrapolation exercise seem reasonable as it is
inconceivable that all benefits of early prenatal care for birth outcomes accrue solely through
reductions in drinking and smoking. Although we caution readers about drawing strong causal
conclusions based on the estimates in Table 6, they are remarkably consistent, irrespective of
the exact outcome or specification. Thus, we view them as providing suggestive evidence that


32
  Here we refer to the applicable Polish standards of prenatal care services (Dziennik Ustaw, 2004).
33
  Nilsson (2017) provides compelling evidence from Sweden that prenatal alcohol consumption negatively affects
the fetus thought adulthood and leads to worse labor market and educational outcomes. Although we cannot
observe long-term outcomes in our data, this evidence suggests that our policy in question may have positive
effects on children s success in adulthood.
                                                     28
early promotion of healthy behaviors during pregnancy might represent a plausible, but not
necessarily exclusive, channel through which the reform improved newborns health.

9. CONCLUSIONS

This paper investigated whether the timing of prenatal care initiation matters for neonatal
health. Specifically, we evaluated a policy intended to speed up the first prenatal care visit in
Poland, which has a universal and publicly funded health care system. The reform forced
expectant mothers to begin prenatal care during the first ten weeks of gestation in order to be
eligible for a one-time monetary transfer after childbirth, which was before that time an
unconditional benefit. Administrative data on prenatal care utilization and governmental
payments suggested that the vast majority of mothers complied with the stricter eligibility
criteria, and the reform increased the utilization of early prenatal care by at least 25 percentage
points.
          Applying a differences-in-differences design to individual-level register data on the
population of births and fetal deaths, we found statistically significant positive effects of the
policy on neonatal health. These benefits were generated by mothers who were treated both by
the conditionality of the monetary transfer and the public information about the importance of
early prenatal care spread by the media and the government due to the law passage. In contrast,
by exploring the hold-up in policy implementation, we did not identify any statistically
significant or economically meaningful effects from the public information channel alone. Our
estimates imply moderate gains in birth weight and significant decreases in the likelihood of
fetal death. From the perspective of mixed findings on the benefits of prenatal care itself
(Corman et al., 2019), our results are promising as the reform only shifted the timing of the first
prenatal visit rather than affecting the extensive margin of healthcare utilization. We also found
some suggestive evidence that the beneficial effects might disproportionately accrue to more
disadvantaged mothers. Finally, using auxiliary survey data, we showed that improved maternal
health knowledge and less risky behaviors during pregnancy might be plausible, though not
necessarily exclusive, mechanisms underlying the positive effects of early prenatal care
initiation on neonatal health.
          In summary, our results suggest that children in utero may benefit from earlier initiation
of prenatal care. Moreover, it is important to keep in mind that these public investments might
have additional impacts far beyond neonatal health documented in this paper. For example,
Miller and Wherry (2019) demonstrated that children who gained Medicaid coverage in the
womb and during infancy exhibited better health and educational outcomes as adults. Related
research also found that first-trimester care positively affects maternal health-related behaviors
                                                 29
measured postpartum (e.g., Conway and Kutinova, 2006; Reichman et al., 2010), while most
recent results suggests that benefits of improved prenatal health persist even beyond the treated
generation (East et al., 2019). From the policy perspective, it is also important to highlight that
the Polish legislation was fiscally neutral and did not require any additional transfers from the
state as it built upon an existing birth-related benefit. Therefore, even small to moderate gains
in neonatal health should be viewed as welfare improving.




                                                30
REFERENCES

Abrevaya, J. (2006). Estimating the effect of smoking on birth outcomes using a matched panel
       data approach. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(4), 489-519.
Abrevaya, J., Dahl, C. (2008). The effects of birth inputs on birthweight: Evidence from
       quantile estimation on panel data. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 26(4),
       379-397.
Alexander, G. R., & Korenbrot, C. C. (1995). The role of prenatal care in preventing low birth
       weight. The Future of Children, 103-120.
Alwan, N. A., Roderick, P. J., Macklon, N. S. (2016). Is timing of the first antenatal visit
       associated with adverse birth outcomes? Analysis from a population-based birth cohort.
       The Lancet, 388, S18.
Almond, D., Currie, J. (2011). Human capital development before age five. Handbook of Labor
       Economics, Vol 4B.
Almond, D., Hoynes, H., Whitmore Schanzenbach, D. (2011). Inside the war on poverty: The
       impact of food stamps on birth outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2),
       387-403.
Almond, D., Currie, J., Duque, V. (2018). Childhood circumstances and adult outcomes: Act
       III. Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4), 1360-1446.
Barreca, A., Page, M. (2015). A pint for a pound? Minimum drinking age laws and birth
       outcomes. Health Economics, 24(4), 400-418.
Becker, S. O., Grosfeld, I., Grosjean, P., Voigtl nder, N., Zhuravskaya, E. (2020). Forced
       migration and human capital: evidence from post-WWII population transfers. American
       Economic Review, 110(5), 1430-63.
Bernloehr, A., Smith, P., Vydelingum, V. (2005). Antenatal care in the European Union: a
       survey on guidelines in all 25 member states of the Community. European Journal of
       Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, 122(1), 22-32.
Bharadwaj, P., Johnsen, J., Løken, K. (2014). Smoking bans, maternal smoking and birth
       outcomes. Journal of Public Economics, 115, 72-93.
Bharadwaj, P., Lundborg, P., Rooth, D. O. (2017). Birth weight in the long run. Journal of
       Human Resources, 53(1),189-231.
BIP (2017). Sprawozdanie Rady Ministrów z wykonywania oraz o skutkach stosowania w 2015
       r. ustawy z dnia 7 stycznia 1993 r. o planowaniu rodziny, ochronie p odu ludzkiego i
       warunkach dopuszczalno ci przerywania ci y. Biuletyn Informacji Publicznej (BIP)
       Kancelarii Prezesa Rady Ministrów (The Chancellery of the Prime Minister of Poland),
       Warszawa.        Available      online      at     https://bip.kprm.gov.pl/kpr/bip-rady-
       ministrow/informacje-i-sprawozda/4555,informacje.html [Last accessed: 04.01.2018].
Black, S., Devereux, P., Salvanes, K. (2007). From the cradle to the job market? The effect of
       birth weight on adult outcomes of children. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 (1),
       409-439.
Borra, C., González, L., & Sevilla, A. (2019). The Impact of Scheduling Birth Early on Infant
       Health. Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(1), 30-78.
Brenøe, A. A., & Molitor, R. (2018). Birth order and health of newborns. Journal of Population
       Economics, 31(2), 363-395.

                                              31
Brunner, B., Kuhn, A. (2014). Announcement effects of health policy reforms: Evidence from
        the abolition of Austria s baby bonus. European Journal of Health Economics, 15, 373-
        388.
Buckles, K., Guldi, M. (2017). Worth the wait? The effect of early term birth on maternal and
        infant health. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(4), 748-772.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Rockoff, J. (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers II: Teacher
        value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic Review, 104(9),
        2633-2679.
Clarke, D., Oreffice, S., Quintana-Domeque, C. (2017). On the value of birth weight. HECO
        WP 2017-018.
Conway, K. S., Deb, P. (2005). Is prenatal care really ineffective? Or, is the devil in the
        distribution? Journal of Health Economics, 24(3), 489-513.
Conway, K. S., Kutinova, A. (2006). Maternal health: does prenatal care make a difference?
        Health Economics, 15(5), 461-488.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Reichman, N. E. (2019). The Effects of Prenatal Health on Birth
        Outcomes: Reconciling a Messy Literature. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of
        Economics and Finance.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. (2007). The technology of skill formation. American Economic
        Review, 97(2), 31-47.
Currie, J., Gruber, J. (1996). Saving babies: The efficacy and cost of recent changes in the
        Medicaid eligibility of pregnant women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263-
        1296.
Currie, J., Grogger, J. (2002). Medicaid expansions and welfare contractions: offsetting effects
        on prenatal care and infant health? Journal of Health Economics, 21(2), 313-335.
Currie, J., Rossin-Slater, M. (2015). Early-lie origins of lifecycle well-being: Research and
        policy implications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 34(1):208-242.
Cygan-Rehm, K. (2016). Parental leave benefit and differential fertility responses: Evidence
        from a German reform. Journal of Population Economics, 29(1), 73-103.
Dench, D., Joyce, T. (2020). The earned income tax credit and infant health revisited. Health
        Economics, 29(1), 72-84.
De Walque, D. (2010). Education, information, and smoking decisions. Evidence from smoking
        histories in the United States, 1940-2000. Journal of Human Resources, 45(3), 682-717.
Diagnoza Spo eczna (2009). Warunki i Jako          ycia Polaków. Raport. Czapi ski J., Panek T.
        (Eds.). Rada Monitoringu Spo ecznego, Warszawa. Available online at
        http://www.diagnoza.com/pliki/raporty/Diagnoza_raport_2009.pdf [Last accessed:
        20.08.2020].
Dickert-Conlin, S., Chandra, A. (1999). Taxes and the timing of births. Journal of Political
        Economy, 107(1), 161-177.
Dustmann, C., Schönberg, U. (2012). Expansions in maternity leave coverage and children's
        long-term outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3), 190-224.
Druki Sejmowe (1998). Sprawozdanie Rady Ministrów z realizacji w roku 1997 ustawy z dnia
        7 stycznia 1993 r. o planowaniu rodziny, ochronie p odu ludzkiego i warunkach
        dopuszczalno ci przerywania ci y. Archiwum Sejmu (archives of the Polish


                                              32
        parliament), Druki Sejmowe III kadencja, Druk nr 592, Warszawa. Available online at
        http://orka.sejm.gov.pl/Rejestrd.nsf?OpenDatabase [Last accessed: 31.07.2019].
Dziennik Ustaw (2004). Rozporz dzenie Ministra Zdrowia z dnia 21 grudnia 2004 r. w sprawie
        zakresu wiadcze opieki zdrowotnej, w tym bada przesiewowych, oraz okresów, w
        których te badania s przeprowadzane. Za cznik nr 1: Zakres profilaktycznych
         wiadcze opieki zdrowotnej u kobiet w okresie ci y wraz z okresami ich
        przeprowadzania. Dz. U. 2004 nr. 276 poz. 2740.
East, C. N., Miller, S., Page, M., Wherry, L. R. (2019). Multi-generational Impacts of
        Childhood Access to the Safety Net: Early Life Exposure to Medicaid and the Next
        Generation s Health. NBER Working Paper No. 23810. Revised in February 2019.
EURO-PERISTAT (2008). European perinatal health report by the EURO-PERISTAT project
        in collaboration with SCPE, EUROCAT & EURONEOSTAT. Data from 2004.
        Coordinated         by      INSERM,           Paris.      Available       online       at
        https://www.europeristat.com/images/doc/EPHR/european-perinatal-health-report.pdf
        [Last accessed: 07.08.2019].
EURO-PERISTAT (2013). European perinatal health report. Health and Care of Pregnant
        Women and Babies in Europe in 2010. Coordinated by INSERM, Paris. Available
        online     at    http://www.europeristat.com/reports/european-perinatal-health-report-
        2010.html [Last accessed: 07.08.2019].
Evans, W., Lien D. (2005). The benefits for prenatal care: Evidence from PAT bus strike.
        Journal of Econometrics, 125, 207-239.
Fertig, A., Watson, T. (2009). Minimum drinking age laws and infant health outcomes. Journal
        of Health Economics, 28(3), 737-747.
Figlio, D., Guryan, J., Karbownik, K., Roth, J. (2014). The effects of poor neonatal health on
        children s cognitive development. American Economic Review, 104(12), 3921-3955.
Firpo, S., Fotin, N., Lemieux, T. (2009). Unconditional quantile regressions. Econometrica,
        77(3), 953-973.
Frank, R. G., Strobino, D. M., Salkever, D. S., Jackson, C. A. (1992). Updated Estimates of the
        Impact of Prenatal Care on Birthweight Outcomes By Race. Journal of Human
        Resources, 27(4), 629-642.
Fryer, R. (2017). The production of human capital in developed countries: Evidence from 196
        randomized field experiments. Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, 2, 95-322.
Gajate-Garrido, G. (2013). The impact of adequate prenatal care on urban birth outcomes: An
        analysis in a developing country context. Economic Development and Cultural Change,
        62(1), 95-130
Gans, J., Leigh, A. (2009). Born on the first of July: An (un)natural experiment in birth timing.
        Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2), 246-263.
Girouard, N., Imai, Y. (2000). The health care system in Poland. OECD Economics Department
        Working Papers, No. 257.
Gonzalez, F., Kumar, S. (2018). Prenatal care and birthweight in Mexico. Applied Economics,
        50(10), 1156-1170.
González, L. (2013). The effect of a universal child benefit on conceptions, abortions, and early
        maternal labor supply. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(3), 160-88.


                                               33
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
        Political Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Grossman, M., Joyce, T. J. (1990). Unobservables, pregnancy resolutions, and birth weight
        production functions in New York City. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 983-1007.
Gray, B. (2001). Do Medicaid physician fees for prenatal services affect birth outcomes?
        Journal of Health Economics, 20(4), 571-590.
Hoynes, H., Miller, D., Simon, D. (2015). Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant
        health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), 172-211.
Huebener, M., Kuehnle, D., Spiess, C. K. (2019). Paid parental leave and child development:
        Evidence from the 2007 German parental benefit reform and administrative data.
        Labour Economics (forthcoming).
Jones, A. M. (1991). An econometric investigation of low birth weight in the United States.
        Journal of Health Economics, 10(1), 81-99.
Joyce, T. (1999). Impact of augmented prenatal care on birth outcomes of Medicaid recipients
        in New York City. Journal of Health Economics, 18(1), 31-67.
Jukic, A. M., Baird, D. D., Weinberg, C. R., McConnaughey, D. R., Wilcox, A. J. (2013).
        Length of human pregnancy and contributors to its natural variation. Human
        Reproduction, 28(10), 2848-2855.
Keskin, P., Shastry, G., Willis, H. (2017). Water quality awareness and breastfeeding: Evidence
        of health behavior change in Bangladesh. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(2),
        265-280.
Kling, J., Liebman, J., Katz, L. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects.
        Econometrica, 75(1), 83-119.
Komro, K., Livingston, M., Markowitz, S., Wagenaar, A. (2016). The effect of an increased
        minimum wage on infant mortality and birth weight. American Journal of Public
        Health, 106(8), 1514-1516.
Kornas-Biela, D. (2012). Male dzieci w Polsce. Zaniedbania prenatalne. Dziecko krzywdzone.
        Teoria, badania, praktyka, 11(11), 24-32.
Lagarde, M., Haines, A., Palmer, N. (2007). Conditional cash transfers for improving uptake of
        health interventions in low- and middle-income countries. A systematic review. JAMA,
        298(16); 1900-1910.
Lalive, R., Zweimüller, J. (2009). How does parental leave affect fertility and return to work?
        Evidence from two natural experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1363-
        1402.
LaLumia, S., Sallee, J., Turner, N. (2015). New evidence on taxes and the timing of birth.
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2), 258-293.
Lange, F. (2011). The role of education in complex health decisions: Evidence from cancer
        screening. Journal of Health Economics, 30(1), 43-54.
 yso , P. (2012). Zdrowie i ochrona zdrowia w 2011 R. Informacje i Opracowania
        Statystyczne, G ówny Urz d Statystyczny, Warszawa.
McGeary, K., Dave, D., Lipton, B., Roepr, T. (2020). Impact of comprehensive smoking bans
        on the health of infants and children. American Journal of Health Economics, 6(1), 1-
        38.


                                              34
Miller, S., Wherry, L. R. (2019). The long-term effects of early life Medicaid coverage. Journal
        of Human Resources, 54(3), 785-824.
Neugart, M., Ohlsson, H. (2013). Economic incentives and the timing of births: Evidence from
        the German parental benefit reform of 2007. Journal of Population Economics, 26, 87-
        108.
NFZ (2020). Portal Statystyki Narodowego Funduszu Zdrowia (NFZ). Statystyki wiadcze .
        Available online at: https://statystyki.nfz.gov.pl/ [Last accessed 20.08.2020]
Nieszporska, S. (2017). Priorities in the Polish health care system. European Journal of Health
        Economics, 18(1), 1-5.
Nilsson, P. (2017). Alcohol availability, prenatal conditions, and long-term economic
        outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 125(4), 1149-1207.
Olafsson, A. (2016). Household financial distress and initial endowments: Evidence from the
        2008 financial crisis. Health Economics, 25, 43-56.
Prina, S., Royer, H. (2014). The importance of parental knowledge: Evidence from weight
        report cards in Mexico. Journal of Health Economics, 37, 232-247.
Reichman, N. E., Corman, H., Noonan, K., & Dave, D. (2009). Infant health production
        functions: What a difference the data make. Health Economics, 18(7), 761-782.
Reichman, N., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Schwartz-Soicher, O. (2010). Effects of prenatal care
        on maternal postpartum behaviors. Review of Economics of the Household, 8, 171-197.
Rosenzweig, M. R., Schultz, T. P. (1983). Estimating a household production function:
        Heterogeneity, the demand for health inputs, and their effects on birth weight. Journal
        of Political Economy, 91(5), 723-746.
Rossin-Slater, M. (2013). WIC in your neighborhood: New evidence on the impacts of
        geographic access to clinic. Journal of Public Economics, 102, 51-69.
Rossin-Slater, M. (2018). Maternity and Family Leave Policy. In Averett, S., Argys, L. M.,
        Hoffman, S. D. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Women and the Economy. Oxford
        University Press, Oxford.
Schulkind, L., Shapiro, T. (2014). What a difference a day makes: Quantifying the effects of
        birth timing manipulation on infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 33, 139-158.
Sonchak, L. (2015). Medicaid reimbursement, prenatal care and infant health. Journal of Health
        Economics, 44, 10-24.
Tamm, M. (2013). The impact of a large parental leave benefit reform on the timing of birth
        around the day of implementation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 75(4),
        585-601.
UNDP (2007). Raport: Zdrowie kobiet w wieku prokreacyjnym 15 49 lat. Polska 2006.
        Program Narodów Zjednoczonych ds. Rozwoju (United Nations Development
        Programme - UNDP), Warszawa.
UNICEF (2020). Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health data portal. Available
        online at:       https://www.who.int/data/maternal-newborn-child-adolescent/ [Last
        accessed 20.08.2020]
UN IGME (2019). United Nations inter-agency group for child mortality estimation. Available
        online at: https://data.unicef.org/resources/levels-and-trends-in-child-mortality/ [Last
        accessed 20.08.2020]
Wehby, G., Dave, D., Kaestner, R. (2020). Effects of the minimum wage on infant health.
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 39(2), 411-443.
                                              35
Wiswall, M., Zafar, B. (2015). Determinants of college major choice: Identification using an
       information experiment. Review of Economic Studies , 82(2), 791-824.
Wojty a, C., Wojty a-Buciora, P. (2016). Polish Pregnancy-related Assessment Monitoring
       System (Pol-PrAMS): research on lifestyle health behaviours of Polish women during
       gestation study design. Journal of Health Inequalities, 2(2), 185-191.
World Health Organization (2016). WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive
       pregnancy experience. WHO Press, Geneva.
Yan, J. (2020). Healthy babies: Does prenatal care really matter? American Journal of Health
       Economics, 6(2), 199-215
Zi ba, A. (2006). Podziemie aborcyjne w Polsce. Prezes Zarz du Polskiego Stowarzyszenia
       Obro ców ycia Cz owieka. Wiceprezes Zarz du Polskiej Federacji Ruchów Obrony
         ycia, Kraków.




                                            36
Figures and Tables


                       Figure 1: Rates of Prenatal Care Initiation in the First Trimester

           100.0%
            90.0%                                                                  82%
                                                 79%        79%         79%                   79%        78%        76%
            80.0%
            70.0%
            60.0%            54%        54%
            50.0%
            40.0%
            30.0%
            20.0%
            10.0%
             0.0%
                           1997       mid- 2012             2013        2014      2015        2016       2017       2018
                                     2000s
                 urban         rural         total
Note: This figure presents aggregate statistics on rates of prenatal care initiation in the first trimester. The data is limited to visits
contracted by the public health care insurance system. The numbers for 1997, are from a governmental report (Druki Sejmowe,
1998); for mid-2000s, from Kornas­Biela (2012). The data from 2012 onwards is provided by the Healthcare Information Systems
Center (CSIOZ) of the Ministry of Health.




                                          Figure 2: Timeline of the Law Change

                                                  passed                                                           effective
   law's timeline                               6.12.2008        8.2.2009                      29.8.2009          1.11.2009


                                                                     pregnancy
                                                        (38 weeks since the day of conception)
                                                                                       pregnancy
                                                                         (38 weeks since the day of conception)


   conceptions                not affected             affected by                   affected by information
                                                      information                    and conditional transfer

   compliance

Note: Own illustration. This figure presents the timing of the reform.




                                                                   37
                              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Balance of Covariates
                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)
                                                                                                             Donut-hole sample
                                    Cutoff: 6th December 2008              Cutoff: 8th February 2009
                                                                                                                +/- 4 weeks
                                  4 weeks     4 weeks      D-in-D       4 weeks    4 weeks       D-in-D                  D-in-D
                    All births                                                                                Mean
                                  before        after     [p-value]     before       after      [p-value]               [p-value]
                                                          Panel A. Background characteristics
  Age at             27.146       26.997      27.049       -0.011       27.989     28.046       0.038        27.268      0.037
  conception                                                [0.781]                              [0.397]                  [0.371]
  First birth        0.511         0.524       0.520       0.003        0.519      0.518        -0.003       0.520       -0.004
                                                            [0.486]                              [0.453]                  [0.181]
  Less than high     0.269         0.250       0.256       0.003        0.253      0.255        0.000        0.274       0.002
  school                                                    [0.377]                              [0.895]                  [0.511]
  High school        0.359         0.359       0.353       -0.010       0.356      0.353        -0.001       0.361       -0.005
  graduate                                                  [0.002]                              [0.880]                  [0.119]
  In labor force     0.679         0.707       0.704       0.003        0.702      0.703        -0.001       0.678       -0.004
                                                            [0.371]                              [0.656]                  [0.136]
  Married            0.799         0.799       0.795       -0.002       0.792      0.789        0.003        0.797       0.000
                                                            [0.491]                              [0.389]                  [0.995]
  Divorced           0.027         0.027       0.027       0.000        0.029      0.030        0.001        0.027       0.002
                                                            [0.775]                              [0.477]                  [0.180]
  Widowed            0.003         0.003       0.003       0.000        0.003      0.003        0.000        0.003       0.000
                                                            [0.517]                              [0.936]                  [0.837]
  Rural residence    0.417         0.411       0.412       -0.002       0.405      0.405        0.001        0.415       0.001
                                                            [0.616]                              [0.838]                  [0.736]
  F-statistic                                              1.430                                0.270                    0.980
                                                               Panel B. Neonatal outcomes
  Health index       0.000        -0.007       0.001       0.007          0.004      0.006      0.008        -0.005      0.020
  (PCA)                                                     [0.391]                              [0.351]                  [0.018]
  Fetal death        0.415         0.432       0.347       -0.089         0.409      0.318      -0.105       0.438       -0.117
  (×100)                                                    [0.042]                              [0.038]                  [0.022]
  Birth weight       3376.980     3366.124    3368.030       -1.860      3373.216 3373.491        1.415      3367.558      9.728
  (grams)                                                   [0.671]                              [0.738]                  [0.033]
  Low birth          4.844         5.068       4.788       -0.260         4.934      4.920      -0.105       5.053       -0.391
  weight (×100)                                             [0.083]                              [0.568]                  [0.014]
  Gestational age    39.166       39.179      39.187       0.017         39.195      39.183     0.007        39.184      0.025
  (weeks)                                                   [0.254]                              [0.686]                  [0.130]
  Observations       2,327,942       32,639      32,833     313,251       28,394      27,966     284,083      296,828     296,828
Note: Column 1 presents means for the universe of births between 2006 and 2011. Columns 2 and 3 present descriptive statistics
for children conceived +/- 4 weeks around 6th December 2008 cutoff while columns 5 and 6 present descriptive statistics for
children conceived +/- 4 weeks around 8th February 2009 cutoff. Columns 4 and 7 show the coefficients on an indicator variable
that equals to one if a child was conceived in the 4 weeks after the cutoff in the reform year 2008/09 estimated for each listed
variable separately as an outcome. The p-value of a significance test is in square brackets and each cell represents a separate
linear regression. F-tests in panel A report the value of F-statistics from regressions of the reform indicator on all the covariates
listed in this panel. Column 8 presents the mean values for the donut difference-in-differences sample while column 9 presents
the balancing test for this sample. Note that some college is reference category in education, not in labor force is a reference
category for employment, single mother is a reference category for civil status while urban is a reference category for place of
residence. P-values are based on heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.




                                                                   38
Table 2: Effects of the Reform Passage and Implementation on Number of Conceptions and Births
                                               (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)
                                          +/- 1 week       +/- 2 weeks   +/- 3 weeks     +/- 4 weeks
                                                 Panel A. 6th December 2008 cutoff (conceptions)
                     Number of                6.321            3.982         2.762            6.223
                     conceptions            (17.036)         (13.609)      (11.209)         (10.763)
                     Mean of Y             1057.375         1057.527      1074.071         1106.156
                     Log number of           0.014            0.011            0.005            0.004
                     conceptions            (0.015)          (0.012)          (0.010)          (0.009)
                     Observations             70               140              210              280
                                                 Panel B. 8th February 2009 cutoff (conceptions)
                     Number of               19.929            1.625         -3.667          10.316
                     conceptions            (22.604)         (14.508)       (11.179)        (10.425)
                     Mean of Y              1001.75         1007.152       1010.048         1016.621
                     Log number of           0.018            0.001           -0.002            0.011
                     conceptions            (0.022)          (0.014)          (0.011)          (0.010)
                     Observations             70               140              210              280
                                                   Panel C. 1st November 2009 cutoff (births)
                     Number of births        43.357          28.750         15.726           19.179
                                            (27.309)        (21.404)       (16.838)         (13.228)
                     Mean of Y              1011.75        1005.625       1006.423         1012.393
                     Log number of           0.040            0.026            0.017            0.020
                     births                 (0.026)          (0.021)          (0.017)          (0.013)
                     Observations             70               140              210              280
Note: Panels A and B show the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (2) obtained for the cutoffs of 6th December
and 8th February, respectively. Panel C shows the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (3). The dependent variable
is the (log) daily number of conceptions (Panels A and B) or births (Panel C). Each cell represents a separate linear regression
and unit of observation is a day. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. The estimation samples include all
conceptions/births up to four weeks before and up to four weeks after a particular cutoff in years 2005/6 - 2009/10. ***, **,
and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                              39
                               Table 3: Effects of the Reform on Neonatal Health
                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
                           +/- 1 week                +/- 2 weeks                +/- 3 weeks               +/- 4 weeks
    A. Health         0.034*** 0.035***         0.031*** 0.031***          0.021**     0.021**       0.020**     0.021**
    index              (0.012)      (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.008)
    Mean of Y                 0.000                     0.000                     0.000                     0.000
    B. Fetal death     -0.178** -0.173**         -0.154** -0.148**        -0.156*** -0.153***       -0.117** -0.116**
    (×100)              (0.085)      (0.085)      (0.059)      (0.059)     (0.059)      (0.058)      (0.051)      (0.050)
    Mean of Y                  0.465                     0.462                    0.450                     0.453
    C. Log birth      0.767*** 0.799***          0.524**    0.539**         0.319     0.332*         0.345**    0.346**
    weight (×100)      (0.212)    (0.212)        (0.214)    (0.218)        (0.196)    (0.201)        (0.166)    (0.169)
    Mean of Y               810.394                   810.431                   810.487                   810.455
    D. Low birth      -0.937*** -0.925***       -0.636*** -0.622***        -0.347*      -0.352*     -0.391** -0.399**
    weight (×100)      (0.154)      (0.154)      (0.194)      (0.195)       (0.184)      (0.184)     (0.158)      (0.158)
    Mean of Y                 5.099                     5.125                      5.117                    5.129
    E. Gestational       0.034       0.034       0.042**    0.041**         0.025       0.027         0.025      0.028*
    age (weeks)         (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.020)     (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.019)       (0.016)     (0.016)
    Mean of Y                 39.180                   39.187                    39.192                    39.189
    N                         74,084                    148,843                   222,848                   296,828
    Controls             No            Yes         No             Yes        No             Yes        No             Yes
Note: Each cell is based on a separate regression and displays the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (1). Individual
controls include maternal age at conception (linear and squared), dummies for her marital status, education, source of income,
province of residence, rural areas, number of previous births, and a child's gender. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered
at the level of conception day. The estimation samples include all conceptions up to four weeks before 6th December in years
2005 - 2009 and up to four weeks after 8th February in years 2006 - 2010. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                               40
              Table 4: Effects of the Reforms' Information Component on Neonatal Health
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                             +/- 1 week                +/- 2 weeks               +/- 3 weeks               +/- 4 weeks
   A. Health index       -0.008       -0.010       -0.007       -0.007        0.002        0.001        0.007        0.007
                         (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.008)
   Mean of Y                    0.000                     0.000                     0.000                     0.000
   B. Fetal death        -0.084       -0.073       -0.051       -0.048      -0.091*      -0.089*      -0.089** -0.088**
   (×100)                (0.058)      (0.057)      (0.059)      (0.059)      (0.050)      (0.050)      (0.044)      (0.044)
   Mean of Y                    0.475                     0.457                     0.449                     0.456
   C. Log birth          -0.134     -0.155         -0.201     -0.145         -0.082     -0.048          0.038      0.051
   weight (×100)         (0.217)    (0.217)        (0.171)    (0.170)        (0.173)    (0.175)        (0.152)    (0.151)
   Mean of Y                  810.413                   810.416                   810.471                   810.517
   D. Low birth          -0.294       -0.244       -0.068       -0.067       -0.083       -0.083      -0.260*      -0.263*
   weight (×100)         (0.192)      (0.189)      (0.181)      (0.182)      (0.163)      (0.164)      (0.149)      (0.148)
   Mean of Y                    4.990                     5.063                     5.053                     5.026
   E. Gestational age    -0.033     -0.039*        -0.011      -0.015         0.008       0.004         0.017       0.015
   (weeks)               (0.020)     (0.021)       (0.018)     (0.018)       (0.017)     (0.017)       (0.015)     (0.015)
   Mean of Y                   39.183                    39.186                    39.191                    39.190
   N                           74,796                   149,695                   228,204                   313,251
   Controls                No           Yes          No             Yes        No           Yes          No           Yes
Note: Each cell is based on a separate regression and displays the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (1). The
estimation samples include all conceptions up to four weeks before and up to four weeks after 6th December in years 2005 -
2009. Individual controls include maternal age at conception (linear and squared), dummies for her marital status, education,
source of income, province of residence, rural areas, number of previous births, and a child's gender. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the level of conception day. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level.




                                                               41
                  Table 5: Effects of the Reform on Neonatal Health: Sensitivity Analysis
                                  (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)
                                               Fetal death       Log birth      Low birth Gestational age Odd number
                            Health index
                                                 (×100)        weight (×100) weight (×100)   (weeks)      DOB (×100)
 A. Baseline                   0.021**          -0.116**         0.346**         -0.399**     0.028*        -0.032
                               (0.008)           (0.050)          (0.169)         (0.158)    (0.016)        (1.630)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.453          810.455           5.129     39.189         51.144
 Observations                                                             296,828
 B. Excluding                  0.022**          -0.125**           0.357**        -0.467***             0.030*            -0.028
 2005/06 cohort                (0.008)           (0.052)            (0.166)         (0.154)             (0.016)           (1.999)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.437            810.585           5.071              39.179            51.337
 Observations                                                               240,365
 C. Excluding                  0.017**          -0.118**            0.299*         -0.346**              0.019            -0.182
 2009/10 cohort                (0.008)           (0.052)            (0.164)         (0.161)             (0.016)           (2.058)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.453            810.455           5.129              39.189            51.144
 Observations                                                               236,006
 D. Lagging control           0.020***          -0.130**           0.340**         -0.347**              0.013             0.471
 group by 10 weeks             (0.007)           (0.050)            (0.142)         (0.154)             (0.015)           (1.773)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.430            810.648           4.985              39.202            50.983
 Observations                                                               290,769
 E. Assuming mid-              0.019**           -0.058            0.369**         -0.376**             0.030*            -0.378
 week delivery                 (0.008)           (0.051)            (0.170)         (0.158)             (0.016)           (1.563)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.457            810.466           5.105              39.189            50.775
 Observations                                                               294,451
 F. Adding quadratic          0.024***          -0.108**           0.403**        -0.497***            0.038**             0.123
 trends                        (0.009)           (0.054)            (0.178)         (0.166)            (0.017)            (1.773)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.453            810.455           5.129             39.189             51.144
 Observations                                                               296,828
 G. Adding maternity           0.021**          -0.116**           0.346**         -0.399**             0.028*            -0.032
 leave controls                (0.008)           (0.050)            (0.169)         (0.158)             (0.016)           (1.630)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.453            810.455           5.129              39.189            51.144
 Observations                                                               296,828
 H. Adding regional            0.021**          -0.112**           0.388**         -0.405**              0.023            -0.013
 unemployment                  (0.009)           (0.054)            (0.189)         (0.179)             (0.018)           (1.552)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.453            810.455           5.129              39.189            51.144
 Observations                                                               296,828
 I. Placebo reform              0.001             0.019             -0.100           0.109               0.019            -0.224
 (6 months earlier)            (0.008)           (0.050)            (0.147)         (0.157)             (0.016)           (0.843)
 Mean of Y                      0.000             0.391            811.145           4.688              39.147            50.651
 Observations                                                               297,435
Note: Each cell is based on a separate regression and displays the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (1). Samples
include all conceptions up to four weeks before 6th December in years 2005 - 2009 and up to four weeks after 8th February in
years 2006-2010. All regressions include individual level controls: maternal age at conception (linear and squared), dummies
for her marital status, education, source of income, province of residence, rural areas, number of previous births, and a child's
gender. Panel B excludes conceptions from 2005/06 cohort while panel C excludes conceptions from 2009/10 cohort. Panel D
lags the threshold by 10 weeks to exclude any partially treated women from the control group. Panel E assumes a mid-week
delivery in the last (non-completed) gestational week. Panel F includes quadratic trends in conception date. Panel G adds
maternity leave controls while panel H adds regional unemployment controls. Panel I presents placebo estimates when we move
the two cutoffs back by six months to 6th June 2008 (from 6th December 2008) and 8th August 2008 (from 8th February 2009).
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of conception day. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level.                                          42
                                  Table 6: Exploring potential mechanisms: Maternal health-related knowledge and behaviors
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)             (9)
                                                    Health-related knowledge                              Health-related behaviors during and post pregnancy
                             Small alcohol Large alcohol     Active         Passive                      Alcohol        Smoking                     Exposure to
                                                                                        Knows all of                                   Smoker
                               amounts       amounts        smoking        smoking                        during         during                      smoking at
                                                                                             this                                    postpartum
                               harmful       harmful        harmful        harmful                     pregnancy       pregnancy                        work
                                                                    Panel A. Baseline June 2009 mean (pre-reform period)
                                 0.877         0.946          0.969          0.924          0.832         0.129           0.173         0.091           0.114
                                                           Panel B. Unconditional differences between 2009 and subsequent years
           Post 2010           0.096***      0.050***       0.025***       0.070***       0.138***      -0.062***      -0.066***      -0.027***         0.002
                                (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.010)       (0.008)         (0.009)
           Post 2011           0.107***      0.052***       0.028***       0.073***       0.150***      -0.054***      -0.041***      -0.026***        -0.004
                                (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.009)         (0.010)       (0.008)         (0.010)




43
           Post 2012           0.103***      0.051***       0.027***       0.071***       0.144***      -0.055***      -0.059***      -0.035***        -0.012
                                (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.010)       (0.007)         (0.009)
                                                      Panel C. Differences between 2009 and subsequent years conditional on covariates
           Post 2010           0.096***      0.050***       0.025***       0.069***       0.137***      -0.061***      -0.069***      -0.030***         0.003
                                (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.008)         (0.009)       (0.007)         (0.009)
           Post 2011           0.109***      0.052***       0.029***       0.073***       0.152***      -0.055***      -0.052***      -0.034***        -0.001
                                (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.009)         (0.010)       (0.008)         (0.010)
           Post 2012           0.104***      0.052***       0.029***       0.071***       0.146***      -0.055***      -0.063***      -0.037***        -0.003
                                (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.008)       (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.007)         (0.009)
           Observations          9,372         9,372          9,372          9,372          9,372         9,372           9,372         9,372           8,540
     Note: Panel A presents mean values of outcome variables in the pre-reform period while panels B and C present regression output where treatment variables of interest are
     indicators for survey years 2010, 2011, and 2012, respectively. In these regressions data from 2009 survey serve as a reference category. Regressions in panel B do not include
     any additional controls while regressions in panel C control for maternal age at delivery (indicators in three-year intervals), dummies for her marital status, education, province
     of residence, town size, number of previous births, and a child's gender. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
     at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.
A                         Supplemental Figures and Tables

                                Figure A.1: Internet Searches for "Baby Bonus" and "Week of Pregnancy"

                                                                                                   a) Baby bonus
                          100
                           90
                           80
    Google search index




                           70
                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0
                                Jan 2004

                                           Jan 2005

                                                      Jan 2006

                                                                 Jan 2007

                                                                            Jan 2008

                                                                                        Jan 2009

                                                                                                     Jan 2010

                                                                                                                Jan 2011

                                                                                                                           Jan 2012

                                                                                                                                      Jan 2013

                                                                                                                                                 Jan 2014

                                                                                                                                                            Jan 2015

                                                                                                                                                                       Jan 2016

                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan 2017
                                                                                       b) Week of pregnancy
                          100
                           90
                           80
    Google search index




                           70
                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0
                                Jan 2004

                                           Jan 2005

                                                      Jan 2006

                                                                 Jan 2007

                                                                            Jan 2008

                                                                                        Jan 2009

                                                                                                     Jan 2010

                                                                                                                Jan 2011

                                                                                                                           Jan 2012

                                                                                                                                      Jan 2013

                                                                                                                                                 Jan 2014

                                                                                                                                                            Jan 2015

                                                                                                                                                                       Jan 2016

                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan 2017




Note: Google Trends available online at https://trends.google.com/trends/explore [Last accessed: 01.08.2019]. The figures
show monthly Google search index for the Polish keywords "becikowe" and "tydzie ciy", respectively. The search region was
restricted to Poland and the search period to 01.01.04 - 31.07.17. The vertical solid lines mark December 2008 and November
2009, respectively. The vertical dashed line marks February 2009.



                                                                                                     44
     Figure A.2: Number of General Practitioners as well as Gynaecologists and Obstetricians




Note: This figure presents aggregate statistics on number of general practitioners as well as OB/GYN specialists in Poland
between 2005 and 2018. This data is limited to doctors under contract to the public health care insurance system.
Source: The Central Statistics Office of Poland, Basic Data on Health Care (various years).




                                                           45
                                                                Figure A.3: Take up of the "Baby Bonus" Between 2006 and 2015

                                                                     A. Absolute number of births and "baby bonuses" paid
                                                      430
                                                      420
     Number of births and "baby bunuses" (in 1,000)



                                                      410
                                                      400
                                                      390
                                                      380
                                                      370
                                                      360
                                                      350
                                                      340
                                                      330
                                                      320
                                                      310
                                                      300
                                                      290
                                                      280
                                                      270
                                                      260
                                                         2006     2007    2008    2009            2010     2011        2012    2013   2014   2015

                                                                                    live births          "baby bonuses" paid


                                                                             B. Coverage rate of the "baby bonus"
                                                      110%
                                                      105%
                                                      100%
     Coverage rate




                                                      95%
                                                      90%
                                                      85%
                                                      80%
                                                      75%
                                                      70%
                                                         2006      2007    2008    2009           2010      2011        2012   2013   2014   2015

Note: This figure presents aggregate statistics on all births and number of benefits paid based on annual data from The Ministry
of Family, Labour and Social Policy. The coverage rate is a ratio of the number of "baby bonuses" to the number of all births
in a given year.




                                                                                                    46
            Figure A.4: Legal Abortions and Miscarriages between 2002 and 2016 in Poland

                                                    A. Legal abortions




                                                      B. Miscarriages




Note: This figure presents aggregate statistics on number of legal abortions and miscarriages relative to live births between 2002
and 2016 in Poland.
Source: Centrum Systemow Informacyjnych Ochrony Zdrowia (CSIOZ).

                                                               47
                                              Figure A.5: Trends in Conceptions and Births

                                                             (a) Conceptions around 6th December
                    10000
                     9500
                     9000
                     8500
                     8000
                     7500
                     7000
                     6500
                     6000
                     5500
                     5000                                         01 Nov

                                                                            01 Nov

                                                                                     15 Nov

                                                                                              22 Nov

                                                                                                       29 Nov

                                                                                                                06 Dec

                                                                                                                          13 Dec

                                                                                                                                   20 Dec

                                                                                                                                            27 Dec

                                                                                                                                                     03 Jan

                                                                                                                                                              10 Jan

                                                                                                                                                                       17 Jan

                                                                                                                                                                                24 Jan

                                                                                                                                                                                         31 Jan
                            04 Oct

                                     11 Oct

                                               18 Oct

                                                        25 Oct




                                          2005/6                   2006/7                     2007/8                2008/9 (reform)                           2009/10


                                                                 (b) Conceptions around 8th February
                    10000
                     9500
                     9000
                     8500
                     8000
                     7500
                     7000
                     6500
                     6000
                     5500
                     5000
                                                                                                       01 Feb

                                                                                                                08 Feb

                                                                                                                          15 Feb

                                                                                                                                   22 Feb

                                                                                                                                            01 Mar

                                                                                                                                                     08 Mar

                                                                                                                                                              15 Mar

                                                                                                                                                                       22 Mar

                                                                                                                                                                                29 Mar

                                                                                                                                                                                         05 Apr
                            07 Dec

                                     14 Dec

                                               21 Dec

                                                        28 Dec

                                                                  04 Jan

                                                                            11 Jan

                                                                                     18 Jan

                                                                                              25 Jan




                                          2005/6                   2006/7                     2007/8                2008/9 (reform)                           2009/10


                                                                     (c) Births around 1st November
                    10000
                     9500
                     9000
                     8500
                     8000
                     7500
                     7000
                     6500
                     6000
                     5500
                     5000
                            30 Aug

                                     06 Sep

                                               13 Sep

                                                        20 Sep

                                                                  27 Sep




                                                                                                                01 Nov

                                                                                                                          08 Nov

                                                                                                                                   15 Nov

                                                                                                                                            22 Nov

                                                                                                                                                     29 Nov

                                                                                                                                                              06 Dec

                                                                                                                                                                       13 Dec

                                                                                                                                                                                20 Dec

                                                                                                                                                                                         27 Dec
                                                                            04 Oct

                                                                                     11 Oct

                                                                                              18 Oct

                                                                                                       25 Oct




                                                 2006                      2007                 2008                     2009 (reform)                        2010

Note: This figure plots the weekly number of conceptions and births across years around three cutoffs: 6th of December, 8th of
February, and 1st of November. Conception date is calculated as the day of birth minus the actual completed gestational weeks
converted into days. The x-axis shows the starting days of seven-day periods.
                                                                                                       48
                            Figure A.6: Effects of the Reform on Neonatal Health: Quantile Regressions

                                                                               a) Log birth weight
                                      2.0



                                      1.5
                 Coefficient (x100)




                                      1.0



                                      0.5



                                      0.0
                                             5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40    45    50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95

                                                                                    Quantile
                                      -0.5



                                                                               b) Health index
                                  0.09

                                  0.08

                                  0.07

                                  0.06

                                  0.05
           Coefficient




                                  0.04

                                  0.03

                                  0.02

                                  0.01

                                  0.00
                                             5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40    45    50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95
                             -0.01
                                                                                    Quantile

Note: The estimation samples include all conceptions up to four weeks before 6th December in years 2005 - 2009 and up to
four weeks after 8th February in years 2006 - 2010. These figures plot unconditional quantile regression estimates, from RIF
regressions (Firpo et al., 2009) implemented using the rifreg command in Stata, on the reform dummy as defined in equation
(1). Solid black line depicts the point estimate while gray lines present 90% confidence intervals. Panel A presents estimates
for log birth weight while panel B for health index. Control variables include maternal age at delivery (linear and squared),
dummies for her marital status, education, source of income, province of residence, rural areas, number of previous births, and
a child's gender.




                                                                                     49
                      Table A.1: Construction of Principal Components Health Index
                                                                    First              Second
                                                                component            component
                        Fetal death (indicator)                   -0.389                0.918
                        Birth weight (grams)                       0.643                0.328
                        Gestational age (weeks)                    0.660                0.221
                        Eigenvalue                                 1.708                0.877
                                 Summary statistics for the first component
                        Mean                                        0.000
                        Standard deviation                          1.307
Note: This table reports the results of a principal components analysis of an indicator for fetal death, birth weight in grams,
and gestational age in weeks. The eigenvectors associates with the first and second components are reported, as well as their
associated eigenvalues. The bottom panel reports summary statistics of the health index, defined as the first component of the
principal components analysis, for the overall sample.




                                                              50
                Table A.2: Heterogeneity in the Effects of the Reform on Neonatal Health
                                      (1)        (2)              (3)                (4)       (5)
                                          Fetal death         Log birth         Low birth  Gestational
                          Health index
                                              (×100)        weight (×100) weight (×100) age (weeks)
                                                   Panel A: Baseline specification
      Reform               0.020**          -0.117**           0.345**          -0.391**     0.025
                            (0.008)          (0.051)           (0.166)            (0.158)   (0.016)
      Mean of Y               0.000            0.453           810.455              5.129   39.189
                                                Panel B: Interaction with education
      High school dropout  0.040***        -0.234***           0.636**             -0.617     0.049
      (reference)            (0.015)          (0.078)           (0.286)           (0.380)   (0.032)
      Reform × High          -0.027           0.183*            -0.450              0.497    -0.031
      school graduate        (0.019)          (0.109)           (0.375)           (0.496)   (0.040)
      Reform × Some         -0.027*           0.136*            -0.334              0.108    -0.023
      college and above      (0.016)          (0.080)           (0.317)           (0.403)   (0.035)
                                       Panel C: Interaction with labor force participation
      Not in labor force     0.025*          -0.126*            0.426*           -0.702**     0.038
      (reference)            (0.014)          (0.071)           (0.253)           (0.284)   (0.031)
      Reform × Working       -0.006            0.014            -0.114              0.431    -0.013
                             (0.014)          (0.074)           (0.255)           (0.314)   (0.033)
                                                  Panel D: Interaction with place of residence
      Rural (reference)             0.025**          -0.115*           0.479**           -0.428*                0.022
                                    (0.012)           (0.067)          (0.229)            (0.227)              (0.024)
      Reform × Urban                 -0.006           -0.002            -0.223             0.049                0.011
                                    (0.011)           (0.065)          (0.234)            (0.272)              (0.027)
                                               Panel E: Interaction with maternal age at conception
      Teen birth                    0.056*           -0.239*           1.272*          -2.407***                0.074
      (reference)                   (0.032)           (0.132)          (0.654)            (0.700)              (0.071)
      Reform × Non-teen             -0.037             0.130            -0.974          2.113***               -0.048
      birth                         (0.033)           (0.140)          (0.656)            (0.690)              (0.071)
                                                       Panel F: Interaction with birth order
      First birth                    0.014            -0.069             0.259           -0.351*                0.018
      (reference)                   (0.011)           (0.069)          (0.211)            (0.211)              (0.020)
      Reform × Non-first             0.014            -0.098             0.180            -0.099                0.021
      birth                         (0.013)           (0.081)          (0.249)            (0.252)              (0.028)
      N                                                                 296,828
Note: Each column in each panel is based on a separate regression without controls based on the donut-hole sample where
we include conceptions up to four weeks before 6th December in years 2005-2009 and up to four weeks after 8th February in
years 2006-2010. It displays the coefficient on a Reform dummy from equation (1), which is labelled as reference category group
comparison between treated and control individuals, as well as its interactions with demographic characteristics. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered at the level of conception day. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level.




                                                               51
                                   Table A.3: Robustness: Event study analysis
                                    (1)                 (2)                   (3)             (4)                  (5)
                                                    Fetal death        Log birth weight Low birth weight     Gestational age
                               Health index
                                                      (×100)               (×100)           (×100)              (weeks)
   13-15 weeks prior to           -0.014               0.024               -0.239            0.073               -0.013
   reform                         (0.010)             (0.064)              (0.174)          (0.176)             (0.018)
   10-12 weeks prior to           -0.001              -0.063               -0.106           -0.048                0.003
   reform                         (0.010)             (0.057)              (0.198)          (0.178)             (0.017)
   7-9 weeks prior to              0.009              -0.072                0.198          -0.346*                0.006
   reform                         (0.011)             (0.052)              (0.203)          (0.181)             (0.019)
   4-6 weeks prior to             -0.003              -0.046                0.011            0.015               -0.012
   reform                         (0.010)             (0.060)              (0.193)          (0.189)             (0.018)
   1-3 weeks prior to
                                                                       Reference period
   reform
   1-3 weeks after reform          0.003              -0.092               -0.013             -0.105              0.007
   signing                        (0.010)             (0.056)              (0.183)            (0.174)            (0.018)
   4-6 weeks after reform         0.016*             -0.096*                0.205             -0.141             0.034*
   signing                        (0.010)             (0.051)              (0.193)            (0.204)            (0.018)
   7-9 weeks after reform          0.017              -0.024               0.411*            -0.350*              0.018
   signing                        (0.011)             (0.061)              (0.220)            (0.214)            (0.019)

   1-3 weeks after reform        0.032***           -0.202***              0.510**          -0.491**             0.041**
   implementation                 (0.011)            (0.059)                (0.211)          (0.205)             (0.020)
   4-6 weeks after reform        0.022***             -0.015                0.352*           -0.258             0.055***
   implementation                 (0.010)            (0.065)                (0.209)          (0.203)             (0.018)
   7-9 weeks after reform         0.019*               0.003                0.356*          -0.421**             0.043**
   implementation                 (0.011)            (0.057)                (0.210)          (0.201)             (0.020)
   10-12 weeks after               0.013               0.006                 0.297          -0.476**              0.030
   reform implementation          (0.012)            (0.071)                (0.222)          (0.193)             (0.021)
   13-15 weeks after              0.019*               0.046              0.545***          -0.456**             0.035*
   reform implementation          (0.010)            (0.072)                (0.204)          (0.200)             (0.019)
   Reference period mean           0.000               0.431               810.645            5.014              39.180
   N                                                                      1,459,814
Note: Each columns is based on a separate regression with controls and the sample includes conceptions up to 15 weeks before
and up to 24 weeks after 6th December in years 2005-2010. The 24-week post-period is divided into 9-week period between
signing and implementation of the reform and 15-week period post implementation. Event-time dummies are defined based on
3-week intervals and a period of 1 to 3 weeks prior to reform signing serves as a reference period. Individual controls include
maternal age at conception (linear and squared), dummies for her marital status, education, source of income, province of
residence, rural areas, number of previous births, and a child's gender. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level
of conception day. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                                  52
