                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REVENGE OF THE EXPERTS:
          WILL COVID-19 RENEW OR DIMINISH PUBLIC TRUST IN SCIENCE?

                                    Barry Eichengreen 
                                    Cevat Giray Aksoy 
                                        Orkun Saka

                                     Working Paper 28112
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28112


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020

 The order of author names is randomized via AEA Randomization Tool (code:
tOjmA7DVzybq). Eichengreen is a Professor of Economics and Political Science at the
University of California, Berkeley, Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research and Research Fellow at the Centre for Economic Policy Research. Aksoy is a Principal
Economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), part-time
Assistant Professor of Economics at King's College London and Research Associate at IZA
Institute of Labour Economics. Saka is an Assistant Professor at the University of Sussex,
Visiting Fellow at the London School of Economics and Research Associate at the Systemic Risk
Centre. We thank Nicolás Ajzenman, Chris Anderson (discussant), Belinda Archibong, Sascha
Becker, Damien Bol, Ralph De Haas, Anna Getmansky (discussant), Luigi Guiso, Bruce Hardy,
Beata Javorcik, André Sapir, Konstantin Sonin, Dan Treisman, and webinar participants at the
Bank of Finland, Comparative Economics Webinar series, EBRD, LSE and University of Sussex
for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Kimiya Akhyani for providing very useful research
assistance. Views presented are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the EBRD. All
interpretations, errors, and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Barry Eichengreen , Cevat Giray Aksoy , and Orkun Saka. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Revenge of the Experts: Will Covid-19 Renew or Diminish Public Trust in Science?
Barry Eichengreen , Cevat Giray Aksoy , and Orkun Saka
NBER Working Paper No. 28112
November 2020
JEL No. H0

                                            ABSTRACT

It is sometimes said that an effect of the COVID-19 pandemic will be heightened appreciation of
the importance of scientific research and expertise. We test this hypothesis by examining how
exposure to previous epidemics affected trust in science and scientists. Building on the
"impressionable years hypothesis" that attitudes are durably formed during the ages 18 to 25, we
focus on individuals exposed to epidemics in their country of residence at this particular stage of
the life course. Combining data from a 2018 Wellcome Trust survey of more than 75,000
individuals in 138 countries with data on global epidemics since 1970, we show that such
exposure has no impact on views of science as an endeavor but that it significantly reduces trust
in scientists and in the benefits of their work. We also illustrate that the decline in trust is driven
by the individuals with little previous training in science subjects. Finally, our evidence suggests
that epidemic-induced distrust translates into lower compliance with health-related policies in the
form of negative views towards vaccines and lower rates of child vaccination.


Barry Eichengreen                                  Orkun Saka
Department of Economics                            University of Sussex
University of California, Berkeley                 Business School
549 Evans Hall 3880                                Falmer, Brighton BN1 9RH
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                            United Kingdom
and NBER                                           and LSE
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu                         o.saka@sussex.ac.uk

Cevat Giray Aksoy
European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Broadgate, 1 Exchange Square
London EC2A 2JN
United Kingdom
aksoyc@ebrd.com
        "More shutdowns are avoidable, but the public needs to trust science."
        (Anthony Stephen Fauci, Director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases'
        remarks at a virtual symposium hosted by Harvard University on 5 August 2020)


    1. Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted disagreements among scientists, leading to criticism
from politicians and the public.2 It has renewed long-standing concerns that lay perceptions
of scientific disputes diminish the regard in which scientific findings are held and further
"misunderstanding of how science operates and/or...[lead] people to ignore scientific
advice" (Dieckmann and Johnson, 2019). It has put on display leaders' "longstanding
practice of undermining scientific expertise for political purposes" (Friedman and Plumer,
2020) and of engaging in "denigration of scientific expertise and harassment of scientists"
(Scientists for Science-Based Policy, 2020).


One can distinguish several questions under this heading. First, are assessments of science
as an endeavor and scientists as experts affected positively or negatively by the circumstances
of a pandemic? Second, will changes in attitudes and opinions adhere mainly to the scientific
endeavor or individual scientists? Will any reassessment of the importance of science apply
to both the undertaking and those engaging in it, or will the public continue to trust science
as a potential source of a vaccine, for example, while criticizing individual scientists who
warn that the time needed to develop that vaccine will be lengthy?


We investigate in this paper how exposure to past epidemics affected trust in science and
scientists. We use data from the 2018 Wellcome Global Monitor (WGM), which includes
responses to questions about trust in science and scientists from over 75,000 individuals in
138 countries. We link these individual responses to the incidence of epidemics since 1970
as tabulated in the EM-DAT International Disasters Database. Building on work suggesting
that individual attitudes and behavior are durably molded in what psychologists refer to as

2
 See, for example, the Conversation article from April 8, 2020: https://theconversation.com/coronavirus-why-
experts-disagree-so-strongly-over-how-to-tackle-the-disease-135825.

                                                     2
the "impressionable" late-adolescent and early-adult years, we show that impressionable-
year epidemic exposure does not influence respondents' long-term views of the value of
science as an endeavor or of its role in containing the spread of diseases. However, such
exposure is negatively associated with trust in scientists and, specifically, with views of their
integrity and trustworthiness. Specifically, an individual with the highest exposure to an
epidemic (relative to zero exposure) is 11 percentage points less likely to have trust in the
scientist (the respective average of this variable in our sample is 76 percent).

Our data and setting allow us to extend and complement existing studies. We can examine
trust in science and trust in scientists as separate outcomes. Using the cross-cohort variation
generated by past epidemics, our analysis offers the broadest cross-national evidence to date
on the relationship between exposure to epidemics and scientific trust. Whereas previous
papers have looked at individual countries, our data cover 138 countries. This inspires greater
confidence in the generality of the findings.

The negative relationship between past epidemic exposure during one's impressionable years
and current trust in scientists is robust to controlling for a battery of political and economic
shocks that may have coincided with an individual's impressionable years. We utilize the
methodology developed by Oster (2019) to show that our results are unlikely to be driven by
omitted variables. In addition, there is no such association in the case of trust in public health
professionals (doctors, nurses, traditional healers, and others helping to manage the public-
health consequences of an epidemic). And in line with the impressionable year hypothesis,
this relationship is specific to the epidemic exposure between the ages of 18 and 25.

Public distrust in science and scientists during and following an epidemic can be a product
both of individuals' backgrounds and of miscommunication by the scientific community.
Such miscommunication, including conflicting statements by different experts, is more likely
in crisis periods when the pressure to quickly produce and disseminate scientific findings is
intense (IFPRI, 2020). Members of the public who are not familiar with the scientific process
may interpret the conflicting views of scientists and criticism of some studies by the authors
of others as signs of bias or dishonesty. This paper cannot analyze the first argument, due to
lack of data on scientific communication during past epidemics. But we provide suggestive
                                                3
evidence for the second, showing that individuals with little scientific training drive the
negative relationship between past epidemic exposure and trust in scientists.

Effective epidemic control depends on public compliance with government mandates based
on scientific advice. For example, trust in scientists recommending policies such as mask
wearing, social distancing, lockdowns and mass vaccination will be associated with greater
compliance with those recommendations. We directly investigate this channel, establishing
that epidemic-induced distrust in scientists is associated with lower compliance with health-
related advice. In particular, we show that past epidemic exposure negatively shapes
respondents' long-term attitudes towards vaccination and reduces the likelihood that their
children are vaccinated against childhood diseases.

Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, there are a number of studies of
the impact of epidemics on trust-related outcomes, which reach conflicting results. Aassvea
et al. (2020) find that the Spanish Flu had permanent negative consequences for individuals'
social trust. Bol et al. (2020), on the other hand, survey citizens of 15 European countries and
find that COVID-19-related lockdowns were associated with a 2 percent increase in trust in
government in the short term. Fluckiger, Ludwig and Onder (2019), focusing on Ebola in
West Africa, provide evidence that exposure to the epidemic enhanced trust in government,
especially where governments responded robustly. In contrast, Aksoy, Eichengreen and Saka
(2020) find a negative impact of past exposure to epidemics on confidence in government.

In addition, we know of one paper that has explored changes in trust in science following the
outbreak of COVID-19. Agley (2020) shows that the overall level of trust in science remained
unchanged between December 2019 and March 2020 in the United States, although
conservatives reported slight increases and liberals reported slight decreases.3

Second, our paper is related to the literature on the trust in science and expert advice. Gauchat
(2012) investigates public trust in science in the United States and documents differences by
social class, ethnicity, gender, church attendance, and region. Sapienza and Zingales (2013)

3 However, this study considers only the short-term impact of a single epidemic. In contrast, we consider a
larger class of epidemics and test for persistent effects of experiencing epidemics during a critical juncture in
individuals' life cycle, namely `impressionable years'.
                                                       4
examine whether information about the consensus views of economists affects the views of
average citizens, finding that knowledge of expert views sometimes moves public opinion in
the opposite direction.

Third, there is the literature on scientific communication, which shows that different findings
across studies may be seen by the public as discrediting the investigators, depending on how
disagreements are presented (Scheufele, 2013; Van der Bles et al., 2020). These analyses
point to the importance of scientists cultivating an aura of trustworthiness, in addition to
asserting expertise (Fiske and Dupree, 2014). Related to this is the literature concerned with
science and public opinion (Drummond and Fishhoff, 2017), in which it is argued that
scientific knowledge may be invoked or dismissed insofar as it supports or challenges non-
scientific (economic or political) concerns.

Fourth, there is the literature on the impressionable years. A seminal study pointing to the
importance of this stage of the lifecycle is the survey of women attending Bennington College
between 1935 and 1939 (Newcomb 1943, Newcomb, Koenig, Flacks and Warwick 1967),
among whom beliefs and values formed then remained stable for long periods. An early
statement of the resulting hypothesis is Dawson and Prewitt (1969); Krosnick and Alwin
(1989), among others, then pinpoint the impressionable years as running from ages 18 to 25.

When rationalizing the importance of the impressionable years, some scholars draw on
Mannheim's concept of the "fresh encounter," suggesting that views are durably formed
when late adolescents first encounter new ideas or events. Others invoke Erikson (1968) to
suggest that individuals at this age are open to new influences because they are at the stage
of life when they are forming a sense of self and identity. Still others suggest that attitudes
are pliable at this stage of the lifecycle because views have not yet been hardened by
confirmatory information (Converse, 1976). Spear (2000) links the the impressionable years
to work in neurology, suggesting that these neurochemical and anatomical changes between
the adolescent and adult brain are associated with durable attitude formation. Niemi and
Sobieszek (1977, p.221 et seq) suggest that only in the late adolescent years have young




                                               5
people developed "the cognitive capacity to deal with political ideas" and that the same can
be said to some extent of individuals in their university years (p.222).

In terms of applications, Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) establish that experiencing a
recession between the ages of 18 and 25 has a significant impact on political preferences and
beliefs about the economy. Using survey data from Chile, Etchegaray et al. (2018) show that
individuals in their impressionable years in periods of political repression have a greater
tendency to withhold their opinions, compared to those who grew up in less repressive times.
Farzanegan and Gholipour (2019) find that Iranians experiencing the Iran-Iraq War in their
impressionable years are more likely to prioritize a strong defense.

Finally, the present paper is related to Aksoy, Eichengreen and Saka (2020), where we find
a negative impact of past epidemic exposure in confidence in the current political leader and
in the integrity of the elections through which that leader is selected. But whereas, in that
paper, we were able to investigate trust in the leader only in one setting (that of national
government), here we observe views of the trustworthiness of scientists in two different
settings: universities and private companies. In addition, we are able to link the changes in
trust in the responsible authorities with compliance with their advice; we show that epidemic
exposure that erodes trust in scientists is also associated with a reduced willingness to
vaccinate one's children, both within the same group of individuals included in WGM survey.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section
Section 3 outlines our empirical design and identification strategy. Section 4 presents the
baseline results, after which Section 5 concludes.




   2. Data

Our principal data sources are 2018 Wellcome Global Monitor (WGM) and the EM-DAT
International Disasters Database. WGM is a nationally representative survey fielded in 2018.
Our final merged sample includes 138 countries. WGM is the first global survey of how
people think and feel about key health and science challenges, including attitudes towards

                                               6
vaccines; trust in doctors, nurses and scientists; trust in medical advice from the government;
whether people believe in the benefits of science.

The main outcome variables of interest come from questions asked of all WGM respondents
regarding their trust in science and scientists:
    (i) "in general, would you say that you trust science a lot, some, not much, or not at all?";
    (ii) "how much do you trust scientists working in colleges/universities in this country to
         do each of the following?"
             a. to do their work with the intention of benefiting the public
             b. to be open and honest about who is paying for their work
    (iii) "thinking about companies - for example, those who make medicines or agricultural
         supplies - how much do you trust scientists working for companies in this country to
         do each of the following?"
             a. to do their work with the intention of benefiting the public
             b. to be open and honest about who is paying for their work
    (iv) "in general, how much do you trust scientists to find out accurate information about
         the world? A lot, some, not much, or not at all?"


Responses were coded on a 4-point Likert scale, ranging from "A lot" (1) to "Not at all" (4).
We code "A lot" and "Some" as 1 and zero otherwise in order to estimate a Linear Probability
Model (LPM).4


WGM also provides information on respondents' demographic characteristics (age, gender,
educational attainment, marital status, religion, and urban/rural residence), labor market
outcomes, and within-country income quintiles. Controlling for employment status and
income allows us to measure the impact of past epidemics on trust in science and scientists
beyond any direct effect of epidemics on material well-being.




4
  In Appendix Tables 16 and 17, we also show that our results are robust to using ordered logit and multinomial
logit models.
                                                      7
We also examine responses to three parallel questions as placebo outcomes, namely whether
the respondents have trust in doctors and nurses; hospitals and health clinics; traditional
healers. This helps us to determine whether what we are capturing is the impact of epidemic
exposure on views of scientists specifically, as distinct from any impact on views of
healthcare-related institutions and professionals.


Data on the worldwide epidemic occurrence and effects are drawn from the EM-DAT
International Disasters Database from 1970 to the present. 5 These data are compiled from
UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, research institutes,
press agencies, and other sources. It includes all epidemics (viral, bacterial, parasitic, fungal,
and prion) meeting one or more of the following criteria: (i) 10 or more people dead; (ii) 100
or more people affected; (iii) declaration of a state of emergency; (iv) a call for international
assistance.


Our dataset includes 47 different types of epidemics and pandemics since 1970. This includes
large outbreaks of Cholera, Ebola, and H1N1 and also more limited epidemics. Averaged
across available years, H1N1, Ebola, Dysentery, Measles, Meningitis, Cholera, Yellow
Fever, Diarrhoeal Syndromes, Marburg Virus, and Pneumonia were the top 10 diseases
causing epidemic mortality worldwide.


Many of these epidemics and pandemics affected multiple countries. 138 countries
experienced at least one epidemic since 1970. This includes 51 countries in Africa, 40 in
Asia, 22 in the Americas, 19 in Europe, and 5 in Oceania. The most epidemic-prone countries
in the dataset are Niger (25), Nigeria (25), Congo (22), Cameroon (21), Mozambique (20),
Sudan (20), Uganda (20) and India (19). Advanced countries in our sample all experienced
5 or fewer epidemics.6


5 EM-DAT was established in 1973 as a non-profit within the School of Public Health of the Catholic University
of Louvain; it subsequently became a collaborating center of the World Health Organization. It also gathers
historical information on epidemics that took place before it was founded; however, those data are patchy and
biased towards well-recorded epidemics. Hence we only focus on epidemic cases that EM-DAT "live" collected
after it was founded in early 1970s.
6 We provide the full country-year-epidemic list in Appendix Table 18.

                                                      8
Each epidemic is identified with the country where it took place. When an epidemic affects
several countries, several separate entries are made to the database for each. EM-DAT
provides information on the start and end date of the epidemic, the number of deaths, and the
number of individuals affected. The number of individuals affected refers to the total number
requiring immediate assistance (assistance with basic survival needs such as food, water,
shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical treatment) during the period of emergency. We
aggregate the epidemic related information in this database at the county-year level and
merge it with WGM. Figure 1 provides a visual summary.


We also use country level information from the Cross-National Time-Series (CNTS) dataset
to control for individuals' past experiences and get information on past media consumption
(TV units per capita and radio units per capita). Country level past economic experience
variables come from the World Bank. The data on political regime comes from the Polity. 7


    3. Empirical Model


      To assess the effect of past exposure to an epidemic on an individual's trust in science
and scientists, we estimate the following OLS specification:


Yi, c, a = 0 + 1Xi + 2Exposure to epidemic (18-25)ica + 3Cc + 4Aa + 5Cc*Age + ica                              (1)


where Yica is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the respondent i with age a in
country c has trust in science or scientists. To operationalize Exposure to epidemic (18-25),
we calculate for each individual the number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of
the population, averaged over the 8 years when the individual was in his or her




7
 Past experience variables include GDP growth, GDP per capita, the inflation rate, the political regime (the
Polity2 score), assassinations, general strikes, terrorism/guerrilla warfare, purges, riots, revolutions, and anti-
government demonstrations, government crises, physicians per capita and university enrollment per capita.
                                                        9
impressionable years (18-25 years old).8 The coefficient of interest is 2, which captures the
impact of past exposure to an epidemic on the trust in science or scientists.


We specify the Xi vector of individual characteristics to include: indicator variables for living
in an urban area and for having a child (any child under 15), and dummy variables for gender
(male), employment status (full-time employed by an employer, full-time self-employed,
part-time employed with intention for full-time, part-time employed with no intention for
full-time, unemployed, out of workforce), religion (religious vs. non-religious), educational
attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), and within-country income quintiles.


To account for unobservable characteristics, we include fixed effects separately at the levels
of country (Cc) and age cohort (Aa) (that is, cohort fixed effects). The country dummies
control for all variation in the outcome variable due to factors that vary cross-nationally. The
cohort fixed effects control for the variation in the outcome variable caused by factors that
are heterogeneous across (but homogenous within) birth cohorts.9 By controlling for these
and other variables separately, we can be confident that their effects are not being picked up
by impressionable-year epidemic exposure. In addition to saturating our specification with
country and cohort fixed-effects, we include country-specific age trends (Cc*Age).10 These
address the possibility that, even though we control for overall cohort and age-related factors,
the interaction of age and attitudes may differ across countries. In further robustness checks,
we also include country*income quintile, country*employment status and country*education
fixed effects.


We cluster standard errors by country and use sampling weights provided by the WGM to
make the data representative at the country level.

8
  In Appendix Tables 5 and 6, we show that our results are robust to using "population unadjusted epidemic
exposure" variable. Additionally, the results are qualitatively same once we employ a time-invariant measure
for population (see Appendix Tables 7 and 8).
9
  Since WGM contains a cross-section of countries at a single point in time (as of 2018), our cohort fixed effects
fully coincide with the age dummies that one would ideally like to include in Equation 1. Thus, even though
we cannot separately estimate the age-fixed effects due to such perfect collinearity, our setting indirectly
controls for all age-related heterogeneity by including these cohort fixed-effects.
10
   Our results remain virtually unchanged when we include country-quadratic age trends. These results are
available upon request.
                                                       10
Identification

One can imagine several potential threats to this strategy. First, age-specific factors may
matter if different generations were exposed to epidemics with different probabilities; given
advances in science and improvements in national healthcare systems, one might anticipate
that epidemics are less likely to be experienced by younger generations. We address these
concerns by including a full set of cohort fixed effects determined by an individual's year of
birth.


Second, generational trends in science attitudes could also be heterogeneous across countries.
Some national cultures may be more flexible and open to change in individual values and
beliefs, leading to larger differences across generations. We therefore include country-
specific age trends in our models.


Third, although we fully saturate our specifications with fixed effects, there could still be
other past exposures that are correlated with epidemics and matter for individuals' views
regarding science and scientists. To capture these additional exposures, we control for
various aspects of the political and socio-economic environment (GDP growth, GDP per
capita, inflation rate, political regime -the Polity2 score-, assassinations, general strikes,
terrorism/guerrilla warfare, purges, riots, revolutions, anti-government demonstrations,
government crises, physicians per capita and university enrollment per capita) in the country
in question during the individual's impressionable years. Thus, we confirm that including
these controls for other past exposures and conditions has minimal impact on the stability of
our coefficients of interest.


Lastly, we control for contemporaneous individual characteristics and economic
circumstances as captured by the WGM. These contemporaneous controls minimize the
possibility that the impact of a past epidemic is transferred to current outcomes via one of
these variables. These variables might also be considered as `bad controls' (Angrist and


                                             11
Pischke, 2009). As we reported in the Appendix, removing them does not substantively
change any of our findings.



       4. Results

Main Results
Table 1 reports the results for all dependent variables in WGM dataset related to respondents'
views of scientists: whether the respondent has trust in scientists in their country; trusts that
scientists working for private companies in their country aim to benefit the public; trusts that
scientists working for private companies in their country are honest about who is paying for
their work; trusts that scientists working for universities in their country aim to benefit the
public; trusts that scientists working for universities in their country are honest about who is
paying for their work; and trusts that scientists can find out accurate information about the
world.


Models/Columns 1-3, estimated on the full sample of respondents, progressively increase the
tightness of identification by adding controls at each step. Models/Columns 4-6 then add
fixed effects, where individuals in the treatment and control groups are only compared within
the same country and income level (Model 4), the same country and employment status
(Model 5), and the same country and educational attainment (Model 6).


The coefficients on impressionable-year epidemic exposure are negative and significant at
conventional levels in 29 of 36 cases.11 The estimates in Column 3 of Table 1, for example,
show that an individual with the highest exposure to epidemics (0.032, that is, the highest
number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the population averaged during an
individual's formative years) relative to individuals with no exposure is on average 11




11
     Later in a robustness check, we confirm the relevance of our treatment variable across multiple hypotheses.
                                                        12
percentage points (-3.454*0.032) less likely to trust in scientists in their country (the
respective average of this variable in our sample is 76 percent).12


Table 2 reports estimates of the same models for six additional dependent variables. The first
three are related to the societal impact of science: whether the respondent has trust in science;
thinks that science will help improve life for the next generation; and thinks that studying
disease is a part of science. The next three are placebo tests that address the possibility that
what we are picking up is not the impact on the perceived trustworthiness and public-
spiritedness of scientists engaged in health-related research specifically but the impact on
perceptions of individuals engaged in tasks related to healthcare and health outcomes
generally. In contrast to Table 1, Table 2 shows that formative-year epidemic exposure has
a positive, small and statistically insignificant effect on almost all of these outcome variables.
The effect we find is not a general decline in trust in science, but only in scientists. It is not
a general decline in trust in everyone engaged in health care, only in scientists researching
health care related issues.13


Heterogeneity by the Level of Science Education


Given that previous work points to science education as shaping views of science and
scientists, we also estimate our main specification for two subsamples: respondents who
learned about science at most at the primary school level, versus respondents who learned
about science at least at the secondary school level. The results, in Table 3, reveal substantial
differences. They suggest that our results are driven by the sample of individuals with little
or no science education. Additional analysis (not presented here but available upon request)



12
   We use the highest number in terms of past epidemics exposure as this varible is highly skewed with more
than half of the respondents having no experience at all; and thus, it would not be appropriate to benchmark the
effect size with mean or median.
13
   One could be concerned that our preferred specification (Model 3) in Tables 1 and 2 contains country-specific
age trends, which could be collinear with our treatment variable ( Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)). On the one
hand, there is little to suspect that our treatment variable would vary in a certain direction in line with the age
of the respondents in a country since we focus on the same past experience window (ages 18-25) irrespective
of what the age of the respondent is at the time of the survey. On the other hand, it is reassuring that our results
change very little when we drop these age trends in our estimations (see Models 1 and 2 in Tables 1 and 2).
                                                        13
suggests that these results cannot be explained by the possible interruption in education due
to exposure to an epidemic. 14


Are the results driven by other past experience?


In a robustness check, we control for other political and socio-economic experiences, the
timing of which corresponds to the same impressionable years (ages 18-25). For each
individual we add GDP growth, GDP per capita, inflation rate, political regime - Polity2
score-, assassinations, general strikes, terrorism/guerrilla warfare, purges, riots, revolutions,
anti-government demonstrations, government crises, physicians per capita and university
enrollment per capita at the time of the survey response.15 If such shocks coincide with
epidemics, omitting them may exaggerate the estimated effect of the latter.


Appendix Table 1 reports the results across the same six outcome variables related to trust in
scientists and shows that the impact of epidemic exposure on trust in scientists -if anything-
become larger, not smaller, once we control for these other past political and economic
shocks. This is consistent with the idea that what we are capturing is specific to epidemics
and not related to other coincident shocks.


Changes in Actual Behaviour


We ask whether the loss of trust in scientists has implications for actual behavior. We focus
on changes in vaccine-related attitudes and on the tendency for individuals to vaccinate their
own children. Table 4 presents estimates analogous to Model 3 of Table 1, while

14
   We also check the role of media consumption in shaping attitudes towards scientists at the time of the
epidemics. To do so, we use the country-level data from CNTS, which reports TV units per capita and Radio
units per capita for a large number of countries. In particular, we calculate the average values for each dimension
during the impressionable years of each individual. We then create interaction terms, Exposure to Epidemic
(18-25)*TV Per Capita (18-25) and Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)*Radio Per Capita (18-25), and include them
(alongside standalone variables) in our baseline model as reported in Appendix Table 15. The results show that
none of the interactions are statistically significant, suggesting that media consumption is not likely to be the
main transmission channel in our setting.
15
   In particular, we calculate the average values for each one of these dimensions during the impressionable
years of each individual. Including these past experiences as controls naturally makes for smaller samples, since
the Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive covers only some of the countries and years in our main sample.
                                                       14
simultaneously controlling for other past economic and political shocks. Individuals exposed
to epidemics in their impressionable years are more likely to have negative attitudes towards
vaccination and less likely to vaccinate their children. This suggests that the change in
attitudes that we document have consequences for actual behavior.


Robustness to omitted variable bias


One might be concerned that our results are driven by other omitted factors that shape the
individuals' trust. We therefore follow the method proposed by Oster (2019) to investigate
the importance of unobservables. In Appendix Table 2, we first reproduce the baseline
estimates for our main outcomes in the top row. The second row then presents estimation
bounds where we define Rmax upper bound as 1.3 times the R-squared in specifications that
control for observables.16 The bottom row presents Oster's delta, which indicates the degree
of selection on unobservables relative to observables that would be needed to fully explain
our results by omitted variable bias.


The results show very limited movement in the coefficients. High delta values also indicate
that the unobservables have less effect on our coefficient of interest than the observables.
The value of Oster's delta ranges between 2 and 132 across models, which is reassuring, as
it is unlikely that there are unobserved factors that are 2 to 132 times as important as all
observables we include in our preferred specification.


Are the results unique to impressionable years?


The results in Appendix Table 3 suggest that the effect is insignificant when individuals are
exposed to epidemics in any stage of life other than when they are between ages 18 and 25.




16Estimation bounds on the treatment effect range between the coefficient from the main specification and the
coefficient estimated under the assumption that observables are as important as unobservables for the level of
Rmax. Rmax specifies the maximum R-squared that can be achieved if all unobservables were included in the
regression.
                                                     15
These results are consistent with the idea that there is something special about the late
adolescent and early adult years that leaves a long-lasting legacy in beliefs and attitudes.


Multiple hypothesis testing


We also conducted multiple hypothesis testing by employing a randomization inference
technique suggested by Young (2019). This helps us establish the robustness of our results
for the null that our treatment does not have any effect across any of the outcome variables
(i.e., treatment is irrelevant), taking into account the multiplicity of the hypothesis testing
procedure. The method essentially builds on repeatedly randomizing the treatment variable
in each estimation and comparing the pool of randomized estimates to the estimates derived
via the true treatment variable. The results, presented in Appendix Table 4, show that our
findings remain robust when evaluated via these joint tests of treatment significance.


Robustness to Alternative Treatment Definitions


In our baseline results, we standardize our treatment variable by dividing the average number
of epidemic-affected people with the average population size of the country during one's
impressionable years. This standardization is crucial as one would expect that countries with
larger populations would naturally have more people infected by an epidemic since viruses
are socially transmitted and the eventual toll would depend on how many people live in a
country.

Nevertheless, one might be concerned that a small population in a country may increase the
intensity of the epidemic as well as the intensity of the epidemic affecting the population
counts (through both mortality and immigration). We, therefore, checked the robustness of
our results using population unadjusted treatment variable: simply the number of individuals
affected by an epidemic averaged over the 8 years when the individual was aged 18 to 25.
The results presented in Appendix Tables 5 and 6 show that our results are robust to this
alternative definition.


                                              16
In addition, in Appendix Tables 7 and 8, we show that our results remain qualitatively
identical when we use the treatment variable adjused by a time-invariant population size
(that is, using a population measure as of 1970).

Heterogeneity by the Country Characteristics

We consider the baseline specification (Column 3 of Table 1) for two subsamples: (i)
countries with below and above median physicians per capita at the time of the epidemic; (ii)
low-income countries vs. high-income countries. We report these results in Appendix Table
9, where each cell reports point estimates for a different outcome varible.

The negative impact of epidemic exposure on trust in scientists seems to be driven by
countries with below median physicians per capita at the time of the epidemic and low-
income countries. This pattern is in line with evidence from Aksoy, Eichengreen and Saka
(2020), who find that people in the low-income countries more likely to see their
governments and leaders less trustworthy and unreliable when they are exposed to epidemics
during their impressionable years.

Are the results driven by the intensive or extensive margin?

In Appendix Table 10, we distinguish the intensive and extensive margins of the treatment.
For the extensive margin, we mean whether the effect is due to any level of epidemic
exposure. To capture this, we construct a binary variable based on whether the number of
people affected by epidemics during the individual's impressionable years is positive or zero.
For the intensive margin, we limit the sample to individuals with positive epidemic exposure
in their impressionable years.

Appendix Table 10 shows that the treatment works via the intensive margin. It is not simply
being exposed to an epidemic that generates the effect; rather, conditional on being exposed,
the severity of the epidemic drives the results.

Are large epidemics different?



                                              17
As shown in Appendix Table 10, the effects we identify are driven by intensive margin. To
further investigate this, in Appendix Table 11, we use indicators for the top 0.5 percent of
exposures to epidemics, the top 1 percent, the top 2 percent, and the top 5 percent, each in a
separate estimation. An epidemic exposure in the scale of top 0.5, 1, or 2 percent of all past
experiences causes a significant fall in an individual's confidence in scientists. Moreover, the
magnitude of the effect tends to increase with more intense experiences.

Excluding potential "bad controls"

One might worry that certain individual characteristics (such as household income) are
themselves affected by epidemic related economic shocks. We therefore checked for
potential "bad controls" (Angrist and Pischke, 2008) by excluding these individual
characterisitics. Doing so does not substantively change the point estimates for our variables
of interest (see Appendix Table 12).17

Robutness to Controlling for the Number of Epidemic Experience

Appendix Table 13 shows that our results are robust to controlling for the number of
epidemics experienced by individuals over their lifetime.

Robustness to Excluding Most Affected Countries

To check whether our results are driven by a small set of countries, we exclude the most
affected countries and reestimate our main models. The results presented in Appendix Table
14 show that our results remain robust.

       5. Discussion


COVID-19 has the potential to reshape every aspect of society, including how science and
scientists are perceived. It is not clear, however, whether trust in science and scientists will
be enhanced or diminished, or whether such changes will affect mainly science as an
endeavor or scientists as individuals.


17
     We therefore keep these controls in our baseline specification to avoid omitted variable bias.
                                                         18
If past epidemics are a guide, the virus will not have an impact on the regard in which science
as an undertaking is held. Members of the public will continue to believe that science has the
potential to improve society. However, it will reduce trust in individual scientists, worsen
perceptions of their honesty, and weaken the belief that their activities benefit the public.
This distinction is consistent with the literatures in psychology and cognitive science on how
individuals assign blame in complex, high-stakes social settings and with their tendency to
blame individuals rather than institutions (see e.g. Wright 1993, Wilinson-Ryan 2020). It is
consistent with what we observe in, inter alia, the United States, where politicians and
commentators have questioned the value of the public-policy recommendations offered by
individual scientists (viz. Senator Rand Paul's comment "As much as I respect you, Dr.
Fauci, I don't think you're the end-all") while at the same time seeking to mobilize all
available scientific resources to develop a vaccine (the Trump Administration's "Operation
Warp Speed").


Whether evidence from past epidemics provide an accurate guide to the likely effects on trust
in scientists of COVID-19 can be questioned of course. The spread of COVID-19 is global,
where some past epidemics were limited to a handful of countries. COVID-19 is arguably
the first epidemic to occur in the era of widespread social media, which may have an effect
on the spread of misinformation as well as information and on the formulation of opinions.
We cannot speak definitively to this question of external validity. Our results in this paper
however hold for epidemics that strike multiple countries as well as for those that are limited
to a small number of countries.


The State of Science Index (2018) survey suggests that scientists are distrusted because they
are seen as members of the elite. It suggests individuals feel that scientists, being self-
interested and human, can be unduly influenced by government and corporate agendas, or
because they feel that scientists' conclusions are based on personal beliefs and data. Our
finding that past epidemic exposure negatively affects views of scientists working for private
companies but not as much of scientists working for universities suggests that suspicion of
corporate agendas is especially salient in this connection. That epidemic exposure affects
                                              19
views of scientists but not of science is consistent with this emphasis on investigator agendas
and beliefs, insofar as bias due to self interest more plausibly skews results when a study is
undertaken by an individual than a large team, in the latter case cancelling out individual
biases (Dieckmann and Johnson, 2019). Still other surveys find that a significant share of
respondents take disagreement among scientists, which is not unlikely in the context of a
swiftly unfolding pandemic, as evidence that their conclusions are based on personal belief
(rather than on issues of data and methodology), or as simply indicating that the investigators
in question are incompetent.


Addressing concerns about corporate agendas, personal bias and disagreement in scientific
communication is even more important in this light. Our results suggest that it is especially
important to tailor any such response to the concerns expressed by members of the generation
("Generation Z") currently in their impressionable years.




                                              20
References


Aassve, A., Alfani, G., Gandolfi, F., & Le Moglie, M. (2020). "Epidemics and trust: the case
of the spanish flu". Mimeo.


Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist's Companion. Princeton University Press.


Agley, J. (2020). "Assessing changes in US public trust in science amid the Covid-19
pandemic". Public Health. Forthcoming.


Aksoy, C. G., Eichengreen, B., & Saka, O. (2020). "The Political Scar of Epidemics". NBER
Working Paper No. 27401.


Bol, D., M. Giani, A. Blais, A. and P.J. Loewen, "The effect of COVID19 lockdowns on
political support: Some good news for democracy?" European Journal of Political Research.
Forthcoming.


Converse, P.E. (1976), The dynamics of party support: Cohort-analyzing party identification ,
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Dawson, R. and K. Prewitt (1969), Political socialization, Boston: Little, Brown & Co.


Dieckmann, N. F., & Johnson, B. B. (2019). "Why do scientists disagree? Explaining and
improving measures of the perceived causes of scientific disputes". PloS One, 14(2),
e0211269.


Drummond, C., & Fischhoff, B. (2017). "Individuals with greater science literacy and
education have more polarized beliefs on controversial science topics". Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 114(36), 9587-9592.


Erikson, E. (1968), Identity, Youth and Crisis, New York: Norton.
                                             21
Etchegaray, N., A. Scherman and S. Valenzuela (2018), "Testing the hypothesis of
`impressionable years' with willingness to self-sensor in Chile," International Journal of
Public Opinion Research 31: 331-348.


Fiske, S. T., & Dupree, C. (2014). Gaining trust as well as respect in communicating to
motivated audiences about science topics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(Supplement 4), 13593-13597.


Fluckiger, M., M. Ludwig and A. Sina Onder, "Ebola and State Legitimacy". Economic
Journal 129: 2064-2089.


Friedman L. and Plumer B., Trump's Response to Virus Reflects a Long Disregard for
Science.       New        York        Times        (28       April).       Available        at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/28/climate/trump-coronavirus-climate-science.html
Accessed 18 May 2020.


Gauchat, G. (2012). "Politicization of science in the public sphere: A study of public trust in
the United States, 1974 to 2010". American sociological review, 77(2), 167-187.


Giuliano, P., & A. Spilimbergo, (2013). "Growing up in a recession," Review of Economic
Studies 81(2), 787-817.


IFPRI (2020). "Trust in science and in government plays a crucial role in COVID-19 response"
Available at: https://www.ifpri.org/blog/trust-science-and-government-plays-crucial-role-covid-19-
response


Krosnick, J. and D. Alwin (1989), "Aging and susceptibility to attitude change," Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 57: 416-425.



                                              22
Newcomb, T. (1943), Personality and social change: Attitude formation in a student community, New
York: Dryden.


Newcomb, T., K. Koenig, R. Flacks and D. Warwick (1967), Persistence and change: Bennington
College and its students after 25 years, New York: Wiley.


Niemi, R. and B. Sobieszek (1977), "Political Socialization," Annual Review of Sociology 3: 209-233.


Oster, E. (2019). "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence". Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187-204.


Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2013). "Economic experts versus average Americans". American
Economic Review, 103(3), 636-42.


Scheufele, D. A. (2013). "Communicating science in social settings". Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110, 14040-14047.


Shepherd M. The COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic Highlights the Importance of Scientific Expertise,
Forbes (14 March). Available at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/marshallshepherd/2020/03/14/covid-
19-and-the-sudden-respect-of-science-expertise/#54ae1afa29b0 Accessed 15 September 2020.


Scientists for Science-Based Policy (2020). "Statement to Restore Science-Based Policy in
Government," Concerned Members of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences: Available at:
https://scientistsforsciencebasedpolicy.org/.


Spear, L. (2000), "Neurobehavioral changes in adolescence," Current Directions in Psychological
Science 9(4): 111-114.


State of Science Index Survey (2018). Available at: https://www.3m.com/3M/en_US/state-of-science-
index-survey/


                                                23
Van Der Bles, A. M., van der Linden, S., Freeman, A. L., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (2020). "The effects of
communicating uncertainty on public trust in facts and numbers". Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 117(14), 7672-7683.


Wilinson-Ryan, T. (2020), "Our Minds aren't Equipped for This Kind of Reopening," The Atlantic (6
July), https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/07/reopening-psychological-morass/613858/.


Wright, S.E. (1993), "Blaming the Victim, Blaming Society or Blaming the Discipline: Fixing
Responsibility for Poverty and Homelessness," Sociological Quarterly 34, 1-16.


Young, A. (2019), "Channeling fisher: Randomization tests and the statistical insignificance of
seemingly significant experimental results," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(2): 557-598.




                                             24
Figure 1: Share of respondents who trust science and scientists
Panel A




Panel B




Notes: Panel A illustrates share of respondents who trust science a lot or some. Panel B illustrates share of respondents who
trust scientists a lot or some. Countries are grouped in quintiles. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018.




                                                     25
Table 1: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Trust in Scientists
                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Outcome     Trust in scientists
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)               -2.937*              -2.821*           -3.454**              -3.408**             -3.162**           -3.525**
                                            (1.600)              (1.645)           (1.330)               (1.422)              (1.468)            (1.421)
Observations                                 83014                82854             82854                 82854                82854              82854
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -1.552***            -1.559***         -1.283***             -1.289***             -1.141**          -1.346***
                                            (0.354)              (0.349)           (0.338)               (0.389)              (0.447)            (0.375)
Observations                                 81554                81406             81406                 81406                81406              81406
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -2.105***            -2.106***         -1.731***             -1.915***            -1.611***          -1.779***
                                            (0.597)              (0.611)           (0.642)               (0.661)              (0.466)            (0.620)
Observations                                 76856                76723             76723                 76723                76723              76723
Outcome      Scientists working for universities benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                 0.150                0.226             -0.616               -0.836*               -0.572            -0.808*
                                            (0.727)              (0.752)           (0.478)               (0.459)              (0.500)            (0.448)
Observations                                 81307                81147             81147                 81147                81147              81147
Outcome      Scientists working for universities are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -3.042***            -2.980***         -3.330***             -3.442***            -3.259***          -3.337***
                                            (0.375)              (0.413)           (0.446)               (0.471)              (0.356)            (0.531)
Observations                                 76123                75992             75992                 75992                75992              75992
Outcome       Scientists to find out accurate information
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                 -1.352               -1.188          -1.438**             -1.873***               -1.185           -1.704**
                                            (0.988)              (1.137)           (0.664)               (0.644)              (0.752)            (0.717)
Observations                                 84104                83939             83939                 83939                83939              83939
Country fixed effects                         Yes                  Yes               Yes                   No                    No                No
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Demographic characteristics                    No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                  No                  Yes               Yes                   No                   Yes                Yes
Labour market controls                         No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                   No                Yes
Country-specific age trends                    No                   No               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                   No                   No                No                   Yes                   No                No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                   Yes                No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                    No                Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-
DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                     26
Table 2: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Trust in Science and Placebo Outcomes
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
Outcome     Have trust in science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                0.124              0.256                 0.256                 -0.039              0.533               0.164
                                           (0.503)            (0.599)               (0.408)               (0.484)             (0.406)             (0.423)
Observations                                85368              85199                 85199                 85199               85199               85199
Outcome      Science and technology will help improve life
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)               0.562*             0.669*                 0.685                 0.641               0.730               0.655
                                           (0.336)            (0.357)               (0.462)               (0.482)             (0.489)             (0.457)
Observations                                86585              86397                 86397                 86397               86397               86397
Outcome      Studying diseases is a part of science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                0.126              0.209                 0.369                 0.130               0.462               0.417
                                           (0.576)            (0.496)               (0.423)               (0.344)             (0.389)             (0.404)
Observations                                88326              88138                 88138                 88138               88138               88138
Outcome      Have trust in doctors and nurses
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                1.296              1.332                 1.585                 1.427               1.513               1.400
                                           (1.291)            (1.272)               (1.196)               (1.380)             (1.112)             (1.235)
Observations                                92026              91835                 91835                 91835               91835               91835
Outcome      Have trust in hospitals and health clinics
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                0.702              0.748                 1.341                 1.446               1.122               1.251
                                           (1.482)            (1.382)               (1.323)               (1.569)             (1.228)             (1.378)
Observations                                90030              89851                 89851                 89851               89851               89851
Outcome      Have trust in traditional healers
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                0.115              0.031                 -0.696                -0.663            -0.987**              -0.667
                                           (1.056)            (0.966)               (0.505)               (0.480)             (0.405)             (0.501)
Observations                                87942              87761                 87761                 87761               87761               87761
Country fixed effects                        Yes                Yes                   Yes                    No                 No                   No
Cohort fixed effects                         Yes                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Demographic characteristics                  No                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                No                 Yes                   Yes                    No                 Yes                 Yes
Labour market controls                       No                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 No                  Yes
Country-specific age trends                  No                 No                    Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                 No                 No                     No                   Yes                 No                   No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                  No                 No                     No                    No                 Yes                  No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                  No                 No                     No                    No                 No                  Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-
DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                    27
Table 3: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in Scientists by the Level of Science Education
                                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)                      (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                                 Confidence in        Scientists working for   Scientists working for   Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                          scientists           private companies      private companies are     universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                               benefit the public             honest                 the public               honest             information
Sample     Respondents learned about science at most at primary school level

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -4.521***                 -4.140***                -2.443**                   0.186                   -0.891                -0.253
                                           (0.888)                   (1.162)                 (0.971)                  (1.323)                 (3.436)               (0.488)

Observations                              14434                      13984                   12931                    13752                   12668                 14300
Sample    Respondents learned about science at least at secondary school level

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                1.332                   3.270***                  -1.545                   1.529                   -0.441                -1.315
                                           (2.547)                  (0.831)                  (2.370)                  (1.780)                 (1.285)               (1.037)

Observations                                 57892                     57054                     54130                 57206                53755             59232
Country fixed effects                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Demographic characteristics                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                 Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Labour market controls                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Country-specific age trends                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International
Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                      28
Table 4: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic on Attitudes towards Vaccines
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)
Outcome                             Children      Children     Vaccines are      Vaccines are      Vaccines      Vaccines      Vaccines     Vaccines
                                   received a    received a    important for     important for     are safe      are safe         are          are
                                    vaccine       vaccine       children to       children to                                  effective    effective
                                                                   have              have
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)       -1.341***     -1.479***      -1.562***          -1.272**        -4.694***    -4.461***     -2.446***     -1.959***
                                     (0.311)       (0.334)        (0.538)           (0.522)          (0.490)      (0.533)       (0.602)       (0.624)

Observations                         25774         25774           30955              30955             30330         30330       30383        30383
Country fixed effects                 Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Cohort fixed effects                  Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Demographic characteristics           Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Income quintile fixed effects         Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Labour market controls                Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Country-specific age trends           Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Past controls (18-25)                  No           Yes              No                 Yes              No            Yes         No           Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and
EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                            29
Appendix Table 1: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic, Education Related and Political Shocks
                                                   (1)                                   (2)
Outcome                                    Trust in scientists                   Trust in scientists

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                      -1.548***                                  -1.839***
                                                    (0.528)                                    (0.570)
Observations                                         30666                                      30666
Outcome                                 Scientists working for private             Scientists working for private
                                        companies benefit the public               companies benefit the public

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                        -0.738                                     -0.837
                                                   (1.030)                                    (1.167)
Observations                                        30273                                      30273
Outcome                                 Scientists working for private             Scientists working for private
                                            companies are honest                       companies are honest

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                      -2.001***                                 -2.465***
                                                    (0.387)                                   (0.573)
Observations                                         28789                                     28789
Outcome                               Scientists working for universities       Scientists working for universities
                                               benefit the public                        benefit the public

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                      -2.616***                                 -2.684***
                                                    (0.634)                                   (0.748)
Observations                                         30067                                     30067
Outcome                             Scientists working for universities are   Scientists working for universities are
                                                     honest                                    honest

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                       -4.007***                                  -3.841***
                                                     (1.183)                                    (1.214)
Observations                                          28437                                      28437
Outcome                            Scientists find out accurate information   Scientists find out accurate information

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                        -1.551***                               -0.974**
                                                      (0.373)                                (0.456)
Observations                                           30980                                  30980
Country fixed effects                                   Yes                                    Yes
Cohort fixed effects                                    Yes                                    Yes
Demographic characteristics                             Yes                                    Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                           Yes                                    Yes
Labour market controls                                  Yes                                    Yes
Country-specific age trends                             Yes                                    Yes
Past controls (18-25)                                   No                                     Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source:
Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                  30
Appendix Table 2: Robustness to Omitted Variable Bias
                                              (1)                   (2)                        (3)                     (4)                 (5)                   (6)
                                                            Scientists working                                    Scientists           Scientists
                                                                                      Scientists working for                                              Scientists to find
                                            Trust in            for private                                      working for          working for
        Dependent variable:                                                           private companies are                                                 out accurate
                                           scientists       companies benefit                                    universities        universities are
                                                                                              honest                                                        information
                                                                the public                                     benefit the public        honest

  Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -3.454**              -1.283***                 -1.731***                 -0.616             -3.330***             -1.438**
                                            (1.330)                (0.338)                   (0.642)                (0.478)               (0.446)              (0.664)

  Bounds on the treatment effect
                                        (-3.454, -3.044)      (-1.238, -1.134)           (-1.731, -2.301)       (-0.616, 0.649)      (-3.330, -2.587)      (-1.438, -0.827)
      (=1, Rmax=1.3*R)
   Treatment effect excludes 0               Yes                    Yes                        Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes
      Delta (Rmax=1.3*R)                    -44.41                -132.15                     13.52                  -1.97                -39.39               -5.367

Notes: *** Significant at the 1% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; * Significant at the 10% level. Bounds on the Democracy 18-25 effect are calculated using Stata
code psacalc, which calculates estimates of treatment effects and relative degree of selection in linear models as proposed in Oster (2019). Delta, , calculates an estimate
of the proportional degree of selection given a maximum value of the R-squared. Delta is assumed to be 1 in the analysis, which means that the observed and the unobserved
factors have an equally important effect on the coefficient of interest. Rmax specifies the maximum R-squared which would result if all unobservables were included in
the regression. We define Rmax upper bound as 1.3 times the R-squared from the main specification that controls for all observables.




                                                                                 31
Appendix Table 3: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic on Trust in Scientists During Formative Years (18-25) vs. During Other Years
                                       (1)                 (2)                       (3)                   (4)                   (5)
Outcome                              Trust in      Trust in scientists       Trust in scientists   Trust in scientists   Trust in scientists
                                    scientists
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)        -3.454**           -4.433**                  -3.086**             -2.361***             -6.326***
                                     (1.330)            (1.915)                   (1.184)               (0.836)               (1.023)

Exposure to Epidemic (2-9)                                      -0.044
                                                               (0.990)
Exposure to Epidemic (10-17)                                                             0.078
                                                                                        (0.942)
Exposure to Epidemic (26-33)                                                                                       -0.753
                                                                                                                  (1.152)
Exposure to Epidemic (34-42)                                                                                                               -0.932
                                                                                                                                          (4.066)
Observations                             82854                 58284                       71109                      60943                42018
Country fixed effects                      Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Cohort fixed effects                       Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Demographic characteristics                Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Income quintile fixed effects              Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Labour market controls                     Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Country-specific age trends                Yes                  Yes                          Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and
EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                             32
Appendix Table 4: Multiple Hypothesis Testing on Variables Related to Trust in Scientists

Randomization-c p-values (joint test of treatment significance)                                                              0.005***
Randomization-t p-values (joint test of treatment significance)                                                                 N/A
Randomization-c p-values (Westfall-Young multiple testing of treatment significance)                                          0.037**
Randomization-t p-values (Westfall-Young multiple testing of treatment significance)                                          0.020**

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Randomization-t technique does not produce p-values for the joint test
of treatment significance. Results are derived from 100 iterations. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor,
2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                              33
Appendix Table 5: Robustness to Using Population Unadjusted Treatment Variable - Trust in Scientists
                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Outcome      Trust in scientists
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.           -0.067               -0.060          -0.095**              -0.089**              -0.079*           -0.093**
                                            (0.042)              (0.043)           (0.043)               (0.043)              (0.044)            (0.042)
Observations                                 85746                85586             85586                 85586                85586              85586
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.         -0.043*              -0.045*          -0.060***             -0.057***             -0.048**          -0.058***
                                            (0.026)              (0.024)           (0.017)               (0.020)              (0.021)            (0.017)
Observations                                 84228                84080             84080                 84080                84080              84080
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.        -0.092***            -0.093***         -0.096***             -0.105***            -0.086***          -0.091***
                                            (0.025)              (0.025)           (0.013)               (0.014)              (0.016)            (0.015)
Observations                                 79312                79179             79179                 79179                79179              79179
Outcome      Scientists working for universities benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.           0.031                0.034            -0.037*               -0.044*               -0.034           -0.041**
                                            (0.024)              (0.024)           (0.022)               (0.023)              (0.024)            (0.020)
Observations                                 83930                83770             83770                 83770                83770              83770
Outcome      Scientists working for universities are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.        -0.106***            -0.101***         -0.143***             -0.148***            -0.139***          -0.144***
                                            (0.030)              (0.031)           (0.023)               (0.024)              (0.027)            (0.022)
Observations                                 78540                78409             78409                 78409                78409              78409
Outcome       Scientists to find out accurate information
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.           -0.022               -0.012            -0.060               -0.078*               -0.047             -0.066
                                            (0.040)              (0.044)           (0.042)               (0.042)              (0.045)            (0.042)
Observations                                 86857                86692             86692                 86692                86692              86692
Country fixed effects                         Yes                  Yes               Yes                   No                    No                 No
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Demographic characteristics                    No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                  No                  Yes               Yes                   No                   Yes                Yes
Labour market controls                         No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                   No                Yes
Country-specific age trends                    No                   No               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                   No                   No                No                   Yes                   No                 No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                   Yes                 No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                    No                Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-
DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                     34
Appendix Table 6: Robustness to Using Population Unadjusted Treatment Variable - Trust in Science and Placebo Outcomes
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
Outcome      Have trust in science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.          -0.000             0.009                 -0.025                -0.039              -0.009              -0.028
                                           (0.031)            (0.032)               (0.043)               (0.040)             (0.044)             (0.043)
Observations                                88129              87960                 87960                 87960               87960               87960
Outcome      Science and technology will help improve life
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.          0.013              0.018                 -0.004                -0.008              0.003               -0.004
                                           (0.031)            (0.032)               (0.038)               (0.037)             (0.041)             (0.037)
Observations                                89271              89083                 89083                 89083               89083               89083
Outcome      Studying diseases is a part of science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.          -0.032             -0.026                0.003                 -0.005              0.007               0.008
                                           (0.026)            (0.025)               (0.024)               (0.023)             (0.024)             (0.025)
Observations                                91104              90916                 90916                 90916               90916               90916
Outcome      Have trust in doctors and nurses
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.        0.083**            0.083**                 0.079                 0.076              0.073*              0.073*
                                           (0.037)            (0.037)               (0.042)               (0.047)             (0.042)             (0.044)
Observations                                95061              94870                 94870                 94870               94870               94870
Outcome      Have trust in hospitals and health clinics
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.        0.077**            0.074**               0.117***              0.122***            0.104***            0.115***
                                           (0.036)            (0.034)               (0.022)               (0.025)             (0.023)             (0.023)
Observations                                92985              92806                 92806                 92806               92806               92806
Outcome      Have trust in traditional healers
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)nopop.          0.042              0.034                 -0.010                -0.015              -0.022              -0.008
                                           (0.042)            (0.041)               (0.019)               (0.025)             (0.018)             (0.019)
Observations                                90775              90594                 90594                 90594               90594               90594
Country fixed effects                        Yes                Yes                   Yes                    No                  No                  No
Cohort fixed effects                         Yes                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Demographic characteristics                   No                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                 No                Yes                   Yes                    No                 Yes                 Yes
Labour market controls                        No                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  No                 Yes
Country-specific age trends                   No                 No                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                  No                 No                    No                   Yes                  No                  No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                   No                 No                    No                    No                 Yes                  No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                   No                 No                    No                    No                  No                 Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-
DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                    35
Appendix Table 7: Robustness to Using Treatment Variable with a Fixed Population in 1970 - Trust in Scientists
                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Outcome      Trust in scientists
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            -1.277               -1.226          -1.546**               -1.521*              -1.402*           -1.567**
                                            (0.825)              (0.848)           (0.745)               (0.783)              (0.797)            (0.780)
Observations                                 83014                82854             82854                 82854                82854              82854
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70         -0.743***            -0.750***         -0.624***             -0.611***             -0.530**          -0.645***
                                            (0.173)              (0.177)           (0.156)               (0.194)              (0.226)            (0.179)
Observations                                 81554                81406             81406                 81406                81406              81406
Outcome      Scientists working for private companies are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70         -0.989***            -0.996***         -0.811***             -0.895***            -0.716***          -0.820***
                                            (0.226)              (0.227)           (0.261)               (0.266)              (0.207)            (0.259)
Observations                                 76856                76723             76723                 76723                76723              76723
Outcome      Scientists working for universities benefit the public
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.112                0.145             -0.261               -0.350*               -0.232            -0.347*
                                            (0.345)              (0.358)           (0.194)               (0.192)              (0.205)            (0.185)
Observations                                 81307                81147             81147                 81147                81147              81147
Outcome      Scientists working for universities are honest
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70         -1.367***            -1.334***         -1.515***             -1.563***            -1.455***          -1.527***
                                            (0.260)              (0.279)           (0.166)               (0.172)              (0.175)            (0.176)
Observations                                 76123                75992             75992                 75992                75992              75992
Outcome       Scientists to find out accurate information
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            -0.526               -0.447           -0.581*              -0.783**               -0.455            -0.695*
                                            (0.487)              (0.555)           (0.342)               (0.345)              (0.373)            (0.376)
Observations                                 84104                83939             83939                 83939                83939              83939
Country fixed effects                         Yes                  Yes               Yes                   No                    No                No
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Demographic characteristics                    No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                  No                  Yes               Yes                   No                   Yes                Yes
Labour market controls                         No                  Yes               Yes                   Yes                   No                Yes
Country-specific age trends                    No                   No               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                   No                   No                No                   Yes                   No                No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                   Yes                No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                    No                   No                No                   No                    No                Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-
DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                     36
Appendix Table 8: Robustness to Using Treatment Variable with a Fixed Population in 1970 - Trust in Science and Placebo Outcomes
                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                   (6)
Outcome      Have trust in science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.073              0.133                 0.112                 -0.036             0.255                0.069
                                            (0.231)            (0.281)               (0.188)               (0.212)           (0.190)               (0.191)
Observations                                 85368              85199                 85199                 85199             85199                 85199
Outcome       Science and technology will help improve life
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70           0.290*             0.338**                0.360                 0.334              0.398                0.345
                                            (0.151)            (0.155)               (0.213)               (0.228)           (0.209)               (0.212)
Observations                                 0.041              0.049                 0.052                 0.064              0.067                0.060
Outcome       Studying diseases is a part of science
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.005              0.043                 0.139                 0.040              0.184                0.167
                                            (0.259)            (0.219)               (0.192)               (0.147)           (0.177)               (0.183)
Observations                                 88326              88138                 88138                 88138             88138                 88138
Outcome       Have trust in doctors and nurses
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.693              0.706                0.829*                 0.774             0.791*                0.752
                                            (0.541)            (0.533)               (0.471)               (0.556)           (0.438)               (0.496)
Observations                                 92026              91835                 91835                 91835             91835                 91835
Outcome       Have trust in hospitals and health clinics
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.421              0.435                 0.714                 0.793              0.607                0.678
                                            (0.652)            (0.604)               (0.531)               (0.633)           (0.499)               (0.557)
Observations                                 90030              89851                 89851                 89851             89851                 89851
Outcome       Have trust in traditional healers
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)pop70            0.130              0.090                 -0.294                -0.278           -0.453*                -0.271
                                            (0.475)            (0.433)               (0.264)               (0.250)           (0.233)               (0.258)
Observations                                 87942              87761                 87761                 87761             87761                 87761
Country fixed effects                         Yes                Yes                   Yes                    No                No                    No
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                  Yes
Demographic characteristics                   No                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                  Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                 No                 Yes                   Yes                    No                Yes                  Yes
Labour market controls                        No                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                No                   Yes
Country-specific age trends                   No                  No                   Yes                   Yes                Yes                  Yes
Country*Income fixed effects                  No                  No                    No                   Yes                No                    No
Country*Empl. fixed effects                   No                  No                    No                    No                Yes                   No
Country*Educ. fixed effects                   No                  No                    No                    No                No                   Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                   37
Appendix Table 9: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in Scientists ­ Country Level Heterogeneity
                                             (1)                       (2)                        (3)                      (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                                 Confidence in       Scientists working for      Scientists working for   Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                          scientists           private companies        private companies are     universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                               benefit the public               honest                 the public               honest             information
Sample     Countries with below median physicians per capita at the time of the epidemic

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -2.538**                    -0.941                     -1.290               -1.480***               -3.821***             -1.500***
                                           (1.198)                   (0.704)                    (1.880)                 (0.477)                 (0.920)               (0.389)

Observations                             23471                       22897                       21429                  22657                   21188                 23457
Sample     Countries with above median physicians per capita at the time of the epidemic

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                8.534                     3.150                      23.543                  3.551                  -2.854                -10.120
                                           (8.792)                  (19.549)                    (19.378)               (17.570)                (20.983)              (15.787)

Observations                             24971                     24950                         23849                  24936                   23538                 25752
Sample    Countries with below median-income at the time of the epidemic

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -3.385**                 -1.205***                  -2.169***                  -0.653               -3.238***                -0.833
                                           (1.399)                   (0.416)                    (0.747)                 (0.642)                 (0.615)               (0.611)

Observations                              32979                     32195                        30127                  31915                   29857                 33153
Sample     Countries with above median-income at the time of the epidemic

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                -16.196                  -11.317                      0.243                 -18.143                 -22.066              -26.570*
                                           (19.432)                 (20.752)                    (16.352)               (11.706)                (12.233)              (13.173)

Observations                               34116                     33929                       32465                     33963                  32155               34984
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1.Source: Wellcome Global Monitor,
2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                           38
Appendix Table 10: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Trust in Scientists - Intensive and Extensive Margins
                                           (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                               Confidence in       Scientists working for   Scientists working for   Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                        scientists         private companies       private companies are     universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                            benefit the public             honest                 the public               honest             information
Intensive margin

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -3.762*                -1.870***                 -2.354**                  -2.782               -4.154***             -1.807***
                                         (2.233)                  (0.389)                  (0.983)                 (1.986)                 (0.916)              (0.348)

Observations                              35807                   34932                      32912                 34673                   32542                 35805
Extensive margin

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              0.001                   -0.005                   0.007                    -0.002                  0.001                 -0.003
                                         (0.006)                 (0.006)                  (0.006)                  (0.006)                 (0.005)               (0.005)

Observations                                 82854                     81406                     76723                 81147                75992             83939
Country fixed effects                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Demographic characteristics                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income quintile fixed effects                 Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Labour market controls                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Country-specific age trends                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International
Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                        39
Appendix Table 11: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Trust in Scientists by Exposure Thresholds
                                             (1)                       (2)                       (3)                       (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                                 Confidence in        Scientists working for    Scientists working for    Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                          scientists          private companies        private companies are      universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                               benefit the public              honest                  the public               honest             information

Top 0.5 per cent                          -0.274***                -0.188***                 -0.134***                   0.008                -0.134***                0.008
(Exposure to Epidemic, 18-25)               (0.014)                  (0.015)                   (0.016)                  (0.014)                 (0.016)               (0.014)

Observations                                27212                    26639                       25102                  26644                   25102                 26644

Top 1 per cent                              -0.125                   -0.011                  -0.136***                   -0.018               -0.136***                -0.018
(Exposure to Epidemic, 18-25)              (0.085)                  (0.093)                    (0.013)                  (0.018)                 (0.013)               (0.018)

Observations                                27212                    26639                       25102                  26644                   25102                 26644

Top 2 per cent                            -0.134**                  -0.113**                  -0.089*                    -0.108                -0.089*                 -0.108
(Exposure to Epidemic, 18-25)              (0.058)                   (0.056)                  (0.052)                   (0.066)                (0.052)                (0.066)

Observations                                27212                    26639                       25102                  26644                   25102                 26644

Top 5 per cent                              -0.024                   0.029                      0.043                    0.009                   0.043                 0.009
(Exposure to Epidemic, 18-25)              (0.030)                  (0.026)                    (0.031)                  (0.027)                 (0.031)               (0.027)

Observations                               27212                     26639                       25102                     26644                   25102               26644
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor,
2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                            40
Appendix Table 12: Robutness to Excluding Potentially "Bad Controls"
                                             (1)                        (2)                       (3)                       (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                                 Confidence in         Scientists working for    Scientists working for    Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                          scientists           private companies        private companies are      universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                                benefit the public              honest                  the public               honest             information

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -3.544***                -1.296***                  -1.767***                   -0.703               -3.365***              -1.626***
                                            (1.344)                  (0.337)                    (0.601)                  (0.465)                 (0.455)               (0.616)

Observations                                83014                     81554                    76856                     81307                    76123                  84104
                                             (1)                        (2)                      (3)                      (4)                       (5)                   (6)
Outcome                              Have trust in science   Science and technology     Studying diseases is a    Have trust in doctors       Have trust in          Have trust in
                                                              will help improve life       part of science            and nurses           hospitals and health   traditional healers
                                                                                                                                                  clinics

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                0.114                     0.561                     0.247                     1.557                   1.314                 -0.615
                                           (0.402)                   (0.471)                   (0.446)                   (1.222)                 (1.389)               (0.545)

Observations                                85368                    86585                         88326                 92026                   90030                  87942

Country fixed effects                         Yes                       Yes                         Yes                     Yes                  Yes                     Yes
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes                       Yes                         Yes                     Yes                  Yes                     Yes
Male dummy                                    Yes                       Yes                         Yes                     Yes                  Yes                     Yes
Country-specific age trends                   Yes                       Yes                         Yes                     Yes                  Yes                     Yes
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the     country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT      International
Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                             41
Appendix Table 13: Robutness to Controlling for the Number of Epidemic Experience
                                             (1)                       (2)                       (3)                       (4)                    (5)                   (6)
Outcome                                 Confidence in        Scientists working for    Scientists working for    Scientists working for   Scientists working     Scientists to find
                                          scientists          private companies        private companies are      universities benefit    for universities are     out accurate
                                                               benefit the public              honest                  the public               honest             information

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -3.454**                 -1.283***                 -1.731***                   -0.616               -3.330***              -1.438**
                                           (1.330)                   (0.338)                   (0.642)                  (0.478)                 (0.446)               (0.664)

The number of epidemics exp.              -0.193***                -0.178***                 -0.146***                -0.189***               -0.223***              -0.297***
                                            (0.007)                  (0.006)                   (0.006)                  (0.004)                 (0.006)               (0.005)

Observations                               82854                     81406                       76723                     81147                   75992               83939
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor,
2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                            42
Appendix Table 14: Robustness to Excluding Most Affected Countries (i.e. excluding top 5 percentile)
                                               (1)                        (2)                         (3)                      (4)                      (5)                     (6)
Outcome                                   Confidence in         Scientists working for      Scientists working for   Scientists working for     Scientists working     Scientists to find out
                                            scientists           private companies          private companies are    universities benefit the   for universities are   accurate information
                                                                  benefit the public                honest                   public                   honest

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                -3.427**                  -1.326***                  -1.965***                    -0.580                -3.269***                -1.413**
                                             (1.351)                    (0.313)                    (0.489)                   (0.463)                  (0.451)                 (0.667)

Observations                                 79223                      77719                      73214                     77537                     72531                   80286
                                              (1)                         (2)                        (3)                      (4)                        (5)                    (6)
Outcome                               Have trust in science    Science and technology       Studying diseases is a    Have trust in doctors        Have trust in           Have trust in
                                                                will help improve life         part of science            and nurses            hospitals and health    traditional healers
                                                                                                                                                       clinics

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                  0.122                      0.551                      0.189                     1.569                    1.290                   -0.711
                                             (0.468)                    (0.473)                    (0.364)                   (1.235)                  (1.360)                 (0.528)

Observations                                   81346                   82578                        84246                       87743                  85761                  83696
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1.Source: The most affected countries are *
Madagascar, Philippines, Niger, Zimbabwe, Bolivia, Chad, and Republic of Congo. Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                            43
Appendix Table 15: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in Scientists ­ Exploring the Role of Media
                                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
Outcome                                                     Confidence in        Scientists        Scientists         Scientists       Scientists        Scientists to
                                                              scientists        working for       working for        working for      working for          find out
                                                                                  private           private          universities    universities are      accurate
                                                                                companies        companies are       benefit the         honest          information
                                                                                benefit the         honest             public
                                                                                  public

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                                   -14.230**         -8.094***         -20.589***           -8.239          -22.039**            -3.383
                                                                (7.009)           (2.589)            (5.054)           (5.618)           (8.671)            (6.349)

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)*TV Per Capita (18-25)               -0.002            0.001              -0.000            0.000             -0.002             -0.001
                                                                (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.001)

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)*Radio Per Capita (18-25)            0.012             0.001              0.007             -0.000            0.013              0.004
                                                                (0.009)           (0.003)            (0.006)           (0.005)           (0.011)            (0.008)

TV Per Capita (18-25)                                            -0.000            -0.000             0.000             0.000             -0.000             0.000
                                                                (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)

Radio Per Capita (18-25)                                         -0.000            -0.000             0.000           -0.000***           0.000              -0.000
                                                                (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)

Observations                                                    28085               27889              26453               27746             26150            28471
Notes: Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Specification is Column 3 of Table 1.Source: Wellcome Global
Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                         44
Appendix Table 16: Robutness to Ordered Logit Estimation
                                               (1)                        (2)                         (3)                       (4)                      (5)                    (6)
Outcome                                   Confidence in         Scientists working for      Scientists working for    Scientists working for     Scientists working      Scientists to find
                                            scientists           private companies          private companies are      universities benefit      for universities are      out accurate
                                                                  benefit the public                honest                  the public                 honest              information

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                22300***                   66.00***                   301.81***                  104.13*                2646.74***               92.46***
                                             (95100)                    (92.37)                    (520.52)                  (278.16)                (5196.73)               (416.19)

Observations                                 82854                      81406                      76723                      81147                    75792                    83939
                                              (1)                         (2)                        (3)                       (4)                       (5)                     (6)
Outcome                               Have trust in science    Science and technology       Studying diseases is a     Have trust in doctors       Have trust in            Have trust in
                                                                will help improve life         part of science             and nurses           hospitals and health     traditional healers
                                                                                                                                                       clinics

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                  2.050                      0.002                      0.023                      0.011                    0.000                  0.770
                                             (6.791)                    (0.010)                    (0.090)                    (0.062)                  (0.042)                (6.013)

Observations                                  85199                     86397                         88138                   91835                    89851                   87761

Country fixed effects                           Yes                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Cohort fixed effects                            Yes                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Male dummy                                      Yes                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Country-specific age trends                     Yes                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Notes: Odds ratios are reported (an odds ratio greater than 1 indicates a positive association and an odds ratio less than 1 indicates a negative association). Outcomes "Confidence in
scientists", "Scientists working for private companies benefit the public", "Scientists working for private companies are honest", " Scientists working for universities benefit the public",
" Scientists working for universities are honest", "Scientists to find out accurate information", "Have trust in science", "Have trust in doctors and nurses", "Have trust in traditional
healers" are coded as (1) a lot, (2) some, (3) not much, (4) not at all. Outcomes "Science and technology will help improve life", "Studying diseases is a part of science" and "Have
trust in hospitals and health clinics" are coded as (1) yes, 2 (no). Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome
Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                 45
Appendix Table 17: Robutness to Multinomial Logit Estimation
                                                 (1)                         (2)                          (3)                         (4)                      (5)                      (6)
Outcome                                     Confidence in          Scientists working for       Scientists working for      Scientists working for     Scientists working        Scientists to find
                                              scientists            private companies           private companies are        universities benefit      for universities are        out accurate
                                                                     benefit the public                 honest                    the public                 honest                information

(2) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              64370.22                     0.000**                       0.000*                    192.841                 28700***                     0.073
                                             (628762.5)                     (0.000)                      (0.001)                  (1051.95)                  (13100)                   (0.407)
(3) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             153000***                       0.331                        8.244                  3065.431**               60954.08***                  117.29
                                              (735000)                      (0.829)                     (24.318)                 (10000.84)                 (110188)                  (632.23)
(4) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              30200***                       9.997                      144.46*                     0.227                     0.214                  424.53***
                                               (10900)                     (49.451)                    (380.651)                   (1.547)                   (1.470)                 (2863.42)

Observations                                   82854                       81406                       76723                       81147                      75792                     83939
                                                (1)                          (2)                         (3)                        (4)                         (5)                      (6)
Outcome                                 Have trust in science     Science and technology        Studying diseases is a      Have trust in doctors         Have trust in             Have trust in
                                                                   will help improve life          part of science              and nurses             hospitals and health      traditional healers
                                                                                                                                                              clinics

(2) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                 95.00                      0.002                        0.023                      176.00                     0.000                 45700***
                                               (379.78)                    (0.010)                      (0.090)                    (721.90)                   (0.042)                 (34900)
(3) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                 5.240                        --                           --                        0.024                       --                  54200***
                                                (18.20)                                                                             (0.178)                                           (35800)
(4) Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                 0.113                        --                           --                      13900**                       --                    29600
                                                (0.874)                                                                            (13400)                                            (46100)

Observations                                    85199                        86397                        88138                      91835                      89851                   87761
Notes: Relative risk (probability) ratios are reported (a relative risk ratio greater than 1 indicates a positive association and a relative risk ratio less than 1 indicates a negative association).
Outcomes "Confidence in scientists", "Scientists working for private companies benefit the public", "Scientists working for private companies are honest", " Scientists working for
universities benefit the public", " Scientists working for universities are honest", "Scientists to find out accurate information", "Have trust in science", "Have trust in doctors and nurses",
"Have trust in traditional healers" are coded as (1) a lot, (2) some, (3) not much, (4) not at all. Outcomes "Science and technology will help improve life", "Studying diseases is a part
of science" and "Have trust in hospitals and health clinics" are coded as (1) yes, 2 (no). Category 1 (i.e., "a lot" option) used for the baseline comparison group. Specification is Column
3 of Table 1. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International
Disaster Database, 1970-2017. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                     46
Appendix Table 18: Full List of Epidemics from the EM-DAT Database
Country              Year   Epidemic                               Total no of affected people   Total no of deaths
Afghanistan          1998   cholera                                15783                         185
Afghanistan          1999   cholera                                20702                         135
Afghanistan          2000   cholera                                2228                          50
Afghanistan          2001   cholera                                4425                          154
Afghanistan          2002   leishmaniasis                          206834                        102
Afghanistan          2005   cholera                                3245                          0
Afghanistan          2008   cholera                                1100                          17
Albania              1996   poliovirus                             66                            7
Albania              2002   unknown                                226                           0
Algeria              1991   typhiod                                204                           0
Algeria              1997   typhiod                                364                           1
Angola               1987   cholera                                673                           59
Angola               1989   cholera                                15525                         766
Angola               1995   meningitis                             1007                          0
Angola               1998   meningitis                             1113                          115
Angola               1999   poliovirus                             873                           188
Angola               2000   meningitis                             117                           18
Angola               2001   meningitis                             420                           39
Angola               2004   marburg virus                          45                            329
Angola               2006   cholera                                57570                         2354
Angola               2007   cholera                                18343                         515
Angola               2008   cholera                                17437                         363
Angola               2009   diarrhoeal syndrome                    25938                         116
Angola               2015   yellow fever                           4599                          384
Angola               2018   cholera                                139                           2
Argentina            1992   cholera                                3883                          67
Argentina            2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   13366                         6
Australia            2002   sars                                   6                             0
Australia            2016   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2016                          0
Bangladesh           1977   cholera                                10461                         260
Bangladesh           1982   cholera                                173460                        2696
Bangladesh           1986   water-borne diseases                   52000                         165
Bangladesh           1987                                          601200                        750
Bangladesh           1991                                          1608000                       2700
Bangladesh           1993                                          5660                          38
Bangladesh           1995                                          21236                         400
Bangladesh           1996                                          10000                         20
Bangladesh           1997                                          14330                         64
Bangladesh           1998                                          185000                        151
Bangladesh           2000                                          26214                         31
Bangladesh           2002                                          49904                         96




                                                      47
Bangladesh               2004   nipah viral disease                    54       32
Bangladesh               2007   cholera                                284910   86
Bangladesh               2017   diphteria                              789      15
Belarus                  1995                                          282      13
Belarus                  1997                                          605      0
Belgium                  1945   poliovirus                             104      0
Benin                    1976   poliovirus                             7        1
Benin                    1987                                          403      65
Benin                    1989                                          2411     228
Benin                    1996   yellow fever                           21       65
Benin                    1997                                          226      47
Benin                    1998                                          527      78
Benin                    1999   diarrhoeal syndrome                    241      9
Benin                    2000   meningitis                             7762     351
Benin                    2001   meningitis                             9760     378
Benin                    2002                                          452      50
Benin                    2003   cholera                                265      3
Benin                    2005   cholera                                206      4
Benin                    2008   cholera                                988      33
Benin                    2010   cholera                                1037     25
Benin                    2013   cholera                                486      6
Benin                    2016   cholera                                678      13
Benin                    2019   meningitis                             24       13
Bhutan                   1985                                          247      41
Bhutan                   1992   cholera                                494      0
Bolivia                  1969   poliovirus                             77       18
Bolivia                  1989   yellow fever                           97       67
Bolivia                  1991   cholera                                17665    329
Bolivia                  1997   cholera                                734      18
Bolivia                  1998   cholera                                165      5
Bolivia                  1999   yellow fever                           68       33
Bolivia                  2007   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   228      1
Bolivia                  2008   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   7202     27
Bolivia                  2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   25236    29
Bolivia                  2018   h1n1                                   1428     23
Bosnia and Herzegovina   2000   hepatitis a                            400      0
Botswana                 1988                                          14618    183
Botswana                 2006   diarrhoeal syndrome                    22264    470
Botswana                 2008   cholera                                15       2
Brazil                   1974                                          30000    1500
Brazil                   1975                                          107      0
Brazil                   1986   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   34722    0
Brazil                   1988                                          170      0

                                                          48
Brazil         1991   cholera                                15240    196
Brazil         1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   112939   2
Brazil         1997                                          25900    0
Brazil         1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   214340   13
Brazil         1999   cholera                                235      3
Brazil         2002   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   317730   57
Brazil         2008   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   162701   123
Brazil         2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   126139   23
Brazil         2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   942153   0
Brazil         2016   yellow fever                           777      261
Brazil         2017   yellow fever                           310      154
Burkina Faso   1969   meningitis                             4550     304
Burkina Faso   1979                                          1612     241
Burkina Faso   1981                                          10013    1091
Burkina Faso   1983   yellow fever                           386      237
Burkina Faso   1984                                          1000     0
Burkina Faso   1996                                          40967    4135
Burkina Faso   1997                                          17996    2274
Burkina Faso   1998   cholera                                441      26
Burkina Faso   2001   meningitis                             20820    2978
Burkina Faso   2003   meningitis                             7146     1058
Burkina Faso   2004   meningitis                             2783     527
Burkina Faso   2005   cholera                                606      9
Burkina Faso   2006   meningitis                             7402     784
Burkina Faso   2007   meningitis                             20765    1490
Burkina Faso   2008   measles                                53000    550
Burkina Faso   2009   meningitis                             2892     389
Burkina Faso   2010   meningitis                             5960     841
Burkina Faso   2017   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   9029     18
Burundi        1978   cholera                                1530     54
Burundi        1992                                          2068     220
Burundi        1997   typhus                                 24350    21
Burundi        1999                                          616434   80
Burundi        2000                                          730691   308
Burundi        2002                                          2163     87
Burundi        2003   cholera                                230      6
Burundi        2011   cholera                                600      12
Burundi        2016   cholera                                193      1
Cabo Verde     1994   cholera                                12344    245
Cabo Verde     2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   20147    6
Cambodia       1992                                          380400   50
Cambodia       1997   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   227      3
Cambodia       1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   15069    490

                                                49
Cambodia                   1999   cholera                                874       56
Cambodia                   2006   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4368      0
Cambodia                   2007   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   17000     182
Cameroon                   1988                                          340       39
Cameroon                   1989                                          550       100
Cameroon                   1990   yellow fever                           172       118
Cameroon                   1991   cholera                                1343      308
Cameroon                   1992                                          7865      731
Cameroon                   1993                                          4070      513
Cameroon                   1996   cholera                                2825      378
Cameroon                   1997   shigellosis                            479       109
Cameroon                   1998   cholera                                2086      239
Cameroon                   1999                                          105       14
Cameroon                   2000   meningitis                             65        22
Cameroon                   2001   meningitis                             542       31
Cameroon                   2004   cholera                                2924      46
Cameroon                   2005   cholera                                1400      42
Cameroon                   2006   cholera                                71        8
Cameroon                   2009   cholera                                1456      109
Cameroon                   2010   cholera                                7869      515
Cameroon                   2011   cholera                                16706     639
Cameroon                   2014   cholera                                2056      111
Cameroon                   2015   measles                                858       0
Cameroon                   2018   cholera                                942       57
Canada                     1918   h1n1                                   2000000   50000
Canada                     1953   poliovirus                             8000      481
Canada                     1991                                          171       18
Canada                     2001   cryptosporidiosis                      399       1
Canada                     2002   sars                                   347       45
Central African Republic   1992                                          418       56
Central African Republic   1999                                          86        14
Central African Republic   2000                                          2572      448
Central African Republic   2001   meningitis                             1473      343
Central African Republic   2002   hepatitis e                            727       6
Central African Republic   2003   shigellosis                            379       23
Central African Republic   2011   cholera                                172       16
Central African Republic   2013   measles                                63        0
Central African Republic   2016   cholera                                266       21
Central African Republic   2018   hepatitis e                            119       1
Central African Republic   2019   measles                                3600      53
Chad                       1971   cholera                                7476      2312
Chad                       1988                                          6794      433
Chad                       1991   cholera                                12204     1262

                                                            50
Chad                   1996   cholera                                1317     94
Chad                   1997                                          2835     239
Chad                   2000   meningitis                             9673     1209
Chad                   2001   cholera                                3444     113
Chad                   2003   cholera                                131      11
Chad                   2004   cholera                                3567     144
Chad                   2005                                          6000     115
Chad                   2006   cholera                                216      20
Chad                   2008   hepatitis e                            1755     22
Chad                   2009   meningitis                             871      102
Chad                   2010   measles                                5319     239
Chad                   2011   cholera                                18123    557
Chad                   2012   meningitis                             1708     88
Chad                   2017   cholera                                652      58
Chad                   2018   measles                                4227     90
Chile                  1991   cholera                                40       1
China                  1987   rotavirus                              1000     0
China                  1988                                          2000     0
China                  2002   sars                                   6652     369
China                  2004   h5n1                                   9        16
China                  2005   septicaemia                            168      38
Colombia               1991   cholera                                14137    350
Colombia               1996   cholera                                3000     62
Colombia               2012   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   23235    0
Colombia               2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1171     91
Colombia               2016   yellow fever                           12       0
Colombia               2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   79639    169
Comoros (the)          1989   typhiod                                450      3
Comoros (the)          1998   cholera                                3200     40
Comoros (the)          1999   cholera                                140      14
Comoros (the)          2005   chikungunya                            2282     0
Comoros (the)          2007   cholera                                1490     29
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   1976   ebola                                  262      245
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   1996   cholera                                1954     202
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   1997   cholera                                1411     54
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   1998   cholera                                13884    972
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   1999   marburg virus                          72       3
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2000                                          63       26
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2001   cholera                                11094    838
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2002   h1n1                                   539375   2502
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2003   cholera                                20401    786
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2004   typhiod                                46220    406
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2005   cholera                                4872     101

                                                        51
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2006   cholera                                2986     151
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2007   ebola                                  419      172
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2009   cholera                                15909    209
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2010   cholera                                4342     56
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2011   cholera                                28757    636
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2012   cholera                                23626    608
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2014   ebola                                  17       49
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2016   measles                                2638     55
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2017   cholera                                1022     43
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2018   ebola                                  3454     2297
Congo (the Dem.Rep.)   2019   measles                                277000   5872
Congo (the)            1997   cholera                                485      83
Congo (the)            1999   cholera                                99       15
Congo (the)            2001   ebola                                  13       19
Congo (the)            2002   ebola                                  15       128
Congo (the)            2003   ebola                                  2        29
Congo (the)            2005   ebola                                  2        10
Congo (the)            2006   cholera                                3030     50
Congo (the)            2008   cholera                                630      26
Congo (the)            2010   poliovirus                             524      219
Congo (the)            2011   chikungunya                            10819    65
Congo (the)            2012                                          57       5
Congo (the)            2013   cholera                                1071     16
Congo (the)            2019   measles                                208246   3819
Costa Rica             1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4786     0
Costa Rica             2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   12000    3
Costa Rica             2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4852     0
Cuba                   1993   neuromyelopathy                        49358    0
Cuba                   1997   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   823      3
Cyprus                 1996   meningitis                             280      0
Côte d'Ivoire          1970   cholera                                1500     120
Côte d'Ivoire          1991   cholera                                50       16
Côte d'Ivoire          1995   cholera                                2027     150
Côte d'Ivoire          2001   cholera                                3180     196
Côte d'Ivoire          2002   cholera                                861      77
Côte d'Ivoire          2005                                          210      40
Côte d'Ivoire          2006   cholera                                451      42
Côte d'Ivoire          2007   meningitis                             150      30
Côte d'Ivoire          2017   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   621      2
Djibouti               1994   cholera                                239      10
Djibouti               1997   cholera                                827      29
Djibouti               1998                                          2000     43
Djibouti               2000   cholera                                419      4

                                                        52
Djibouti                   2007   cholera                                562      6
Dominican Republic (the)   1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1252     2
Dominican Republic (the)   2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   3270     25
Dominican Republic (the)   2010   cholera                                17321    130
Dominican Republic (the)   2011   cholera                                220      1
Dominican Republic (the)   2012   cholera                                26090    167
Dominican Republic (the)   2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   16907    34
Ecuador                    1967   poliovirus                             528      36
Ecuador                    1969   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            40000    400
Ecuador                    1977   typhiod                                300      0
Ecuador                    1991   cholera                                15131    343
Ecuador                    1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   3399     0
Ecuador                    1998   cholera                                11       1
Ecuador                    2000                                          100220   8
Ecuador                    2002   unknown                                100      0
Ecuador                    2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4000     4
Ecuador                    2012   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   6967     11
Egypt                      2004   hepatitis a                            143      15
El Salvador                1969   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            19       12
El Salvador                1991   cholera                                5625     155
El Salvador                1992   cholera                                350      0
El Salvador                1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   9296     5
El Salvador                1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1670     0
El Salvador                2000   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   211      24
El Salvador                2002   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2399     6
El Salvador                2003   pneumonia                              50000    304
El Salvador                2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4598     7
El Salvador                2014   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   12783    4
El Salvador                2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   16573    5
Equatorial Guinea          2004                                          946      15
Ethiopia                   1970   cholera                                4000     500
Ethiopia                   1980   dysentery                              25000    157
Ethiopia                   1981                                          50000    990
Ethiopia                   1985   cholera                                4815     1101
Ethiopia                   1988                                          41304    7400
Ethiopia                   1999                                          276      9
Ethiopia                   2000   meningitis                             7033     371
Ethiopia                   2001   meningitis                             8166     429
Ethiopia                   2005                                          964      74
Ethiopia                   2006   diarrhoeal syndrome                    32848    351
Ethiopia                   2008   diarrhoeal syndrome                    3134     20
Ethiopia                   2009   cholera                                13652    135
Ethiopia                   2010   diarrhoeal syndrome                    967      16

                                                            53
Ethiopia       2013   yellow fever                           288     110
Ethiopia       2018   measles                                4000    0
Ethiopia       2019   cholera                                1916    39
Fiji           2019   measles                                14      0
France         2002   sars                                   6       1
Gabon          1988   cholera                                132     0
Gabon          1996   ebola                                  15      45
Gabon          2001   ebola                                  10      50
Gabon          2004   typhiod                                100     1
Gabon          2007   chikungunya                            17900   0
Gabon          2010   chikungunya                            551     0
Gambia (the)   1997                                          793     120
Gambia (the)   2000   meningitis                             116     21
Germany        2002                                          609     0
Ghana          1977   cholera                                6558    0
Ghana          1984                                          1500    103
Ghana          1988                                          138     15
Ghana          1989                                          19      0
Ghana          1996                                          3757    411
Ghana          1997                                          159     26
Ghana          1998   cholera                                1546    67
Ghana          1999   diarrhoeal syndrome                    1196    24
Ghana          2001                                          1141    12
Ghana          2005   cholera                                2248    40
Ghana          2010   meningitis                             100     27
Ghana          2011   cholera                                10002   101
Ghana          2012   cholera                                5441    76
Ghana          2013   cholera                                560     18
Ghana          2014   cholera                                56469   249
Ghana          2015   meningitis                             465     85
Ghana          2016   cholera                                172     0
Guatemala      1969   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            8       4
Guatemala      1991   cholera                                26800   180
Guatemala      1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   3402    0
Guatemala      1998   cholera                                1345    17
Guatemala      2002   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2042    1
Guatemala      2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1977    8
Guatemala      2015   chikungunya                            15211   0
Guatemala      2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   6264    17
Guinea         1987                                          30      18
Guinea         1999   cholera                                123     12
Guinea         2000   yellow fever                           322     190
Guinea         2001   cholera                                143     12

                                                54
Guinea          2002                                          123      23
Guinea          2003   yellow fever                           43       24
Guinea          2006   cholera                                298      129
Guinea          2007   cholera                                2410     90
Guinea          2012   cholera                                5523     105
Guinea          2013   measles                                143      0
Guinea          2014   ebola                                  3814     2544
Guinea          2017   measles                                122      0
Guinea-Bissau   1987   cholera                                6000     68
Guinea-Bissau   1996   cholera                                26967    961
Guinea-Bissau   1997   cholera                                22299    781
Guinea-Bissau   1999                                          2169     404
Guinea-Bissau   2008   cholera                                14004    221
Haiti           1963                                          2724     0
Haiti           2003   typhiod                                200      40
Haiti           2010   cholera                                513997   6908
Haiti           2012   cholera                                5817     50
Haiti           2014   chikungunya                            39343    0
Haiti           2015   cholera                                20000    170
Haiti           2016   cholera                                6096     0
Honduras        1965   poliovirus                             170      7
Honduras        1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   15998    5
Honduras        1998   cholera                                2452     17
Honduras        2002   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4530     8
Honduras        2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   11771    7
Honduras        2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   27000    67
Honduras        2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   34128    27
Honduras        2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   71216    128
Hong Kong       2002   sars                                   1456     299
India           1967                                          13576    3029
India           1977   cholera                                9091     0
India           1978                                          1000     48
India           1984   dysentery                              27000    3290
India           1985                                          6589     854
India           1986                                          11600    265
India           1990   diarrhoeal syndrome                    18000    90
India           1994   pneumonia                              5150     53
India           1996   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   8423     354
India           1997                                          890      80
India           1998   cholera                                15238    807
India           1999                                          79504    281
India           2000                                          1851     191
India           2001   cholera                                58889    89

                                                 55
India                        2002                                          5153      50
India                        2003   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2185      0
India                        2005   chikungunya                            155813    640
India                        2009   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            1521      311
India                        2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1318      121
Indonesia                    1968   bubonic                                94        40
Indonesia                    1977   cholera                                29942     37
Indonesia                    1978   cholera                                70        11
Indonesia                    1982   cholera                                200       39
Indonesia                    1984                                          4000      105
Indonesia                    1986                                          500700    59
Indonesia                    1991                                          15000     170
Indonesia                    1996   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   5373      117
Indonesia                    1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   32665     777
Indonesia                    1999   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   4645      56
Indonesia                    2000   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1719      25
Indonesia                    2002   shigellosis                            759       17
Indonesia                    2004   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   58322     745
Indonesia                    2005   poliovirus                             329       0
Indonesia                    2007   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   35211     403
Iran (Islamic Republic of)   1965   cholera                                2500      288
Iraq                         1978   cholera                                51        1
Iraq                         1997                                          185       0
Iraq                         2007   cholera                                4696      24
Iraq                         2008   cholera                                892       11
Iraq                         2015   cholera                                2217      0
Ireland                      2000                                          1374      2
Ireland                      2002   sars                                   1         0
Israel                       2000   west nile fever                        139       12
Italy                        2002                                          10001     3
Jamaica                      1990   typhiod                                300       0
Jamaica                      2006                                          280       3
Japan                        1977   cholera                                74        1
Japan                        1978   h1n1                                   2000000   0
Japan                        1997   campylobacter                          460       0
Jordan                       1981   cholera                                715       4
Kazakhstan                   1998                                          593       7
Kazakhstan                   1999   typhus                                 166       0
Kazakhstan                   2000   typhus                                 114       0
Kenya                        1991                                          200       26
Kenya                        1994                                          6500000   1000
Kenya                        1997   cholera                                33036     932
Kenya                        1998   cholera                                1025      27

                                                              56
Kenya                     1999                                          329570   1814
Kenya                     2000   cholera                                721      50
Kenya                     2001                                          743      40
Kenya                     2004                                          141      8
Kenya                     2005                                          1645     53
Kenya                     2006   rift valley fever                      588      170
Kenya                     2009   cholera                                10446    251
Kenya                     2010   cholera                                3880     57
Kenya                     2014   cholera                                3459     72
Kenya                     2017   cholera                                4421     76
Kenya                     2019   cholera                                3847     26
Korea (the Republic of)   1969   cholera                                1538     137
Korea (the Republic of)   1998   shigellosis                            350      0
Korea (the Republic of)   2000                                          39531    6
Korea (the Republic of)   2002   sars                                   3        0
Korea (the Republic of)   2015   mers                                   185      36
Kuwait                    2002   sars                                   1        0
Kyrgyzstan                1997                                          336      22
Kyrgyzstan                1998   typhiod                                458      0
Kyrgyzstan                2010   poliovirus                             141      0
Lao People's Dem. Rep.    1987   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2000     63
Lao People's Dem. Rep.    1994   cholera                                8000     500
Lao People's Dem. Rep.    1995   cholera                                244      34
Lao People's Dem. Rep.    2000                                          9685     0
Lao People's Dem. Rep.    2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   36000    77
Latvia                    2000   diphteria                              102      0
Lesotho                   1974   typhiod                                500      0
Lesotho                   1999   dysentery                              1862     28
Lesotho                   2000                                          1834     28
Liberia                   1980   cholera                                1887     466
Liberia                   1995   yellow fever                           359      9
Liberia                   1998   diarrhoeal syndrome                    560      12
Liberia                   2000   cholera                                112      3
Liberia                   2002   diarrhoeal syndrome                    661      0
Liberia                   2003   cholera                                19418    0
Liberia                   2005   cholera                                674      29
Liberia                   2014   ebola                                  10682    4810
Macao                     2002   sars                                   1        0
Macedonia FYR             2002   unknown                                200      0
Madagascar                1999   cholera                                18228    981
Madagascar                2002   h1n1                                   21975    671
Madagascar                2008   rift valley fever                      520      20
Madagascar                2009   chikungunya                            702      0

                                                           57
Madagascar   2013   pneumonia                              660     113
Madagascar   2017   plague                                 2384    207
Madagascar   2018   measles                                98415   0
Malawi       1989                                          444     35
Malawi       1997                                          622     10
Malawi       2000   cholera                                3323    83
Malawi       2001   cholera                                40266   1131
Malawi       2002   cholera                                773     41
Malawi       2006   cholera                                852     20
Malawi       2008   cholera                                5269    113
Malawi       2009   measles                                11461   62
Malawi       2014   cholera                                693     11
Malawi       2017   cholera                                450     6
Malaysia     1968   cholera                                5       2
Malaysia     1977   typhiod                                50      0
Malaysia     1991   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   3750    263
Malaysia     1996   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   5407    13
Malaysia     1997   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   21684   78
Malaysia     1998   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            160     105
Malaysia     2000   enterovirus                            988     4
Malaysia     2002   sars                                   3       2
Maldives     1978   cholera                                11258   219
Maldives     2011   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1289    4
Mali         1969                                          4023    513
Mali         1979                                          80      30
Mali         1981                                          4153    412
Mali         1984   cholera                                4502    1022
Mali         1987   yellow fever                           305     145
Mali         1988                                          159     47
Mali         1996   meningitis                             2208    345
Mali         1997                                          9666    1098
Mali         2002                                          282     33
Mali         2003   cholera                                1216    106
Mali         2005   cholera                                168     43
Mali         2006                                          151     9
Mali         2009   meningitis                             86      10
Mali         2011   cholera                                1190    49
Mali         2014   ebola                                  7       6
Mauritania   1982                                          12      5
Mauritania   1987   yellow fever                           178     35
Mauritania   1988   cholera                                575     38
Mauritania   1998   rift valley fever                      344     6
Mauritania   2005   cholera                                2585    55

                                              58
Mauritius    1980   typhiod                                108      0
Mauritius    2005   chikungunya                            2553     0
Mexico       1991   cholera                                5000     52
Mexico       1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   6525     16
Mexico       2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   41687    0
Moldova      1999                                          1647     0
Mongolia     1996   cholera                                108      8
Mongolia     2002   sars                                   9        0
Mongolia     2008   enterovirus                            3151     0
Morocco      1966   meningitis                             2942     200
Mozambique   1980   cholera                                200      10
Mozambique   1983   cholera                                5679     189
Mozambique   1990   cholera                                4000     588
Mozambique   1992   cholera                                225673   587
Mozambique   1997   cholera                                27201    637
Mozambique   1998   cholera                                2600     209
Mozambique   2000                                          18583    11
Mozambique   2001   cholera                                611      7
Mozambique   2002   cholera                                2028     17
Mozambique   2003   cholera                                24134    159
Mozambique   2006   cholera                                5692     27
Mozambique   2007   cholera                                7547     78
Mozambique   2008   cholera                                19310    155
Mozambique   2009   cholera                                19776    198
Mozambique   2010   cholera                                3188     44
Mozambique   2011   cholera                                325      13
Mozambique   2013   cholera                                317      2
Mozambique   2014   cholera                                5118     43
Mozambique   2017   cholera                                1799     1
Mozambique   2019   cholera                                3577     0
Myanmar      1983                                          800      10
Namibia      2000   meningitis                             58       14
Namibia      2001                                          12098    134
Namibia      2006   poliovirus                             47       10
Namibia      2007   cholera                                250      7
Namibia      2008   cholera                                203      9
Namibia      2013   cholera                                518      17
Nepal        1963                                          5000     1000
Nepal        1967   bubonic                                24       17
Nepal        1982                                          1475     0
Nepal        1990   cholera                                3800     150
Nepal        1991   diarrhoeal syndrome                    45341    1334
Nepal        1992   diarrhoeal syndrome                    50000    640

                                              59
Nepal               1995   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            772     126
Nepal               1996   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            697     118
Nepal               1997   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            1364    84
Nepal               1998   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            300     52
Nepal               1999   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            944     150
Nepal               2000   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            592     69
Nepal               2001   diarrhoeal syndrome                    242     13
Nepal               2009   diarrhoeal syndrome                    58874   314
Nepal               2010   diarrhoeal syndrome                    5372    73
Netherlands (the)   1999   legionellosis                          200     13
New Zealand         2002   sars                                   1       0
Nicaragua           1967                                          444     53
Nicaragua           1991   cholera                                381     2
Nicaragua           1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   13406   18
Nicaragua           1998   cholera                                3356    7
Nicaragua           2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2050    8
Nicaragua           2010   leptospirosis                          395     16
Nicaragua           2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1310    3
Nicaragua           2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   94513   15
Niger (the)         1969   yellow fever                           5       2
Niger (the)         1970                                          2677    319
Niger (the)         1989                                          1785    186
Niger (the)         1991                                          90147   2842
Niger (the)         1995                                          63691   3022
Niger (the)         1996                                          10475   882
Niger (the)         1997                                          2156    262
Niger (the)         1999                                          741     49
Niger (the)         2000                                          1151    190
Niger (the)         2001                                          48067   573
Niger (the)         2002   meningitis                             3306    316
Niger (the)         2003                                          1861    195
Niger (the)         2004                                          20132   154
Niger (the)         2005   cholera                                387     44
Niger (the)         2006   meningitis                             784     62
Niger (the)         2008   meningitis                             2805    173
Niger (the)         2009   meningitis                             4513    169
Niger (the)         2010   meningitis                             1217    103
Niger (the)         2011   cholera                                2130    48
Niger (the)         2012   cholera                                4874    97
Niger (the)         2014   meningitis                             1639    153
Niger (the)         2015   measles                                3370    6
Niger (the)         2016   rift valley fever                      78      23
Niger (the)         2017   meningitis                             2390    118

                                                         60
Niger (the)           2018   cholera                                3824    78
Nigeria               1969   yellow fever                           80000   2000
Nigeria               1986   yellow fever                           1400    1073
Nigeria               1987                                          120     100
Nigeria               1989   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            41      29
Nigeria               1991   cholera                                11200   7689
Nigeria               1996   cerebro spinal                         42586   5539
Nigeria               1998   acute neurological syndrome            211     39
Nigeria               1999   diarrhoeal syndrome                    2977    486
Nigeria               2000   cholera                                1255    87
Nigeria               2001   cholera                                2636    204
Nigeria               2002   diarrhoeal syndrome                    3903    229
Nigeria               2004   cholera                                1897    172
Nigeria               2005                                          23873   619
Nigeria               2008   unknown                                66      46
Nigeria               2009   meningitis                             35255   1701
Nigeria               2010   cholera                                43287   1872
Nigeria               2011   cholera                                21382   694
Nigeria               2012   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            29      10
Nigeria               2014   cholera                                36017   763
Nigeria               2015   cholera                                2108    97
Nigeria               2016   meningitis                             15432   1287
Nigeria               2017   cholera                                1704    11
Nigeria               2018   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            1081    90
Nigeria               2019   measles                                22834   98
Nigeria               2020   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            365     47
Pakistan              1968   cholera                                1075    37
Pakistan              1998   cholera                                9917    83
Pakistan              2000   diarrhoeal syndrome                    258     14
Pakistan              2001   leishmaniasis                          5000    0
Pakistan              2002   unknown                                25      10
Pakistan              2004                                          100     2
Pakistan              2005   tetanos                                111     22
Pakistan              2017   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2492    25
Pakistan              2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   53834   95
Palestine, State of   1983                                          943     0
Panama                1964                                          1200    0
Panama                1991   cholera                                2057    43
Panama                1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2124    1
Panama                2002   meningitis                             173     0
Papua New Guinea      2001                                          1395    0
Papua New Guinea      2002                                          2215    122
Papua New Guinea      2009   h1n1                                   7391    192

                                                       61
Paraguay             1999   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   2273     0
Paraguay             2006   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   100000   17
Paraguay             2008   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   5957     8
Paraguay             2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   24       8
Paraguay             2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   13681    0
Paraguay             2011   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   16264    44
Paraguay             2020   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   106127   20
Peru                 1991   cholera                                283353   1726
Peru                 1997   cholera                                174      1
Peru                 1998   cholera                                33763    16
Peru                 2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   14151    0
Peru                 2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   31703    13
Peru                 2012   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   20106    11
Peru                 2016   yellow fever                           54       26
Philippines (the)    1977                                          681      57
Philippines (the)    1990                                          200      21
Philippines (the)    1996   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1673     30
Philippines (the)    1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   11000    202
Philippines (the)    1999   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   402      10
Philippines (the)    2000   diarrhoeal syndrome                    664      1
Philippines (the)    2002   sars                                   12       2
Philippines (the)    2004   meningitis                             98       32
Philippines (the)    2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   123939   737
Philippines (the)    2011   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   7595     56
Philippines (the)    2012   cholera                                3158     30
Philippines (the)    2018   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   79376    519
Philippines (the)    2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   129597   825
Romania              1996                                          527      0
Romania              1999                                          4743     0
Romania              2002   sars                                   1        0
Russian Federation   1995                                          150000   0
Russian Federation   1997   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            4538     0
Russian Federation   1999   west nile fever                        765      33
Russian Federation   2000   acute jaundice syndrome                2942     0
Russian Federation   2002   sars                                   1        0
Rwanda               1978   cholera                                2000     0
Rwanda               1991                                          214      32
Rwanda               1996   cholera                                106      10
Rwanda               1998   cholera                                2951     55
Rwanda               1999                                          488      76
Rwanda               2000   meningitis                             164      10
Rwanda               2002   meningitis                             636      83
Rwanda               2004   typhiod                                540      4

                                                      62
Rwanda                  2006   cholera                                300     35
Sao Tome and Principe   1989   cholera                                1063    31
Sao Tome and Principe   2005   cholera                                1349    25
Saudi Arabia            2000   rift valley fever                      497     133
Saudi Arabia            2001   meningitis                             74      35
Senegal                 1965   yellow fever                           150     60
Senegal                 1978   cholera                                298     5
Senegal                 1985   cholera                                3100    300
Senegal                 1995   cholera                                3031    188
Senegal                 1998                                          2709    372
Senegal                 2002                                          181     18
Senegal                 2004   cholera                                861     6
Senegal                 2005   cholera                                23022   303
Senegal                 2007   cholera                                2825    16
Senegal                 2014   ebola                                  1       0
Seychelles              2005   chikungunya                            5461    0
Seychelles              2016   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   253     0
Sierra Leone            1985   cholera                                3000    352
Sierra Leone            1996   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            953     226
Sierra Leone            1997   h1n1                                   2024    51
Sierra Leone            1998   cholera                                1770    55
Sierra Leone            1999   dysentery                              3228    133
Sierra Leone            2001   meningitis                             3       12
Sierra Leone            2003   yellow fever                           90      10
Sierra Leone            2004   cholera                                633     56
Sierra Leone            2008   cholera                                1746    170
Sierra Leone            2012   cholera                                23009   300
Sierra Leone            2014   ebola                                  14124   3956
Singapore               1998   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            11      1
Singapore               2000   enterovirus                            2022    2
Singapore               2002   sars                                   205     33
Singapore               2016   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   13051   0
Solomon Islands         2013   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   6700    8
Solomon Islands         2016   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   1212    0
Somalia                 1977                                          2671    0
Somalia                 1985   cholera                                4815    1262
Somalia                 1986   cholera                                7093    1307
Somalia                 1994                                          17000   100
Somalia                 1996   cholera                                5557    247
Somalia                 1997   cholera                                1044    0
Somalia                 1998   cholera                                14564   481
Somalia                 1999   cholera                                175     15
Somalia                 2000   cholera                                2490    244

                                                         63
Somalia        2001   meningitis                             111      33
Somalia        2002   cholera                                1191     63
Somalia        2005   poliovirus                             199      0
Somalia        2006                                          5876     103
Somalia        2007   cholera                                35687    1133
Somalia        2008   cholera                                663      13
Somalia        2016   cholera                                14165    497
Somalia        2017   cholera                                13126    302
South Africa   2000   cholera                                86107    181
South Africa   2002   cholera                                13352    84
South Africa   2004   cholera                                174      5
South Africa   2008   cholera                                12752    65
South Sudan    2013   poliovirus                             3        0
South Sudan    2014   cholera                                6486     149
South Sudan    2015   cholera                                1818     47
South Sudan    2016   cholera                                3826     68
South Sudan    2019   measles                                937      7
Spain          1997   meningitis                             1383     0
Spain          2001   legionellosis                          751      2
Spain          2002   sars                                   1        0
Sri Lanka      1967                                          200000   2
Sri Lanka      1977   cholera                                728      0
Sri Lanka      1997   cholera                                1695     36
Sri Lanka      1999                                          5936     1
Sri Lanka      2000   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   113      2
Sri Lanka      2004   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   15000    88
Sri Lanka      2009   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   35007    346
Sri Lanka      2011   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   26343    167
Sri Lanka      2017   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   155715   320
Sri Lanka      2019   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   18760    28
Sudan (the)    1940   yellow fever                           15000    1500
Sudan (the)    1950                                          72162    0
Sudan (the)    1965                                          2300     0
Sudan (the)    1976   ebola                                  299      150
Sudan (the)    1988                                          38805    2770
Sudan (the)    1996   cholera                                1800     700
Sudan (the)    1998   meningitis                             22403    1746
Sudan (the)    1999   cholera                                3959     357
Sudan (the)    2000                                          2363     186
Sudan (the)    2002   leishmaniasis                          1281     49
Sudan (the)    2003   yellow fever                           178      27
Sudan (the)    2004   hepatitis e                            8114     98
Sudan (the)    2005   meningitis                             7454     650

                                                64
Sudan (the)               2006   cholera                                28769    1142
Sudan (the)               2007   meningitis                             7639     584
Sudan (the)               2008   diarrhoeal syndrome                    212      15
Sudan (the)               2012   yellow fever                           678      171
Sudan (the)               2016                                          632      19
Sudan (the)               2017   diarrhoeal syndrome                    30762    657
Sudan (the)               2019   cholera                                510      24
Swaziland                 1992   cholera                                2228     30
Swaziland                 2000   cholera                                1449     32
Sweden                    2002   diarrhoeal syndrome                    350      0
Switzerland               2002   sars                                   1        0
Syrian Arab Rep.          1977   cholera                                4165     88
Taiwan (Prov. of China)   1998   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            250000   54
Taiwan (Prov. of China)   2002   sars                                   309      37
Tajikistan                1996   typhiod                                7516     0
Tajikistan                1997   typhiod                                15618    168
Tajikistan                1999   typhiod                                200      3
Tajikistan                2003   typhiod                                256      0
Tajikistan                2010   poliovirus                             456      21
Tanzania                  1977   cholera                                6050     500
Tanzania                  1985   bubonic                                118      10
Tanzania                  1987   cholera                                500      90
Tanzania                  1991                                          1733     284
Tanzania                  1992   cholera                                40249    2231
Tanzania                  1997   cholera                                42350    2329
Tanzania                  1998   cholera                                40677    2461
Tanzania                  1999   diarrhoeal syndrome                    529      56
Tanzania                  2000                                          898      37
Tanzania                  2001   diarrhoeal syndrome                    515      25
Tanzania                  2002   meningitis                             149      9
Tanzania                  2005   cholera                                576      6
Tanzania                  2006   cholera                                1410     70
Tanzania                  2007   rift valley fever                      284      119
Tanzania                  2009   cholera                                600      12
Tanzania                  2015   cholera                                37712    582
Tanzania                  2019   cholera                                216      3
Thailand                  1977   cholera                                2800     100
Thailand                  2000                                          1946     89
Thailand                  2002   sars                                   7        2
Thailand                  2003   h5n1                                   4        7
Thailand                  2004   h5n1                                   8        14
Thailand                  2010   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   880      2
Thailand                  2011   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   37728    27

                                                               65
Timor-Leste      2005   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   336      22
Timor-Leste      2014   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   197      2
Togo             1988                                          1617     50
Togo             1996                                          2619     360
Togo             1998   cholera                                3669     239
Togo             2001   meningitis                             1567     235
Togo             2002                                          494      95
Togo             2003   cholera                                790      40
Togo             2008   cholera                                686      6
Togo             2010   meningitis                             236      60
Togo             2013   cholera                                168      7
Togo             2015   meningitis                             324      24
Turkey           1964                                          2500     19
Turkey           1965                                          100000   461
Turkey           1968   poliovirus                             1975     98
Turkey           1977                                          100000   0
Turkey           1987   cholera                                150      11
Turkey           2004   h5n1                                   8        4
Turkey           2006   haemorrhagic fever syndrome            222      20
Uganda           1982   plague                                 153      3
Uganda           1986   plague                                 340      27
Uganda           1989   meningitis                             961      156
Uganda           1990   meningitis                             1170     197
Uganda           1997   o'nyongnyong fever                     100300   0
Uganda           1998   cholera                                600      30
Uganda           1999   cholera                                2205     122
Uganda           2000   ebola                                  723      259
Uganda           2001                                          9        14
Uganda           2003   cholera                                242      35
Uganda           2004   cholera                                53       3
Uganda           2005   cholera                                726      21
Uganda           2006   meningitis                             5702     203
Uganda           2007   hepatitis e                            5937     132
Uganda           2008   cholera                                388      28
Uganda           2009   cholera                                544      17
Uganda           2010   yellow fever                           190      48
Uganda           2012   cholera                                5980     156
Uganda           2013   cholera                                218497   28
Uganda           2018   cholera                                1000     31
Ukraine          1994   cholera                                1333     71
Ukraine          1995                                          5336     204
Ukraine          1997                                          102      0
United Kingdom   1984   salmonella                             16       26

                                                  66
United Kingdom   1985   legionellosis                          144      34
United Kingdom   2001   meningitis                             30       11
United Kingdom   2002   sars                                   4        0
USA              1990   encephalitis syndrome (aes)            50       3
USA              1993   cryptosporidiosis                      403000   100
USA              2002   west nile fever                        3653     214
Uzbekistan       1998                                          148      40
Venezuela        1990   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   9506     74
Venezuela        1991   cholera                                967      18
Venezuela        1995   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   32280    0
Venezuela        2010   cholera                                118      0
Viet Nam         1964   cholera                                10848    598
Viet Nam         1996   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   9706     45
Viet Nam         1998   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   8000     214
Viet Nam         2002   sars                                   58       5
Viet Nam         2003   h5n1                                   8        15
Viet Nam         2004   h5n1                                   51       42
Viet Nam         2005   acute neurological syndrome            83       16
Viet Nam         2016   dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever   79204    27
Yemen            2000   rift valley fever                      289      32
Yemen            2005   poliovirus                             179      0
Yemen            2015                                          3026     3
Yemen            2016   cholera                                180      11
Yemen            2017   diphteria                              298      35
Yemen            2019   cholera                                521028   932
Zambia           1990   yellow fever                           667      85
Zambia           1991   cholera                                13154    0
Zambia           1992   cholera                                11659    0
Zambia           1999   cholera                                13083    462
Zambia           2000   cholera                                1224     163
Zambia           2001   plague                                 425      11
Zambia           2003   cholera                                3835     179
Zambia           2005   cholera                                7615     21
Zambia           2006   cholera                                105      5
Zambia           2007   cholera                                115      5
Zambia           2008   cholera                                8312     173
Zambia           2009   cholera                                5198     87
Zambia           2012   cholera                                153      2
Zambia           2017   cholera                                4371     89
Zimbabwe         1992   cholera                                5649     258
Zimbabwe         1996                                          500000   1311
Zimbabwe         1998   cholera                                377      22
Zimbabwe         1999   cholera                                462      52

                                                      67
Zimbabwe   2000   cholera        2812    112
Zimbabwe   2002   cholera        452     4
Zimbabwe   2003   cholera        750     40
Zimbabwe   2005   cholera        1183    87
Zimbabwe   2007                  10000   67
Zimbabwe   2008   cholera        98349   4276
Zimbabwe   2009   measles        1346    55
Zimbabwe   2010   typhiod        258     8
Zimbabwe   2011   cholera        1140    45
Zimbabwe   2014   cholera        11      0
Zimbabwe   2018   typhiod        5164    12




                            68
