                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 FISCAL POLICY IN EUROPE:
                                    A HELICOPTER VIEW

                                        Florin O. Bilbiie
                                       Tommaso Monacelli
                                         Roberto Perotti

                                       Working Paper 28117
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28117


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Florin O. Bilbiie, Tommaso Monacelli, and Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Policy in Europe: A Helicopter View
Florin O. Bilbiie, Tommaso Monacelli, and Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 28117
November 2020
JEL No. E62,E63,F45

                                           ABSTRACT

We discuss the main fiscal policy issues in the Eurozone. Our goal is pedagogical: we do not
make any new proposal, but try to represent fairly the various sides of the debate. We focus on
two issues that are at the core of the current debate. The first is that, right from the start, the
government deficit and debt were the key objects of contention in the debate that led to the
creation of the Eurozone -and they still are, although the reasons have changed. The second,
obvious issue is that a currency union implies the loss of a country-specific instrument, a national
monetary policy. This puts a higher burden on fiscal policy as a tool to counteract shocks., a
burden that might be even heavier now that the European Central Bank has arguably reached the
Zero Lower Bound. Two obvious solutions are mutual insurance between countries; and a
centralized stabilization policy. Yet both have been remarkably difficult to come by. We argue
that the main reason is fear of persistent, unidirectional transfers between countries, an issue that
largely reflects a Northern vs. Southern Europe divide.

Florin O. Bilbiie                                 Roberto Perotti
University of Lausanne                            IGIER Universita' Bocconi
florin.bilbiie@gmail.com                          Via Roentgen 1
                                                  20136 Milano
Tommaso Monacelli                                 ITALY
IGIER Bocconi University                          and CEPR
Via Roentgen 1                                    and also NBER
20136 Milano                                      roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it
Italy
tommaso.monacelli@unibocconi.it
                Fiscal policy in Europe: a helicopter view*

                                                    Florin Bilbiie
                                          University of Lausanne and CEPR

                                               Tommaso Monacelli
                                       Bocconi University, IGIER, and CEPR

                                                Roberto Perotti
                                  Bocconi University, IGIER, CEPR, and NBER


                                          First version: September 11, 2020




1    INTRODUCTION

In this paper we discuss the main fiscal policy issues in the Eurozone. The Eurozone is a subset of the European
Union 1, and most fiscal policy issues at the European level are decided within the European Union. Because
of the important interactions of fiscal policy with monetary policy and the banking system, in this paper we
will focus on the Eurozone, although much of what we say applies also to the European Union.
         As we have to be selective, we focus on two issues that we believe are at the core of the current debate,
and on the proposals that have been put forth to address these problems. Our goal is pedagogical: we do not
make any new proposal, but try to represent fairly the various sides of the debate. Since this debate plays out
less on academic journals than on policy blogs and discussion papers of research centers and international
organizations, the literature is particularly vast and we will not be able to cite all relevant work; but in
emphasizing the distinction between different visions of "core" and "periphery" countries, we acknowledge
our particular debt to Brunnermeier, James and Landau (2016).
         The first issue we focus on is that, right from the start, the government deficit and debt were the key
objects of contention in the debate that led to the creation of the Eurozone, and they still are. Strict limits to
both were enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 establishing the European Union, seven years before the
Eurozone became operational. At the insistence of Germany, a no-bailout clause was also included in the
Treaty: an insolvent government could not be bailed out by the other countries. Why this seeming fixation with
the deficit and debt in a monetary union? The standard account is that Northern countries, with Germany in
the lead, worried that high debt countries would eventually exert pressure on the common central bank to
monetize the deficit - as they were used to do in the seventies and the eighties with their own central banks ­
thus imperiling the one feature of a currency union that Germany would never give up: a commitment to keep
inflation low and stable (see James 2012). However, with the Quantitative Easing policy started in 2015, the
European Central Bank has bought enormous quantities of government debt, trebling the monetary base by
mid-2020 ­ much more than if it had monetized the deficits of all Eurozone countries ­ and inflation has not
budged. Yet, if anything budget deficits and government debt are even more central to the debate on the reform
of the Eurozone. The focus has shifted: from fears of inflationary pressure to fears of a variety of spillovers
and contagion effects of a default of a monetary union member. This includes, but is not limited to, the fear

* Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives.
1 All 27 European Union members are part of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Only 19 of these, however, have adopted

the Euro and form the Eurozone. All countries that joined the EU after the creation of the Eurozone are waiting to qualify for the
Eurozone; two older members of the EU, Denmark and Sweden, have chosen not to adopt the Euro for the time being.
                                                                1
that a default could force an exit from the Eurozone or the collapse of the financial system, or both, with
unknown consequences for the working or even the viability of a currency union. Greece represents only 3
percent of the Eurozone GDP; yet, between 2010 and 2012 talks about a possible Greek default kept the entire
Eurozone on edge, and fueled a raging debate about a Euro breakup.
          The second issue we focus on is that a currency union implies the loss of a country-specific instrument,
a national monetary policy. This puts a higher burden on fiscal policy as a tool to counteract shocks, a burden
that might be even heavier now that the European Central Bank has arguably reached the Zero Lower Bound.
Two obvious solutions are mutual insurance (or risk sharing, we will use the two expression interchangeably)
between countries and a centralized stabilization policy. Yet both have been remarkably difficult to come by.
          Moral hazard is an obvious problem with any risk sharing arrangement, and it is certainly an important
reason behind the core countries' deep suspicion of a European mutual insurance scheme. But another factor,
which interacts with moral hazard, also plays an important role. The essence of risk sharing among countries
is transfers between countries. In standard models of insurance across countries net transfers are zero ex ante,
and shocks are temporary. In the real life Eurozone, countries have highly persistent differences, one of them
being very different levels and riskiness of their government debts; shocks also tend to be highly persistent.
Because of this, virtually all risk sharing arrangements and centralized stabilization policies that we can think
of are likely to generate long periods of transfers in one direction from the core to the periphery, lasting perhaps
a decade or a generation (we will call these "persistent, unidirectional transfers" for short). 2 Core country
politicians would have difficulties justifying this in front of their electorate, especially in the current political
atmosphere where nationalist feelings are resurgent everywhere. We emphasize that in politics a "long period"
could be rather short: ten years can encompass two or three electoral cycles, an eternity in politics.
          Of course, in theory one can design risk sharing arrangements where only the temporary component
of asymmetric shocks is insured, and transfers even out over reasonably short periods with high probability;
but in reality this is very difficult to do.




2     A NEGATIVE SHOCK IN A PERIPHERY COUNTRY

To understand these issues and the proposals on the table, it is best to start with a concrete question, and one
that is at the center of the debate. Suppose a periphery country of the Eurozone, with high levels of public debt,
is hit by a negative shock. Ignore initially the existence of treaties limiting (with varying degrees of
effectiveness) the use of fiscal policy and ask the question: what will likely happen if the country uses fiscal
policy to counteract this shock?
          A plausible scenario is one in which markets will fret about the solvency of the government, and the
cost of borrowing will increase. Still, for a long time the country will not lose access to the market, partly
because the market will be unsure whether the no-bailout clause will be enforced in case of manifest
insolvency: many participants will assume that the country will eventually be bailed out anyway, perhaps
indirectly by the ECB via large purchases of its debt on the secondary market. Of course nobody knows in
real time if a government is insolvent or simply illiquid: markets will also be uncertain if, at what conditions,
and for what amount European governments and institutions will be called in to provide liquidity to an illiquid
government. The result is a prolonged period of uncertainty, which will make the unavoidable fiscal adjustment
even more costly in the end; or a disorderly, highly disruptive insolvency; or a market panic that transforms
an illiquidity problem into a solvency problem. None of these three scenarios is appealing.
          In addition, the viability of the financial system would be called into question. Naturally, the negative
shock hitting the country impacts the profitability of the banking system by increasing the stock of non-
performing loans. But an additional channel is at work: for reasons that we discuss below, banks and insurance
companies of periphery countries have large exposures to their own sovereigns; as a consequence, the decline

2 For simplicity, the expressions "long periods of transfers in one direction" or "persistent, unidirectional transfers" do not encompass
only the case of a continuous flow of transfers year after year for a long period, but also of a large, one-off transfer which is unlikely
to be offset by a transfer in the opposite direction over a politically realistic horizon. This is the case, for instance, of the Greek bailout.
                                                                       2
in the market value of the sovereign through the mechanism illustrated above calls into doubt the viability of
the financial system as well. This increases further the riskiness of the sovereign itself, as the market takes into
account the possibility of a costly bailout of the financial system by the government. Thus, a two-way linkage
arises, in which the riskiness of the sovereign and that of the financial system reinforce each other. While this
type of "doom loop" between the financial system and the sovereign could arise in any economy, it is
particularly dangerous in a currency union, where governments do not have access to their own "printer of last
resort" and do not have the option to devalue to offset the negative shock, and where the spillover effects on
other countries of a financial system breakdown could be particularly disruptive. 3
         In the rest of the paper we discuss the various proposals to address these issues. To impose some
discipline on the discussion we highlight a few criteria that we will follow. First, we take political constraints
seriously. The most important among these is perhaps the one we have highlighted above: persistent,
unidirectional transfers are politically unfeasible ­ a theme that will resonate throughout this paper. Although
the EU is formally largely run on the basis of "one country one vote", and even requires unanimity in some
cases, the political reality is that some countries matter much more than others: ingenious proposals that have
practically no chance of being accepted in the foreseeable future by one or more of the major players with de
facto veto power do not seem very useful to us. In this respect, we recognize that the difference between
"core" and "periphery" countries is real: not only are their economies and cultures different in important ways,
but the fact of the matter is that a "core Eurozone" could survive and maybe prosper, while a "periphery
Eurozone" is unlikely to be viable. Hence, core countries have more bargaining power, and there is nothing to
be gained by ignoring this simple fact. In addition, we believe that there is a fundamental asymmetry between
a budget deficit and a budget surplus, and between a current account deficit and a current account surplus;
proposals that rely on a symmetric adjustment of deficits and surpluses are not realistic. Finally, in virtually
all countries nationalistic and Euro-skeptical parties are more and more important: even at the best of times
appeals to the notion of "European solidarity" are unlikely to move many voters in the core countries, now
they are simply unrealistic. 4 This was in clear view in July 2020 during the negotiations for a stimulus package
at the European level of about 750bn euros, when the "frugal four" Northern countries ­ Austria, Finland, the
Netherlands, and Sweden ­ openly defied an agreement by France and Germany to distribute large grants to
Southern countries particularly hit by the pandemic, on the ground that these countries had a long history of
mismanagement of their public finances. Three of the four "frugal" countries were led by social democratic
government, facing high pressure at home from nationalistic parties.
      The second criterion we impose is that the transition matters: we do not find very useful those proposals
that would work in a steady state with low government debts but do not make concrete suggestions on how to
get there, except perhaps recommending the implementation of some generic "good policies" or "better
monitoring and supervision" of certain actors.
      The third criterion is that, while we particularly highlight issues related to the Covid pandemic, our
treatment is more general, and covers issues that precede the pandemic and will survive it.




3     MARKET DISCIPLINE VS. RULES



3 The doom loop first really became the object of a heated debate at the time of the sovereign debt crisis of 2011-2012, when Italian
and Spanish banks surprised many by using the large injection of liquidity by the ECB to double down on their holdings of risky
domestic sovereign.
4 During the Greek crisis, one of the most popular arguments in support of a European bailout in the Italian media (and quite possibly

in the media of other countries too) was that Greece was the cradle of the European civilization, it was the land of Plato and Aristoteles
at a time when Germany was barely inhabited. Later, similar arguments (shifted forward by a few centuries to encompass the glories
of the Roman empire, and perhaps with the additional supporting argument of the Renaissance a thousand years later) applied at the
time of the Italian debt crisis in 2011-12. We doubt that many German taxpayers and voters found these arguments convincing.
                                                                    3
3.1     RISK SHARING VS. RISK REDUCTION
At its core, the debate is a manifestation of two age-old debates: rules vs. discretion, and risk sharing vs. risk
reduction and market discipline. An important recent contribution that has tried to reconcile the elements of
this trade-off is the manifesto of the "7+7" (see Bénassy-Quéré et al. 2018), a group of seven French and seven
German economists, that has sparked a large and fruitful policy debate on which we draw freely throughout
this paper.
         One extreme solution is to rely on the discipline imposed by markets. When a government is insolvent,
markets pull the plug and force the government to restructure its debt. If this causes major disruptions to the
economy, requiring a Euro-exit to repair, so be it. The problem with this approach is that markets are imperfect
watchdogs of the sustainability of government finances: they typically ignore the problem for too long, while
at other times they might panic and transform an illiquidity problem into an insolvency problem. It is fair to
say that nobody, at least officially, advocates market discipline as the only approach.
         At the other extreme, the solution is to rely on rules constraining national government deficits and
debt. If the problem is excessive government debts, in principle it can be solved easily: membership in the
monetary union requires compliance with specific limits on government deficits and debt. This is essentially
the approach that was tried at the beginning.




3.2     THE EVOLUTION OF EUROPEAN FISCAL RULES
We can only summarize the evolution of the rules governing the Eurozone, as a full account would take more
than one paper. The original Maastricht Treaty of 1992 envisioned two main rules: a 60 percent debt limit and
a 3 percent budget deficit limit. 5 Countries violating these limits could be subject to an Excessive Deficit
Procedure (the "corrective arm"), whereby the European Commission recommends measures to be taken and
monitors the outcomes. At the time of writing (September 2020), all EU members except Luxembourg and
Sweden have been subject to at least one Excessive Deficit Procedure; one (Romania) is still open. To
reinforce the effectiveness of these rules, per the 1997 Stability and Growth Pact member countries should
also have a budget position "close to balance or in surplus" over the medium term.
         By 2005 it was widely agreed that this approach imparted a strong pro-cyclical bias to fiscal policies.
When the economy is hit by a negative demand shock, the budget deficit and government debt as shares of
GDP rise automatically, both because the numerator increases and the denominator decreases. Hence, the rules
in place called for a restrictive fiscal policy exactly when the economy is hit by a negative shock. One answer
is to express the rules in cyclically adjusted terms. 6 The 2005 reform introduced a role for the "structural"
deficit (the cyclically adjusted deficit net of one-offs and of certain temporary components): each year, each
country is assigned a Medium Term Objective (MTO) defined in terms of the structural balance (the
"preventive arm"): up to 1 percent structural deficit if it had low debt and high potential growth, and a
structural budget in balance or in surplus in the opposite case, or if the sustainability of its public finances were
imperiled by aging of the population. The 2005 reform allowed for a country to deviate from its MTO, or from
the adjustment path towards the MTO, in case it introduced a qualifying structural reform, on condition that it
would get back to the path within four years.
         One can see already how many elements of judgment were involved in these rules. Estimating the
cyclically adjusted budget deficit involves first estimating potential output, and then estimating what
government revenues and expenditures would be if actual output were at potential. Both steps are subject to

5 There are various accounts of where these numbers came from, none of which verifiable; we just note that in steady state the two
numbers are compatible with each other if the rate of growth of nominal GDP is 5 percent, a figure that some countries have not seen
for decades by now.
6 To obtain the cyclically adjusted budget balance, one subtracts from the actual budget balance the component that is due to the

deviation of output from its potential level; in other words, the cyclically adjusted budget balance is the balance that would prevail,
given the current legislation, it output were at its potential. Computing the cyclically adjusted balance therefore requires at least to
estimations subject to high uncertainty: the potential level of output and the elasticity of government revenues and spending to output.
In a recession, government revenues fall automatically as output declines, while government expenditures like unemployment benefits
increase; hence, the government budget balance declines automatically. In a recession, the cyclically adjusted budget deficit is therefore
smaller (in absolute terms) than the actual deficit, and the opposite in an upturn.
                                                                    4
considerable uncertainty. In addition, because of the mechanics of the computation of potential output, in the
early phases of a recession there is a tendency to attribute the recession to a decline in potential output, so that
the initial estimates of the output gap are typically larger (in algebraic terms) than they should be. It follows
that at the beginning of the recession countries are typically required to implement more conservative fiscal
policies than they would be based on later estimates: this did play an important role in the austerity
recommendations of 2011-2012. Fatás (2018) and Fatás and Summers (2018) argue that this mechanism made
the recession deeper and, in a self-reinforcing loop, justified ex-post the estimates of a decline in potential
output.
         With the 2011 debt crisis the pendulum swung in the opposite direction: now there were calls by
Northern countries to make the rules more binding. Hence the "Six Pack", which introduced legally
enforceable sanctions up to .2 percent of GDP, in the form of interest-bearing and then in case of further non-
compliance, of no interest-bearing deposits. Predictably, these sanction were never applied. To assuage the
other countries, that regarded the high current account surpluses of Germany as a main source of disinflationary
pressure in the whole Eurozone, the Six Pack also introduced the Main Macroeconomic Imbalance procedure,
which would take into account a number of macroeconomic variables, including for instance an excessive
current account surplus. Needless to say, the Main Macroeconomic Imbalance procedure has been largely
toothless.
         Still in response to the debt crisis, the Fiscal Compact, adopted by the Eurozone countries, introduced
a debt-brake, by which a country with more than 60 percent of debt / GDP ratio would have to reduce it at an
average speed of one twentieth of the excess per year, where the average is calculated over the last three years.
It also called for all signatories to incorporate the balanced budget rule into their constitutions.
         In 2015 the pendulum swung back again, reflecting a backlash against the period of fiscal austerity
that has been perceived to have been imposed on the Eurozone countries by the Commission and the Northern
countries. Within the existing rules, clarifications were issued about their implementation. Inevitably, the
problem of procyclicality of rules was dealt with by introducing more and more exceptions, qualifications, and
contingencies, in the end leading to a bewildering cobweb that even experts in the field have trouble
navigating. Provisions were made to facilitate public investment and structural reform. Thus, members would
be allowed to deviate temporarily from their MTO or adjustment path towards it to accommodate investment,
provided that: "their GDP growth is negative or GDP remains well below its potential; the deviation does not
lead to an excess over the 3 % deficit reference value and an appropriate safety margin is preserved; investment
levels are effectively increased as a result; the deviation is compensated within the timeframe of the Member
State's Stability or Convergence Programme." (European Commission 2015 p. 9). "Structural reforms" also
give right to a deviation of .5 percentage points of GDP from its MTO "provided that such reforms (i) are
major, (ii) have verifiable direct long-term positive budgetary effects, including by raising potential sustainable
growth, and (iii) are fully implemented" (European Commission 2015 p. 12).
         The budgetary and growth effects of reforms and public investment are pure guesswork, or rather the
result of political give and take. For instance, in 2015 Italy was allowed to deviate from its MTO on the basis
of three different clauses: the "unusual events" clause for .12 percentage points of GDP (half to cover the costs
of refugee crisis and half for the security crisis after terrorist attacks in Europe); the "investment" clause for
.25 pps; and the "structural reform" clause for .50 pps, based on a submission to the European Commission
envisioning an effect of these reforms on the level of GDP of 1.8 percent in 2020 and 7.2 percent in the long
run. 7
         Finally, to take into account cyclical conditions, the Commission devised the "matrix for specifying
the annual fiscal adjustment towards the medium-term objective (MTO) under the preventive arm of the pact"
(see Table 1). The degree of complexity of all these rules is self-evident. Even more important than the mind-
boggling number of contingencies and escape clauses written in the Stability and Growth Pact, and its
numerous modifications, are the exceptions granted on an ad-hoc basis. Almost by definition, rules cannot
foresee all the relevant contingencies, and each time there will be pressure to correct the perceived negative
side effects of a strict enforcement. The result is not just an unwieldy legislation, but endless litigation,
backdoor bargaining, and ultimately loss of trust in the European institutions. Any government (and especially

7   See Italian Ministry of Economy 2015 p.48.
                                                         5
any nationalist party) in any country can point to an episode where they can argue that their own country was
treated unfairly by their partners.
         A further complication is that the rules concern not just fiscal variables, but a whole set of indicators
of all sorts of macro variables. As a consequence, a country with a bad score on the fiscal policy side can
always point out some problems in any other country, and decry the unfairness of the process. This seems
particularly unnecessary because, while monitoring the fiscal accounts has a coherent rationale which was
accepted by all, pursuing a country because, for instance, it has an "excessive" current account surplus is bound
to be enormously controversial.
         All these issues have not been made redundant by the pandemic. As it is well known, with the
pandemic the Stability and Growth Pact has de facto been suspended: the "general escape clause" has become
operational, allowing member states to depart from the adjustment path towards their MTO. Still, this is meant
to be temporary, and if anything the pandemic has highlighted further the need for reform of the SGP.


                                            Table 1: The "matrix"




        Source: European Commission (2015) p. 20.


3.3   THE EXPENDITURE RULE
To correct the procyclical bias in the existing rules, several authors have proposed an expenditure rule (see e.g.
Bénassy-Quéré et al. 2018, Claeys, Darvas and Leandro 2016, Darvas, Martin and Ragot 2018, Feld et al.
(2018), European Fiscal Board 2019, Mohl and Mourrel 2020). There are several versions, all variants of the
following approach: take government spending and subtract interest payments, unemployment benefits, one-
off expenditures, a smoothed version of public investment, and the discretionary change in taxation. This
                                                        6
variable ­ call it "adjusted spending" - cannot grow more than a smoothed version of expected potential GDP
in nominal terms over a window of ten years or so. Shortfalls of adjusted spending relative to this ceiling can
be saved in an accumulation account, whose balance can be spent to finance excesses of adjusted spending in
other years. Most proposals also envision a "debt-brake", i.e. an adjustment of the ceiling based on the debt
to GDP ratio: in countries with a higher ratio the ceiling would be revised downward. Escape clauses and
further adjustments for the cyclical conditions are also typically envisioned. All the judgment calls (estimates
of nominal potential growth, smoothing of public investment, the adjustments for the debt to GDP ratio and
cyclical conditions, escape clauses etc.) would be made by a combination of the European Commission, a
European Fiscal Council, and national fiscal councils.
         In most proposals (Feld et al. 2018 being an exception) the existing structural balance rule would be
replaced by this expenditure rule. The alleged advantages are numerous. We list four that can be found in the
literature; we find all of them debatable at the very least (see also Barnes and Casey 2019). First, the
expenditure rule is more transparent than the construction of the structural balance. However, as we have seen,
the construction of an expenditure rule involves more steps and many actors, some of which ­ like the national
fiscal councils ­ in some countries have not proved to be authoritative. Second, it is less subject to the vagaries
of cyclical adjustment, partly because revisions to the estimates of expected nominal potential output are less
frequent and smaller than revisions of the estimates of output gap. However, this does not mean that estimates
of the expected potential output are better in some statistical sense: in fact, calculating the expected nominal
potential growth over a ten-year period is an extraordinarily uncertain exercise, and it is not clear that it should
be less controversial than estimating an output gap. Third, adjusted spending is under the direct control of the
government, and does not involve relying on estimates of controversial tax elasticities. 8 However, the
expenditure rule requires subtracting the effects of discretionary tax changes, which conceptually involves the
use of tax elasticities; the estimate of these effects in the national budget is often more a political than an
economic exercise. Fourth, the expenditure rule is less procyclical. 9 However, because of the way it is
constructed the expenditure rule essentially imposes a ceiling on the change of a version of the cyclically
adjusted primary deficit. There is no clear logical or practical advantage relative to setting a MTO for a
different version of the cyclically adjusted primary balance.
         Perhaps most surprisingly, since the "Six Pack" reform of 2011 an "expenditure benchmark" is already
in place among the EU rules: "public spending must not rise faster than medium-term potential GDP growth,
unless it is matched by adequate revenue increases." In implementing this rule, the construction of "public
spending" is exactly as in the expenditure rule proposals we have described above (see Barnes and Casey 2019
or Mohl and Mourre 2020 on the performance of the expenditure benchmark).

3.4    RULES VS. STANDARDS
Thus, while there is a widespread agreement that existing fiscal rules are too complicated, unwieldy, even
arbitrary, the quest for alternative rules does not seem to us to have made substantial progress; in fact, it might
have led to a regress. Blanchard, Leandro and Zettelmeyer (2020) argue that in the presence of large Knightian
uncertainty one should simply recognize that rules cannot foresee all possible contingencies ex ante, and
advocate moving from rules to standards, i.e. principles that "leave room to accommodate the particulars of
individual circumstances [...] Rules have the advantage of providing greater clarity ex ante. But a case-by-
case approach may be preferable when `public authorities cannot design general rules, because they lack
relevant information ... or rules [would] be poorly suited to new circumstances turned up by unanticipated
developments.' " (Blanchard, Leandro and Zettelmeyer 2020 p. 20, citing Sunstein 1995). They argue in favor
of simple, generic rules like the current article 126 of the EU Treaty; "Member states shall avoid excessive
government deficits", to be made operational for instance by resorting to stochastic debt sustainability analysis
(essentially, a fan chart of debt developments). Whether this is a practical basis for a yearly political process
involving 26 different countries is very much an open issue.


8 Tax elasticities are used in the construction of the cyclically adjusted budget balance to subtract from actual tax revenues the

component due to the deviation of output from potential output.
9 When GDP grows less than the ceiling, and adjusted expenditure grows at the ceiling, the actual expenditure to GDP ratio increases,

and the opposite in periods of high GDP growth.
                                                                 7
4     MUTUAL INSURANCE

The alternative, or complement, to rules is mutual insurance. Theoretically, mutual insurance is easy to justify
(see e.g. Farhi and Werning 2017): in the presence of asymmetric shocks in a currency union, even with
complete financial markets real relative prices (i.e. real exchange rates) do not adjust efficiently to provide full
insurance because of the rigidity of the nominal exchange rate. Transfers between currency union members,
contingent on the shocks, increase macroeconomic stability and have an aggregate demand externality effect.
The private sector does not internalize this effect, hence even with perfect financial markets the amount of
insurance, absent inter-government transfers, is suboptimal. In practice, however, it is another story. There are
several instruments of mutual insurance, but for reasons of space and to keep with the subject of this paper ­
fiscal policy ­ we consider two obvious candidates: a European deposit insurance scheme (Edis) and a
European unemployment insurance scheme (Euis). Both have figured prominently in the academic and policy
debate; both have failed to make much inroad among policymakers. The main reason is that almost any
conceivable implementation of such schemes would give rise to large, persistent unidirectional transfers.

4.1     A EUROPEAN DEPOSIT INSURANCE SCHEME (EDIS) AND SAFE ASSETS
Consider deposit insurance first. It is commonly considered the third step of a banking union, after a common
resolution procedure and a common supervision system. At a very abstract level, one can think of a banking
union as a risk-sharing tool because its ultimate goals is to ensure that risk-adjusted funding costs for banks
are the same across member countries, and they are independent, in particular, of sovereign risk. 10 Europe has
largely completed the first two steps of a banking union, but Edis has found the unsurmountable opposition of
Germany and other core countries. 11
         The moral hazard problem of a Edis should not be underestimated: it is not difficult to imagine that in
a crisis governments insured by a Edis will put pressure on their banking system to purchase government debt
and to keep lending to firms in distress. To preserve the correct incentives, most proposals of Edis envision
premia based on bank-specific and country-specific risk, and a first loss taken by the domestic government.
Country-specific premia might be challenging to implement in practice, as they must be based on measures
of the solidity of each country's banking system that are likely to be even more contentious than government
debt ratings or country-specific output gaps.
         But even abstracting from moral hazard and the practical difficulties of pricing bank insurance, the
key problem of a Edis is that in the presence of the doom loop it can lead to very large and persistent transfers
to periphery countries. 12 To make Edis possible, therefore, one has first to break up the doom loop. Simplifying,
there are three key proposals.
         First, concentration charges (see e.g. German Council of Economic Experts 2015, Veron 2017, and
more recently the proposal by the German Finance Minister, see Sholz 2019): the higher the share of a
sovereign in the total assets of a bank (or in the total sovereign holdings), the higher the capital charge
coefficient applied to the holdings of that sovereign in that bank. Even though all agree that they would have
to be introduced very gradually, it should not be surprising that the mere mention of concentration charges is
anathema to periphery, high-public debt governments and their central bankers.
         Second, risk weights. The EU has chosen to make use of the discretion allowed by the Basel rules,
and has adopted a zero risk weight on the government debt held by any EU bank under the "standardized
approach" and issued by any EU country (see European Parliament 2019 for a useful summary of the issues).
Differentiating the capital charges according to risk would disincentivise banks from holding the riskier

10 Martinez, Philippon and Sihvonen (2019) study the comparative properties of risk sharing via a banking union or a capital market

union.
11 Recently, a non-paper by the German Finance Minister has made some ouvertures to Edis: see Sholz (2019).
12 Carmassi et al. (2020) argue that regardless of which of several different risk-weights is used, the cross-subsidization via an Edis

would be zero or minimal even in the presence of bank failures well in excess of those seen in the Great Recession. However, their
results are based on symmetric shocks (in each country, banks representing a given percentage of that banking system's assets fail,
and the loss rate is the same across countries).
                                                                  8
sovereigns. This proposal too is anathema to periphery countries. In addition, it would largely refute current
ECB policy, which applies a rather crude differentiation to the haircut of government bonds in its repo
operations, with de facto only two categories of sovereign risk. 13 The simulations of Alogoskoufis and
Langfield (2019) show that even following the finer ratings of rating agencies would not achieve a substantial
reduction in risk, because these ratings are noisy and unreliable.
          Third, safe assets. A large literature maintains that that the supply of safe assets has shrunk
dramatically in recent years 14 while the demand has increased because investors seek protection for the tail
risks. One result is the "safety trap" of Caballero and Farhi (2017) and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2020),
as summarized in the stylized model of Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2016). Suppose (for illustrative
purposes, and taking various shortcuts) that the demand for safe assets depends positively on output and
negatively on the safe interest rate, and that the central bank controls the safe interest rate via a Taylor rule.
When the net supply of safe assets declines, output declines for any given level the safe interest rate; the central
bank can avoid this, and achieve the natural level of output, by reducing the safe interest rate. But once the
Zero Lower Bound is hit, further declines in the supply of the safe assets must be met by a decline in output.
In other words, the real safe interest rate is above the natural safe real interest rate, which equates demand and
supply of safe assets at the natural level of output; as a consequence, recession ensues. This is a modern version
of the keynesian "paradox of thrift": an excess demand for safe assets leads to a recession.
          While this is a general phenomenon, it is of specific interest in the context of the present paper for two
reasons. First, it is sometimes argued that the creation of the Eurozone caused by itself a decline the supply of
safe assets (see e.g. De Grauwe and Ji 2018). As long as they had their own central banks, the governments of
Italy and Spain could be immune from default since their central banks had always the option of buying their
debt. With the creation of the Eurozone, these previously safe assets became risky, and spikes in their riskiness
were associated with massive capital "flights to safety", i.e. to Northern government debt. We disagree with
the first part of this argument: bonds with the backing of their own central bank could be made safe (and even
hundred per cent safe) in nominal terms, but not in real terms. What makes a sovereign safe in real terms is the
government's ability to raise sufficient real revenues to pay interests and principal. In fact, the interest rate on
Italian and Spanish government debt started to decline dramatically after the Madrid Summit of 1995 set an
irrevocable timetable for the introduction of the Euro in 1999, by which time the yield differential with the
Bund was almost nil. We find it more plausible that the spread with the Bund started increasing again when
Spain and Italy were perceived to pursue fiscal policies that made their debt unsustainable in the view of many
market participants.
          The second reason why the "safe asset shortage" phenomenon is of specific interest to the context of
this paper is the idea that, if periphery banks had access to a large supply of well diversified safe assets, a loss
of confidence in their own sovereign need not be reflected in a "flight to safety" and in a decline in their
solidity. This idea rests on two premises: first, there is a dearth of safe assets; second, periphery banks would
gladly invest in them. For the sake of the argument we will take the first premise as given (although defining
and measuring the supply of safe assets is not uncontroversial). We argue however that the second premise is
controversial.
          To increase the supply of safe assets, Brunnermeier et al. (2011) and Brunnermeier et al. (2017)
propose to pool Eurozone sovereigns according to, say, their GDP weights, and then tranche the resulting
security. The senior tranche (called "Esbies") can be made virtually as safe as one wishes, depending on its
waterfall structure: simulations in Brunnermeier et al. (2017) show that when the junior tranche absorbs the
first 30 percent of losses, and under the observed matrix of correlations, the senior tranche can effectively be
made as safe as a Bund. Note that pooling and tranching could be done by the market, once the ECB announces
that it will accept the senior tranche as collateral. 15

13 The 7+7 rule out differentiating risk weights in their proposal.
14 Caballero, Farhi and Gouricnhas (2017) argue that between 2007 and 2011 alone the supply of safe assets declined from 36 to 18
percent of the world GDP due to the downgrade of AAA-rated assets in the US (both GSE-issued and privately-issued assets) and of
the Spanish and Italian government bonds.
15 Since 2011, there have been many variants on this proposal, which we do not have the space to review here. The adoption of Esbies

has been recommended by the European parliament in April 2019. See Garicano (2019) for a proposed path to the implementation of
Esbies.
                                                                 9
         However, this process comes at the cost of also increasing the supply of more risky bonds. While this
may be beneficial in itself if there are agents with different preferences for risk, to highlight the key aspects
for our purposes consider the case of risk neutral banks. Imagine a world in which the price of government
debt can fall because investors expect the government to incur the cost of a bailout of the banking system when
banks' capital becomes negative. In turn, banks' capital can become negative because banks have a home bias
and the decline in the price of government bonds has a large impact on their balance sheets ­ "the doom
loop". Thus, there is always a "good" equilibrium in which the government is not expected to bailout banks
and banks' capital remain positive. However, there can also be a "bad", or "sunspot", equilibrium, in which
the government is expected to bail out banks with negative capital, and banks have negative capital because
the government is expected to bail them out. 16
         The availability of Esbies to banks eliminates the sunspot equilibrium on a region of parameters, which
can be large. Essentially, access to Esbies reduces one leg of the loop - the home bias of banks. Obviously
Esbies work if banks are willing to buy them instead of domestic government debt. Answering this question
calls for a deeper investigation of the causes of the home bias of periphery banks. Although there is no
consensus, we list four possible explanations, not necessarily mutually exclusive. First, moral suasion by the
government: anecdotal 17 and empirical 18 evidence shows that governments can influence the investment
decision of financial institutions. Second, limited liability: banks at the periphery loaded up on domestic
sovereigns (and doubled down on them when the opportunity arose, such as with the ECB's two large Long
Term Refinancing operations of 2011-2012) because increasing their exposure to high-yield assets with zero
capital weight was almost their only chance to avoid bankruptcy and to keep paying dividends, after a deep
recession that had saddled them with a large share of non-performing loans. In short, it was a classic case of
"gambling for resurrection". Third, the marginal cost of borrowing for banks (the interest paid on the bonds
they issue) is closely related to the interest paid by their sovereign ­ and this is largely independent of the
amount of sovereign they hold: rating agencies typically do not rate financial institutions more than two
notches above their sovereigns. In fact, Constancio (2018) shows that the increase in CDS premia of Italian
banks during the debt crisis of 2011-2012 was unrelated to their exposure to their sovereign. Fourth, life
insurance companies also hold large amounts of their sovereign. Typically, the guaranteed return on their life
insurance contracts are linked to domestic interest rate: insurance companies of the periphery could not make
a profit unless they invest their premia disproportionately in their sovereigns.
         If these explanations for the home bias are correct, it is unlikely that there would have been a large
demand for Esbies by the banking sector; periphery banks could have invested in a safe, Euro-denominated
asset virtually identical to Esbies ­ the Bund ­ but they chose not to. In fact, increasing the supply of safe
bonds at the expense of investable risky bonds could conceivably hurt the banking sector of periphery
countries.
         More generally, some critics of Esbies would argue that their key goal ­ reducing the home bias of the
periphery's banking system ­ is misguided in the first place. 19 Conditional on periphery countries having high
public debt, not only is the home bias inevitable for the political and economic reasons that we have seen, but
it also acts as a stabilizing force in the market for the domestic public debt.
         In terms of the model sketched above, suppose that the "sunspot" is a pure liquidity crisis on
government debt, not associated with a bailout. 20 By investing in their own sovereigns the banking systems
of periphery countries stabilize the markets of their sovereigns; and in a liquidity crisis, they use cheap ECB
liquidity to buy domestic sovereigns, thus avoiding a debt run. Clearly in this view the original sin is the high
government debt: until it is reduced, forcing a reduction of the home bias could be counterproductive. And to
reduce the high government debt, rules constraining national fiscal policies should be strengthened, not
weakened.


16 See Brunnermeier et al. (2017) and especially its online appendix for a model that formalizes these ideas.
17 Including conversations with top managers of major Italian financial institutions.
18 See Becker and Ivashina (2018), Acharya and Steffen (2015), De Marco and Macchiavelli (2010), and Horvath et al. (2019).
19 See e.g. Tabellini (2017) and (2018).
20 In the model of Esbies, the price of government bonds falls (driving the banks' capital below 0) because there is the expectation of

a bailout.
                                                                 10
       Similarly, concentration charges and risk weights could backfire, reinforcing rather than weakening the
doom loop. Given that government debt is high, concentration charges and risk weights could increase the
probability of a debt run. At the same time, if the underlying cause of the doom loop is moral suasion and
gambling for resurrection, and as a consequence banks` exposure to their sovereigns is inelastic to the latter's
risk, concentration charges and risk weights would make domestic banks more risky when the sovereign
becomes more risky.


4.2    A EUROPEAN UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE SCHEME (EUIS)

Unemployment insurance is perhaps the most basic and natural case of risk-sharing arrangement. In fact, a
European unemployment insurance scheme (Euis) is perhaps an even more frequent proposal than Edis,
possibly because moral hazard considerations at the country level seem less plausible. Yet, Euis has not found
much more success than Edis with core governments. 21 The reason, once again, is the potential for large and
persistent unidirectional transfers.
         The two panels of Table 2 display the difference between the unemployment rate of the "core"
Eurozone countries and that of Italy and Spain, respectively, from the beginning of the Great Recession until
now. Except for five country-years at the very beginning of the sample, in Italy the unemployment rate has
always been higher than in each of the core countries; in Spain it has been higher in every single year, and by
a large amount. Any Euis designed on the basis of the levels of the unemployment rates would have generated
enormous and persistent transfers.
         Of course one could design a Euis in terms of differences of the unemployment rate from a "neutral"
or "long term" level, but this would entail all the problems that we know are associated with estimates of
notions like "potential output", "potential growth", the "output gap" or the "NAIRU": statistical fragility, large
role for judgment, and, ultimately, controversy and litigation. Delegating everything to an independent council
will not work, because politics can always take over, and it will take over when a large shocks makes the stakes
high. Or, a Euis could be based on changes in unemployment instead of levels, but then one could have large
transfers from countries with high but temporarily decreasing unemployment to countries with low but
temporarily increasing unemployment, something that would quickly become unacceptable to the large public.
         Other features largely defeat the purpose of Euis, or are also difficult to apply in practice. Like for
Edis, these include adjusting contributions for country-level risk; in practice, this would require assessing the
risk of a country's unemployment, which is different from the already controversial rating of a country's
government debt. In many proposals, national unemployment schemes would take the first loss: this would
further limit the ability of a Euis to act as an effective countercyclical tool. The same would apply to the
proposal of limiting the Euis to a catastrophic insurance scheme, paying only in the case of extremely large
increases in unemployment. Once again, delegating to an independent body the determination of the
catastrophe clause trigger is unlikely to work when it matters most.

      Table 2: Difference between the unemployment rate of core countries and that of Italy, Spain


                                                                Difference with Italy
 Country             2009      2010       2011      2012       2013      2014       2015      2016       2017      2018       2019
 Belgium              -0.1       0.1        1.2      3.1         3.8       4.2        3.4      3.9        4.1       4.6        4.6
 Germany                 0       1.4        2.6      5.3           7       7.7        7.3      7.6        7.4       7.2        6.8
 France               -1.3      -0.9       -0.8      0.9         1.9       2.4        1.5      1.7        1.8       1.6        1.5
 Netherlands           3.4       3.4        3.4      4.9         4.9       5.3          5      5.7        6.3       6.8        6.6
 Austria               2.5       3.6        3.8      5.8         6.8       7.1        6.2      5.7        5.7       5.7        5.5
 Finland              -0.4         0        0.6        3           4         4        2.5      2.9        2.6       3.2        3.3


21 The measures taken by the European Union in response to the Pandemic include the SURE program ("Support to mitigate
Unemployment Risks in an Emergency"), providing loans up to 100bn euros to supplement national expenditure on short-term working
schemes. Thus, this is a loan, not an unemployment insurance scheme proper.
                                                              11
                                                                   Difference with Spain
 Country              2009       2010       2011       2012        2013      2014      2015         2016       2017       2018        2019
 Belgium                10       11.6       14.2       17.2        17.7        16      13.6         11.8       10.1        9.3         8.7
 Germany              10.1       12.9       15.6       19.4        20.9      19.5      17.5         15.5       13.4       11.9        10.9
 France                8.8       10.6       12.2         15        15.8      14.2      11.7          9.6        7.8        6.3         5.6
 Netherlands          13.5       14.9       16.4         19        18.8      17.1      15.2         13.6       12.3       11.5        10.7
 Austria              12.6       15.1       16.8       19.9        20.7      18.9      16.4         13.6       11.7       10.4         9.6
 Finland               9.7       11.5       13.6       17.1        17.9      15.8      12.7         10.8        8.6        7.9         7.4
          Source: European Commission, AMECO Database




5     A EUROPEAN ORDERLY RESTRUCTURING SCHEME (EORS)

There is a more general reason why risk-sharing arrangements are hard to implement. High-debt countries are
exposed to a high risk of default. Defaults are typically chaotic and accompanied by deep recessions: hence,
core countries are likely to be on the losing side of a mutual insurance arrangement. This is perhaps the key
message of the famous "non-paper" circulated by the then German minister of finance, Schäuble (2017), which
with some oversimplification can be summarized as follows: "introduce a Eors, put your house in order by
reducing your debt, and then we might talk about a mutual insurance scheme."
         An Eors is also a fundamental proposal of the 7+7 group, and the basic reasoning is slightly more
articulated. Exactly because defaults are often chaotic, they are typically more costly than they could be. This
increases the probability that they will be accompanied by a bailout: ex post it might be rational for core
countries to limit the contagion and spillovers effects by bailing out the defaulting government. Knowing this,
however, high debt countries procrastinate and delay the adjustment, reducing the recoverable value when the
default becomes unavoidable; and the resulting disorderly default cum bailout further destroys recoverable
value, because of the holdout and other problems. 22 In turn, core countries will be unwilling to enter a risk-
sharing arrangement with a high debt country with a high default risk.
         To break this vicious circle one needs to make defaults less costly, so that core countries will be willing
to participate in a risk sharing arrangement; in turn, this requires making the no-bailout clause more credible,
so that high-debt countries will not choose to procrastinate the adjustment. A Eors has this function: it reduces
the cost of default, making it a predictable, orderly process that increases the recoverable value and involves
a creditors' bail-in; as a consequence, a bailout is less likely to be optimal ex post. Essentially, a Eors increases
the recoverable value conditional on a default, but also makes the default (with restructuring and bail-in) more
frequent and a bailout less frequent. Both effects need to be appreciated in order to understand the arguments
pro and against a Eors. If the first effect prevails, core countries will be more willing to enter a risk sharing
arrangement with high debt countries.23 In turn, a risk sharing arrangement makes a Eors more acceptable to
periphery countries, because it absorbs parts of the costs associated with a restructuring process. The key point
of the 7+7 proposal is precisely that there is complementarity between risk sharing and market incentives (a
Eors).
         Supporters of a Eors assume that the first effect does prevail. Although we have scant evidence on
Eors', we know what happened after the introduction of mandatory collective action clauses (CACs) on
government bonds issued by Eurozone countries with maturities in excess, starting on January 1 2013: the
yield on sovereigns with CACs fell relative to the same sovereigns not covered by CACs. If one takes CACs
as close substitutes of a Eors, 24 one could interpret this as evidence that in a Eors the first effects prevails, and
the cost of borrowing for the government falls. Tabellini (2018) offers the opposite interpretation of the same

22 See Panizza (2013a) and (2013b) for a discussion of the costs of the absence of an Eors. The holdout problem arises because it is

rational for a creditor not to accept a debt restructuring scheme, given that the others creditors do accept it: by holding out when the
others do not, a creditor can appropriate the haircut taken by the bailed-in creditors.
23 See Gourinchas, Martin and Messer (2020) for a model that can be used to rationalize this argument.
24 CACs are designed to mitigate one of the problems that Eors are designed to solve, namely the holdout problem.

                                                                  12
piece of evidence: CACs were meant to make default (with bail-in) more likely, hence they should have
increased borrowing costs; instead, borrowing costs decreased because holders of government bonds issued
under international law enjoy more protection than holders of government bonds issued under national law
(one possible reasons is that national courts are captive to the domestic government). Tabellini (2018)
concludes that issuing debt under international law makes debt renegotiation more, not less, difficult. However,
as we have argued above, while it is true that CACs are meant to make default with bail-in more likely, they
were also meant to reduce the cost and disruption of such an occurrence. This is consistent with a Eors
reducing the borrowing costs of a government and reaching its goals. 25
         Another problem with procrastination of the adjustment is that, in the absence of a well-defined
seniority structure, additional borrowing by a government close to default hurts all existing creditors. This is
different from the case of corporations, where a better defined seniority structure protects the more senior
creditors. As part of a Eors, the 7+7 group advocate forcing countries to issue junior debt when their debt
exceeds a certain threshold: this will increase market discipline as the country must pay a higher interest rate
at the margin.
         Critics of a Eors argue that once again it ignores the transition. First, merely talking about the
possibility of a restructuring increases the cost of borrowing in periphery countries and, by increasing the costs
of rolling over debt, it might transform a liquidity problem into a solvency problem (see e.g. De Grauwe and
Ji 2018). However, as we have shown above whether the cost of borrowing will go up or down with a Eors
depends on the alternative: if it is a bailout, it will increase; if it is a disorderly default, it might decrease. Of
course, this second outcome assumes that the no-bailout clause is credible: this is precisely what a Eors with
risk sharing is designed to do.
         Second, a restructuring of a periphery country sovereign would take down with it the banking system
of that country anyway. Most proposals recognize this second problem, although they usually rely on generic
recommendations that Eors should be accompanied by a reduction of non-performing loans and of the banking
system's exposure to domestic sovereigns.
         Third, achieving an explicit seniority structure by forcing governments to issue junior debt would
backfire, because a default on even junior debt would most likely trigger a run on the whole debt stock. A
better way to introduce a seniority structure in government debt would be to introduce GDP-linked bonds (see
Tabellini 2017). A GDP-linked bond is de facto junior, because it pays less in bad times. 26
         Thus, to its critics a Eors tips the scale too much in favor of market discipline. Reducing debt in high
debt countries must be achieved before a Eors can be introduced. Once again, to ensure that debt falls, rules
constraining national fiscal policies should be strengthened, not weakened.




6    CENTRALIZED FISCAL POLICY, DEBT MUTUALIZATION, AND FISCAL UNION

Edis, Euis and Eors are all but a small number of fiscal policy instruments. Most proposals on the table go well
beyond these. Roughly speaking, most of these proposals go in the direction of "more fiscal policy at the
European level". What is meant exactly by this expression is however rarely spelled out exactly. In what


25 However, as we have argued above, while it is true that CACs are meant to make default with bail-in more likely, they were also
meant to reduce the cost and disruption of such an occurrence. This is consistent with a Eors reducing the borrowing costs of a
government and reaching its goals.
26 The idea of GDP-linked bonds goes back to Shiller (1993); see Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2017) and Shiller, Ostry, Benford, and

Joy (2017) for an exposition of the key issues. To date, no country has issued GDP-linked bonds where the investors takes both the
downside and the upside risk. The leading explanations are the risk premium demanded by investors to take on a more volatile returns,
and the liquidity premium associated with a new instrument. Blanchard, Mauro and Acalin (2016) argue that for these reasons GDP-
linked bonds are more appropriate for countries with high, but nor "catastrophically" high, debt. Kim and Ostry (2020) argue that the
advantages of GDP-linked bonds have to be set against possible moral hazard considerations. However, we find it implausible that
governments might induce a recession in order to reduce the value of the principal or interest of their debt.
                                                                13
follows we try to highlight the main possible meanings of this expression, and the difficulties with
implementing them.

6.1   A EUROPEAN MONETARY FUND
The advantage of automatic risk sharing mechanisms like Edis or Euis is that once in place they work in the
background and do not need an explicit political agreement every time that they redistribute resources. The
limitation is that they have limited redistributive capacity. In many circumstances more risk sharing might be
needed.
         Risk sharing could occur on an ad hoc basis, if institutions are in place to collect and redistribute
resources among member countries, as the IMF does at the world level. The European Stability Mechanism is
meant to be such an institution. It leverages a relatively small paid-in capital of 80bn euros (paid roughly in
proportion to the GDP shares of each country) to borrow on the market. Because it does not borrow more than
the total callable capital of a few core countries, about 500bn euros, effectively its debt is rated AAA; it then
lends to illiquid countries at a rate below their borrowing rates. Core countries have insisted on three key
features. First, to comply with the no-bailout rule the ESM can lend only to countries whose debt has been
deemed "sustainable"; second, by implication, countries with unsustainable debt can borrow only if they
restructure their debt; third, ESM lending is subject to various degrees of conditionality, depending on the
program chosen. Periphery countries object to all three features: a periphery government that borrows from
the ESM would immediately be accused by a large share of the electorate to yield to austerity plans imposed
from outside, and the mere possibility of debt restructuring is unacceptable to any periphery government
already struggling with the market's perception of its solvency. In short, core countries want to make the ESM
the instrument of risk prevention and the guardian of rules; periphery countries would like to make it an
instrument of risk sharing, with more resources and less conditions attached. Be as it may, since the Great
Recession it has not been used. As we write, the two countries most affected by the pandemic, Italy and Spain,
appear to be inclined to reject Covid-related loans of the ESM at near zero rates because of the domestic
political implications of conditionality.

6.2   A FISCAL UNION
Many proposals go one step further and advocate a centralized European entity with an autonomous taxing
and spending authority: in other words, a "European finance minister". This European finance minister can
spend (as opposed to re-lending) its resources, either as block grants to individual countries, or directly on
specific projects, like a new high-speed train, or via automatic programs, like a European pension system. It
can be funded both by its own dedicated taxes (like a European plastic or digital tax), by shares of tax revenues
collected by the member states, or by the issuance of its own debt. Thus, there is a large number of
combinations of funding and spending patterns, which are rarely specified. In any case, this seems to be what
people have in mind who advocate a "fiscal union".
Such a European finance minister could be an instrument for risk sharing if it redistributes resources to
countries hit by asymmetric negative shocks, either automatically or on an ad hoc basis. It could also be an
instrument for stabilization policies at the aggregate level: the obvious advantage relative to stabilization
policies at the national level is that it can internalize the many spillover effects, and implement a policy to
offset, say, a pandemic when individual countries would be reluctant to do so in isolation. Supporters of a
European finance minister also often argue that it is a precondition for a closer political union, by which
presumably one means that more and more decisions must be taken at the central level.
         Despite sometimes paying lip service to more fiscal integration, core countries are unenthusiastic about
it. Once again, the key problem is its distributional implications. We have already seen this in the case of risk
sharing. In the case of centralized stabilization, in principle it could be implemented in a distributionally neutral
way. In practice, however, it is easy to imagine that it would lead to large and persistent flows of resources
from the core to the periphery.
         If the centralized stabilization is funded by taxes, in theory one could imagine a spatial allocation of
spending exactly equal to that of taxes: the European finance minister could hand each country an amount
equal to the resources it collects from them. This would be a balanced budget fiscal expansion done at the

                                                         14
central level, without any ex-ante or ex-post redistribution between countries. However, if the European
finance minister goes beyond purely disbursing grants to governments, it is almost bound to generate large
persistent transfers. The bulk of government spending is on pensions, health, and government employment;
the levels of these expenditures and the systems governing them are very different across European countries.
Core countries fear that centralized spending on these items will inevitably flow disproportionately to the
higher spending countries.
         On the other hand, if more centralization requires first more homogenization of policies, this by
definition means going against the collective preferences of some or all member countries on sensitive areas
like pension, health and educations spending. Such an attempt would generate a strong political backlash,
and could well endanger the monetary union rather than strengthening it, particularly in the present political
circumstances with resurgent nationalism in virtually all countries.
         This trade off remains unresolved, or even unacknowledged, in virtually all proposals for more
centralized fiscal policy. Academic economists and policymakers outside a few core countries mostly take it
as given that more centralized European fiscal policy is always good and must be the ultimate goal. We believe
that in a real world full of political and economic frictions and imperfect information, at the normative level it
is not easy to justify centralized spending on policies governed by very different collective preferences At the
positive level, it could simply backfire. 27

6.3     EUROBONDS
So far we have assumed that centralized fiscal policy is financed by taxes. But it could be financed by debt
issued at the central level. This adds another channel of potential redistribution. Currently, the debt issued by
the ESM would be covered by a proportionate guarantee of the member states: in case of a default by the
borrower, the other countries will cover the shortfall in proportion to their shares of capital, hence
approximately in proportion to their GDP. Others go a step further, and propose a debt issuance at the
European level covered by a joint and several guarantee of each member country, 28 a type of debt that is
usually referred to as Eurobonds (although, somewhat confusingly, the same name is used sometimes to denote
any debt issued at the European level, even without joint and several guarantees). In such a type of debt, if a
guarantor defaults on its guarantee, in principle any country can be called upon to pay the whole amount.
Obviously Germany risks more than Greece in this circumstance.
         It should come as no surprise that Eurobonds, in all their shapes, have been proposed only by periphery
countries. We regard this proposal as a political no-starter: no core country government will ever accept a joint
and several liability with periphery countries, and innumerable statements by Northern politicians confirm this.
Note that the Coronabonds that will finance part of the European Recovery Fund, although often characterized
as Eurobonds, do not contain a joint and several guarantee.
         In many cases, proposals for Eurobonds appear to be intended to be explicitly a mechanism for ex-
ante redistribution, even though exactly how the proceeds of a Eurobond issue are distributed to and repaid by
the individual countries are almost never specified.
         Over time, there have been a number of proposals to mitigate the more crude aspects of Eurobonds.
Predictably, they have not made any inroad in core countries. Consider for instance the "Blue and Red Bond"
of Delpla and Weizsäcker (2011). In steady state, an amount of debt up to a maximum of 60% of the GDP of
each country, called the "Blue bonds", would be covered by a joint and several guarantee: thus, effectively it
would be the Eurobond we have just described. Any part in excess of this, the "Red bonds", is serviced by the
issuing country, and it is junior to the Blue bonds. An independent council would decide each year how much
Blue debt a country can issue, based on its performance in terms of some fiscal policy indicators (obviously if
a country has already reached the 60% limit of Blue bonds, it can only issue Red bonds). Because it is covered
by a joint and several guarantee, the Blue debt will pay a low interest rate, allowing high debt countries to save
on interest payments. Because it cannot be guaranteed, bought or rolled over using funds from the rescue
programs of Europe, the Red debt preserves the market signal at the margin.

27See Alesina and Perotti (1998).
28In a joint and several guarantee, each guarantor can be called upon to pay for the whole guaranteed amount in case of default my one
or more of the joint issuers. That guarantor can then ask the other guarantors to contribute their shares.
                                                                 15
         The working of this proposal largely depends on the discretion of the independent council. Suppose a
country experiences a sharp downturn: to be effective, the proposal should allow for a larger emission of Blue
bonds by this country. But this would amount to an implicit subsidy by the other countries, and would be
subject to the usual problems: it could translate easily into a semi-permanent transfer. In addition, independent
councils can be easily overruled by the main countries, exactly in the same way that treaties have been changed
based on the conditions of the moment.



7    CONCLUSIONS

The goal of this paper was pedagogical: to present the various sides of the debate on the main issues of fiscal
policy in Europe. Rather than repeating the main arguments, in these conclusions we emphasize two points.
First, we have not dealt with the design of optimal policies in a formal setting: the literature on optimal fiscal
policy in the presence of externalities is enormous, and many survey exist. Rather, we have focused on the
policy debate, on practical implementation issues, and on political constraints. Obviously some notion of
optimal fiscal policy is often in the background of this discussion, but this was not the focus of our analysis.
        Second, we have touched only tangentially on the recent developments following the Coronavirus
pandemic. Among other things, Europe has set up a Recovery Fund that will distribute 750bn euros by 2025,
of which 390bn in grants and the rest in loans. While we do not discuss the specifics of this Fund (and the
programs and projects it will finance in the various countries have yet to be defined at the time of writing), the
policy debate and political negotiations leading to the adoption of this important step have revolved around
the key issues we have highlighted in this paper.




                                                       16
8   REFERENCES

Acharya, V, and S Steffen (2015): "The "greatest" carry trade ever? Understanding Eurozone bank
   risks", Journal of Financial Economics 115, 215­236.
Alesina, A., and R. Perotti (1998): "Economic Risk and Political Risk in Fiscal Unions", Economic Journal
   108: 989-1009.
Barnes, S. and E. Casey (2019): "Is the Expenditure Benchmark up to Standard?" Irish Fiscal Advisory
   Council
Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2018): "Financial repression in the European sovereign debt crisis" Review of
   Finance, 22(1), pp. 83-115
Bénassy-Quéré, A, M Brunnermeier, H Enderlein, E Farhi, M Fratzscher, C Fuest, P-O Gourinchas, P
   Martin, J Pisani-Ferry, H Rey, I Schnabel, N Veron, B Weder di Mauro and J Zettelmeyer (2018),
   "Reconciling risk sharing with market discipline: A constructive approach to euro area reform", CEPR
   Policy Insight No 91.
Bini-Smaghi, L., T. Padoa-Schioppa, and F. Papadia (1994): The Transition to EMU in the Maastricht
   Treaty. Princeton Essays in International Finance No. 194, November.
Blanchard, O., P. Mauro and J. Acalin (2016): "The case for growth indexed bonds in advanced economies",
   Peterson Institute Policy Brief PB16­2.
Blanchard, O., A. Leandro, and J. Zettelmeyer (2019): "Revisiting the EU fiscal framework in an era of low
   interest rates"
Brunnermeier, M, H. James and J.P. Landau (2016): The Euro and the battle of ideas, Princeton Univesroty
   Press
Brunnermeier, M.K., L. Garicano, P. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S. Van
   Nieuwerburgh and D. Vayanos (2011): "European Safe Bonds (ESBies)", The Euronomics Group
Brunnermeier, M, S Langfield, M Pagano, R Reis, S Van Nieuwerburgh and D Vayanos (2017): "ESBies:
   Safety in the tranches", Economic Policy, pp. 175­219
Caballero, R. and E. Farhi (2017): "The Safety Trap," The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 85 (1), 223­
   274
Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.-O. Gourinchas (2016): "Safe Asset Scarcity and Aggregate Demand",
   American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106(5): 513­518
Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.-O. Gourinchas (2017): "The safe asset conundrum", Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 31(5), pp. 29­46
Caballero, R., E. Farhi and P.-O. Gourinchas (2020): "Global Imbalances and Policy Wars at the Zero Lower
   Bound", CEPR Discussion Paper DP14424
Carmassi, J, S. Dobkowitz, J. Evrard, L. Parisi, A. Silva, and M. Wedow (2020): " Completing the Banking
   Union with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?", Economic
   Policy
Cecchetti, S. and K.Schoenholtz (2017): "GDP-linked bonds: a primer", VoxEu 01 March 2017
Claeys G, Z Darvas and A Leandro (2016): "A Proposal to Revive the European Fiscal Framework",
   Bruegel Policy Contribution No. 2016/1.
Constancio, V. (2018): "Completing the Odyssean Journey of the European Monetary Union", Remarks at
   the ECB Colloquium on the Future of Central Banking, Frankfurt, May.
Darvas, Z, P Martin and X Ragot (2018): "European Fiscal Rules Require a Major Overhaul", Les notes
   du conseil d'analyse économique no. 47, September.
De Grauwe, P. and Y. Ji (2018): "Financial engineering will not stabilize an unstable Euro area", VoxEu
Delpla and Weizsäcker (2011): "Eurobonds: The blue bond concept and its implications", Bruegel Policy
   Contribution, 2011/02
De Marco, F. and M. Machiavelli (2016): "The Political Origin of Home Bias: The Case of Europe", Federal
   Reserve Board, FEDS Working Paper No. 2016-060
European Commission (2015): "Making the best use of the flexibility within the existing rules of the
   Stability and Growth Pact"
                                                       17
    https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52015DC0012&from=en
European Fiscal Board (2019): Assessment of the European fiscal rules, August 2019
European Parliament (2019): "Which supervisory or regulatory treatment of banks' exposures to sovereign
    risks?",
    https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2019/624434/IPOL_BRI(2019)624434_EN.pdf
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2017): "Fiscal unions", American Economic Review 2017, 107(12): 3788­3834
Fatás, A. (2018): "Fiscal Policy, Potential Output and the Shifting Goalposts", paper prepared for the "Euro
    at 20" conference IMF and Central Bank of Ireland, June 2018
Fatás, A., and L. H. Summers (2018): "The permanent effects of fiscal consolidations", Journal of
    International Economics, 238­250.
Feld, L., C. Schmidt, I. Schnabel, V. Wieland (2018): "Refocusing the European fiscal framework"
    VoxEu, 12 September 2018
Garicano, L. (2019): "Two proposals to resurrect the Banking Union: the Safe Portfolio Approach and
    SRB+1", paper prepared for the ECB Conference on "Fiscal Policy and EMU Governance", Frankfurt, 19
    December 2019
German Council of Economic Experts (2015): `The Long Road to More Financial Stability in Germany
    and in Europe', Annual Report 2014/15, pp. 168-212
Gourinchas, P.-O., P. nad T. E. Martin and Messer (2020): "The Economics of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and
    the Eurozone Crisis" NBER Working Paper No. 27403
Horvath, B. L., H. Huizinga, and V. Ioannidou (2015): "Determinants and valuation effects of the home bias
    in European banks' sovereign debt portfolios", CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10661
Italian Ministry of the Economy (2015): "Documento di Economia e Finanza, Sezione I" (2015 Stability
    Program)
Italian Ministry of the Economy (2019): "Documento di Economia e Finanza, Sezione I" (2019 Stability
    Program)
James, H. (2012): Making the European Monetary Union. Harvard University Press.
Kim J. and J. Ostry (2020), "Boosting Fiscal Space: the Roles of GDP-linked Debt and Longer maturities",
    forthcoming in Economic Policy
Lane, P. and S. Langfield (2018): "The feasibility of sovereign bond-backed securities for the euro area",
    VoxEu, February 28, 2018
Martinez, J., T. Philippon and M. Sihvonen (2019): "Does a Currency Union Need a Capital Market Union?
    Risk Sharing via Banks and Markets", NBER Working Paper No. 26026
Mohl, P. and G. Mourrel (2020): " Performance of the EU spending rule: a quantitative assessment of
    sustainability, stabilisation and predictability", Paper presented at the joint conference of European
    Fiscal Board, Amsterdam Centre for Economic Studies and CEPR on Rethinking the European
    Fiscal Framework, 28 February 2020, Brussels
Ongena, S., A. Popov and N. van Horen (2019): "The invisible hand of the government: "Moral suasion
    during the European sovereign debt crisis" , American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 11,
    No. 4, pp. 346-79
Panizza, U. (2013a): "Sovereign defaults and the rules of engineering", VoxEu, 02 March 2013
Panizza, U. (2013b): "Incentives for avoiding delayed sovereign defaults", VoxEu, 03 March 2013
Schäuble, W. (2017), "Non-paper for paving the way towards a Stability Union".
Shiller, R (1993), Macro markets: creating institutions for managing society's largest economic risks,
    Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shiller, R., J. D. Ostry, J. Benford, and M.Joy (2018): "Sovereign GDP-linked bonds: Rationale and
    Design", VoxEu 16 March 2018
Scholz, O. (2019): `Position paper on the goals of the banking union', Bundesfinanzminister non-paper,
    November.
Sunstein, C. (1995): Problems with Rules. California Law Review, VOL. 83, No. 4, pp. 952-1026
Tabellini, G. (2017): "Reforming the Eurozone: Structuring versus restructuring sovereign debts",
    VoxEu, November 23, 2017
                                                        18
Tabellini, G. (2018): "Risk sharing and market discipline: Finding the right mix", VoxEu, July 16, 2018
Veron, N. (2017): "Sovereign concentration charges: a new regime for banks' sovereign exposures",
  European Parliament Study.




                                                  19
