                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   LATE FOR HISTORY

                                       Alberto Bisin
                                       Andrea Moro

                                     Working Paper 28113
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28113


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




Prepared for the Handbook of Historical Economics, by Alberto Bisin and Giovanni Federico,
eds, Elsevier North-Holland, forthcoming 2021. We thank Thierry Verdier for countless
exchanges on these topics over the years. We also thank Jess Benhabib, Giovanni Federico,
Atsushi Inoue, and Pedro Sant'Anna for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alberto Bisin and Andrea Moro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
LATE for History
Alberto Bisin and Andrea Moro
NBER Working Paper No. 28113
November 2020
JEL No. C36,C51,N01

                                          ABSTRACT

In Historical Economics, Persistence studies document the persistence of some historical
phenomenon or leverage this persistence to identify causal relationships of interest in the present.
In this chapter, we analyze the implications of allowing for heterogeneous treatment effects in
these studies. We delineate their common empirical structure, argue that heterogeneous treatment
effects are likely in their context, and propose minimal abstract models that help interpret results
and guide the development of empirical strategies to uncover the mechanisms generating the
effects.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Andrea Moro
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
Nashville, TN 37235
andrea.moro@vanderbilt.edu
1        Introduction
Many studies in Historical Economics document the persistence of some historical
phenomenon, while others leverage this persistence to identify causal relationships of
interest in the present. These are generally referred to as Persistence studies (Voth,
2021, in this volume). In this chapter, we analyze the implications of allowing for
heterogeneous treatment effects in these studies, We delineate their common empirical
structure, argue that heterogeneous treatment effects are likely in their context, and
propose simple abstract models that help interpret results and guide the development
of empirical strategies to uncover the mechanisms generating the effects.
        Persistence studies focus empirically on the effects of a treatment variable in the
present, assuming its persistence from the historical past. Consider as an illustration
the effects of cultural norms or institutions, e.g., on economic development. The
adoption of cultural norms or the process of institutional change can be viewed, using
the language of the causal inference literature, as taking-up treatment in the past.
High-quality norms or institutions may then persist over time and thereby realize
their effects on economic development in the present. An exogenous historical factor
may be available that directly affects the treatment variable and can be exploited
as an instrumental variable to identify a causal effect of norms or institutions on
development.
        The adoption of norms or institutions may be correlated with the returns in
terms of economic development. If these returns are heterogeneous across countries
- that is, if treatment effects are heterogeneous - countries with higher returns may
be more likely to have adopted higher quality institutions or norms.1 Heterogeneous
treatments may then change the interpretation of the identified relationship between
norms or institutions and economic development. For example, if higher values of the
instrument induce countries with relatively higher returns to adopt higher quality
norms or institutions, then the instrumental variable procedure identifies the effects
produced only in high-return countries, possibly overstating the average returns of
all countries. Similarly, the instrument could activate institutional and cultural
changes over time, interacting with successive independent historical phenomena,
inducing a special selection of heterogeneous treatment effects. Finally, even if the
impact of institutions and norms in the present is homogeneous, the persistence of
institutional and cultural changes in the historical past activated by treatment can
    1
        This is often labeled a "selection on returns" or "selection on gains," see Heckman et al. (2010).



                                                      1
be heterogeneous, affecting the interpretation of the nature of persistence.
       When treatment effects are heterogeneous, therefore, the causal arguments re-
main generally unaffected; but the interpretation of estimated coefficients may pose
new empirical questions to analyze further the mechanisms underlying the identified
causal relationships. More specifically, when treatment effects are heterogeneous, the
research design identifies a Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), rather than the
Average (subject-level) Treatment Effect (ATE); see Imbens and Angrist (1994). In
the investigation of the effects of cultural norms or institutions, for example, the local
effect identified by the instrumental variable procedure is the effect in countries that
take-up treatment (higher quality institutions or norms) only when instrumented.2
       Heterogeneous effects are bound to be important in Persistence studies. In fact,
the persistent variable in Persistence studies is typically a cultural (or genetic) trait
or an institutional feature or norm.3 Because these variables are often defined by
such sweeping concepts such as institution quality, cultural or civic norms, they
are likely affected by several underlying heterogeneous mechanisms. Furthermore,
because treatment is generally taken-up in the historical past, various complex and
heterogeneous dynamical processes may affect it, intervening in the determination
of the objective of the analysis in the present.
       Since heterogeneous treatment effects do not generally affect the causal identifi-
cation argument, in this chapter we shy away from discussing the validity of the data
and econometric procedures adopted in these studies.4 We focus instead on the inter-
   2
      In environments where this essential heterogeneity is present Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) show
that the IV procedure identifies a weighted average of the returns and characterize the weights in
terms of the relationship between the IV and the returns. In the Appendix we introduce a simple,
informal primer on the distinction between LATE and ATE in the context of labor economics, to
level the field between historians, economists, and other social scientists who might not be uniformly
attuned to these concepts.
    3
      Recent examples have exploited variation in a wide range of historical variables: from colonial
settlers' mortality to the self-governance of Italian cities, the adoption of the plow in agriculture,
medieval pogroms, the size of the slave trade from Africa. Some of these studies have identified
causal relationships between phenomena of interest in the present, for example, the effect of insti-
tutional quality or civic capital on economic performance. Others have documented the persistence
of various dimensions of institutional and cultural characteristics, including trust, gender attitudes,
and anti-semitism. Persistence studies are a sizeable component of Historical Economics, about
10%, according to Cioni et al. (2021, in this volume)'s classification; see their Table 2 and 4.
    4
      Persistence studies have been the subject of great scrutiny. The credibility of the causal pa-
rameter estimates stands on the reliability of historical data, assumptions about the econometric
model's error structures, and, in most cases, on the adoption of a valid instrumental variable. Be-
cause most of these studies exploit variation across geographic dimensions, spatial correlations of
residuals can be a severe econometric issue; see Kelly (2019) and Voth (2021, in this volume), this
volume.



                                                  2
pretation of the estimated coefficients under heterogeneous treatment effects. While
the identification of causal effects in Persistence studies has produced significant
first-order results, it has also highlighted how little we know about the mechanisms
driving these effects. The paucity of data in historical contexts makes mechanisms
hard to identify both with a quasi-experimental design and with a structural econo-
metrics approach. For the same reason, it is hard to identify the distribution of
treatment heterogeneity.
   To guide our understanding about what moments of this treatment parameters
distribution the estimates identify, it is therefore important to study the relation-
ship between the instrument and treatment and how the mechanism responsible for
the persistence of treatment over time correlates with the values of treatment ef-
fects. Explicit models of these relationships and mechanisms, in the context of the
specific empirical analysis, help to clarify the interpretation of the identified causal
effects and help the formulation of interesting new sets of questions, which can be
addressed empirically, possibly with new data. To this end, we develop simple ab-
stract models linking treatment take-up and treatment's persistence over history
with treatment effects. These models delineate the underlying causal relationships
and the role of the research design in the identification problem. Explicit models of
these relationships and mechanisms represent the outcome of political equilibrium
processes or the aggregation of individuals' relevant behavioral choices. This is typi-
cally the case, in particular, when treatment involves institutional change or change
in cultural attitudes and traits as just described. To illustrate the role of these
models in the abstract, without imposing a fully developed structure (which would
be necessarily context dependent), we will construct minimal reduced-form models
of treatment take-upwithout being explicit about their behavioral and equilibrium
micro-foundations. These models provide us with interpretations of the estimated
parameters, opening new empirical questions, possibly with new data.
   We proceed, in the next section, by formalizing Persistence studies' common
structure. In Section 3 we apply this framework to persistence studies whose main
goal is to identify the causal relationship between variables in the present and exploit
the persistence of a variable in the historical past to provide an instrument. In
Section 4, we focus instead on a set of persistence studies that are directly interested
in investigating the persistence of historical variables.




                                           3
2        Persistence studies' empirical structure
In this section, we introduce the issue of identification of causal relationships in
Persistence studies. We delineate their common empirical structure by constructing
a simple formal framework that encompasses most papers in the literature.5

2.1       Empirical model
Let any variables measured in current time be indexed by t and any historical vari-
ables by t - h, where h is the historical lag considered. Let i = 1, 2, . . . , N index
the cross-section in the data, typically defined along political or geographic dimen-
sions: countries, cities, ethnic groups, etc. . . Consider the following an empirical
relationship:
                                          yt =  + xt + ut ,                                    (1)

where yt , xt , ut are N -dimensional vectors indexed by location i = 1, 2, . . . , N .6
The parameter  is also an N -dimensional vector: distinct i , across locations i =
1, 2, . . . , N, represent the heterogeneous effects which are the focus of our analysis.
The explanatory variable xt is generally endogenous, e.g., because of a common
factor affecting both xt and yt or because of two-way causation between yt and xt .
        History enters the empirical model through the underlying (unobservable) his-
torical dynamics of the explanatory variable xt , governed by a stochastic process,
{x } T , where T denotes the historical sequence of time until the present {t -
h, . . . , , . . . t}. We model the persistence of the process {x } assuming

                                          cov (xt-h , xt ) = ;                                 (2)

where  is also an N -dimensional vector, allowing for heterogeneity of persistence
across locations i =, 1, 2, . . . , N .
        The econometrician observes a valid instrument for xt . The characterizing feature
of Persistence studies is that the instrument, an N -dimensional vector zt-h , is
realized in the historical past, at t - h. The empirical structure underlying the IV
strategy depends crucially on the historical persistence of the instrumented variable,
xt . The instrument zt-h is assumed to affect causally and directly xt-h and hence
    5
     For a book-length treatment of causal analysis in econometrics, see Angrist and Pischke (2008,
2014). For a more abstract approach to causality, see Pearl (2009); Pearl et al. (2016).
   6
     We abuse notation by not distinguishing the random variables in the population from their
sample realizations.


                                                   4
                     Figure 1: Persistence studies: general case

                                           
                                    xt            yt        present (t)

                                 

                                   x                        past ( )

                                 

                  zt-h           xt-h           pt-h        historical past (t - h)



Note: circles indicate variables observed by the investigator. Dashed circles indicate unobserved
variables. Solid arrows indicate directions of causality. Double arrows indicate endogeneity or any
other factor preventing the identification of a causal effect (omitted variables, selection bias, etc...).



indirectly xt through the persistence of the process {x } T in history. This structure
does not require the econometrician to observe the realizations of the stochastic
process at any time other than t; in particular, xt-h is generally not observable to
the econometrician. However, if a proxy pt-h for xt-h is observable, zt-h can be an
instrument for pt-h , even though pt-h might be endogenous with respect to xt-h .
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between variables in this empirical model.7
    The examples from the literature that we study in the rest of the paper focus on
two separate objectives of the empirical analysis. One is to estimate some relevant
moment of the cross-section of treatment effects, i . When data on a proxy pt-h
for xt-h are available, another objective of the analysis is to estimate some relevant
moment of the cross-section of persistence effects, i .

2.2     Heterogeneity and LATE effects
Allowing for heterogeneous treatment effects might have important implications with
respect to how these effects, as they are identified in Persistence studies, are inter-
   7
     It is difficult to represent models with endogenous, equilibrium relationships, or to represent
the distinction between LATE and ATE, using Directed Acyclical Graphs (see Imbens (2019)).
This chart and the next ones are meant to illustrate the relationships between variables in the
various empirical models, not as a tool to discuss the causal identification designs, which we study
analytically in the text.


                                                    5
preted. Consider the empirical model delineated in Section 2.1 and represented in
Figure 1. Assume that either the relationship between xt and yt and/or the persis-
tence effects from xt-h to xt are heterogeneous; that is, ,  are heterogeneous across
locations i = 1, 2, . . . , N . As long as zt-h is a valid instrument for xt or for pt-h , the
IV procedure identifies a causal effect; that is, the causal arguments which are the
objective of Persistence studies remain unaffected. But consider the case in which
the mechanism inducing location i to take-up treatment after being instrumented, or
to maintain the treatment over time, depends on the values of  and  assumed by
that location. In this case, heterogeneity matters for the interpretation of the iden-
tified causal effect. For instance, if locations taking-up treatment have on average
high  , e.g., because a high  lowers the cost of treatment, then the IV procedure
will tend to identify a high  ; that is, the local effect of treatment for those locations
in fact induced by the instrument to adopting treatment (the complier locations in
the jargon of LATE studies; see later).
    To push the empirical analysis of Persistence studies forward it is therefore im-
portant to study the relationship between the instrument zt-h and treatment xt and
how this relationship can be filtered through the values of  and/or . Similarly, it is
important to study how the mechanism responsible for the persistence of treatment
over time, from xt-h to xt , correlates with the values of  and/or . Explicit models
of these relationships and mechanisms, in the context of the specific empirical anal-
ysis, help clarifying the interpretation of the identified causal effects and help the
formulation of interesting new sets of questions, which can be addressed empirically,
possibly with new data. To this end, we develop below minimal abstract models
linking treatment take-up in a location, and the treatment's persistence over history
with the location's value of  and or .
    Importantly, the mechanisms leading to treatment take-up and its persistence
over history cannot generally be represented by direct behavioral choice problems
because the units of observation in most of these studies are countries, cities, ethnic
groups. Consequently, whether treatment is adopted or not, and whether it persists
over history, rests on the outcome of political equilibrium processes or on the aggre-
gation of the relevants behavioral choices of individuals. This is typically the case
when treatment involves institutional change or change in characteristic cultural at-
titudes and traits. For the sake of simplicity and abstraction, our analysis will be
limited to reduced-form models of treatment take-up, without being explicit about
their equilibrium micro-foundations. Furthermore, since the context determines the


                                              6
                  Figure 2: Persistence studies: empirical models

                          
                  xt             yt           xt
                                            present                              xt

                                                                              

                  x                          past                               x

                                                                              

  zt-h           xt-h           pt-h historical past           zt-h           xt-h            pt-h




     (a) Current variables                                         (b) Pure persistence

Note: circles indicate variables observed by the investigator. Dashed circles indicate unobserved
variables. Solid arrows indicate directions of causality. Double arrows indicate endogeneity or any
other factor preventing the identification of a causal effect (omitted variables, selection bias, etc...).
Dashed arrows indicate potential causal links. Highlighted in red are the relationships of interest.



appropriate modeling assumptions, we will illustrate our approach in the context of
several classic Persistence studies.
    In the next two sections, We introduce two empirical models, special cases of the
model introduced above, to highlight different strands of the literature.8 In Section
3 we consider first the special case of the empirical model in Section 2.1 in which the
econometrician aims at uncovering a causal relationship between current variables.
The instrument in the historical past and the persistence of the independent variable
are, in a sense, means to this end. The relationships between variables in this class of
models is represented in Figure 2(a). As an illustration of this empirical model it will
be useful to consider two classic papers among the most-well known in the field: Ace-
moglu et al. (2001) on the colonial origins of economic development, and Ashraf and
Galor (2013) on the effect of human genetic diversity on development. These papers
provide distinct causal explanations of comparative economic development (affected
by different dependent variables). Acemoglu et al. (2001) focus on the effect of the
quality of institutions; specifically, the level of protection of property rights. Ashraf
  8
    This categorization is related to the distinction between apples-on-apples and apples-on-oranges
models by Voth (2021, in this volume), in this volume.



                                                    7
and Galor (2013) study how human genetic diversity affects economic development
through the contrasting effect of social conflict and innovation or creativity.
        Next, in Section 4 we consider the special case of the empirical model in Section
2.1 in which the econometrician aims at uncovering the relationship between the
same variable at two distant times in history. The instrument in the historical past
identifies the persistence of a relevant variable, which is, in a sense, the objective
of the analysis; see Figure 2(b). As an illustration of this type of models we will
consider four other classic well-known papers providing evidence for the persistence
of some form of either institutions or cultural traits over the long-run historical past:
Voigtländer and Voth (2012), Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), Guiso et al. (2016), and
Alesina et al. (2013), studying, respectively, the persistence of anti-semitism, social
trust, civic capital, and gender attitudes.


3        Persistence studies that analyze relationships between
         current variables
Consider the special case of the empirical model of Section 2.1 in which the econo-
metrician does not observe any proxy pt-h for xt-h and zt-h is an instrument for
xt , through the persistence of the process {x } T . We assume that zt-h is a valid
instrument to concentrate our analysis on the interpretation of the estimates of 
or  when they are allowed to be heterogeneous across locations i = 1, 2, . . . , N .
Besides requiring that zt-h be correlated with xt , validity also requires zt-h to be
as good as randomly assigned and to satisfy the exclusion restriction, that is, zt-h
affects yt only through xt .9

Assumption 1. zt-h is a valid instrument for xt ; in particular,

                                          cov (zt-h , xt ) = 0
                                      cov (zt-h , yt | xt ) = 0.

        In Acemoglu et al. (2001), for instance, the process {x } T represents the qual-
ity of institutions, from colonial times t - h to the present t. The instrument zt-h
is settler's mortality: the authors argue that low settlers' mortality facilitated the
set-up of inclusive institutions by colonial powers, whereas high settlers' mortality
    9
        See Angrist and Pischke (2008), ch. 4.4.1 for formal assumptions.



                                                   8
            Table 1: Variables in selected current relationship studies

        Article                   yt                         xt-h                    zt-h

   AJR (2001)        GDP per capita, t = 1995          Property rights       Settlers' mortality
       AG (2013)   Population density, t = 1500       Genetic diversity    Distance from Africa

Note: see Figure 2(a) for relationships between variables. Abbreviations: AJR: Acemoglu et al.
(2001), AG: Ashraf and Galor (2013).



caused extractive institutions. The parameter  represents the returns to institu-
tional quality in terms of economic development, measured by current per capita
GDP. In Ashraf and Galor (2013) the process {x } T is human genetic diversity,
from the first migration of Homo sapiens "Out of Africa" until the present. The
instrument is distance of the current geographical location from East Africa, which
is causal to human genetic diversity as a consequence of the serial-founder effect,
whereby genetic diversity is reduced at any successive migration event. The pa-
rameter  represents the returns to human genetic diversity in terms of economic
development, measured by population density in 1500. The underlying hypothesis,
confirmed by their empirical analysis, is that diversity has a hump-shaped effect on
development, because it has both beneficial and detrimental effects by increasing
social conflict, but fostering innovation or creativity. Table 1 presents concisely the
variables adopted in the main specifications of these studies.10
       To simplify the intuition and to present results with minimal algebra (the argu-
ment generalizes without these assumptions), consider an environment where both
the instrument zt-h , and the treatment x , for any   T , are binary. Under these
assumptions, the instrumental variable estimator coincides with the Wald estimator,
  10
     These examples illustrate well how heterogeneous treatment effects may play a role in the
analysis. Acemoglu et al. (2001), e.g., interpret their measure of institutional quality a "cluster
of institutions, including constraints on government expropriation, independent judiciary, property
rights enforcement, and institutions providing equal access to education and ensuring civil liberties,
that are important to encourage investment and growth. Expropriation risk is related to all these
institutional features." This interpretation allow for different mechanisms connecting expropriation
risk to economic performance, leading naturally to the possibility of heterogeneous effects, which
depend on which mechanism is activated. This is the case in Ashraf and Galor (2013) as well,
where genetic diversity, or lack thereof, affects development by a combination of creativity, increased
cooperation, trust, socioeconomic order, adaptability, specialization, and so on.




                                                  9
whose population analog is:

                             E (yt |zt-h = 1) - E (yt |zt-h = 0)
                                                                           =                               (3)
                             E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)

This representation of the IV estimator has an intuitive interpretation: assuming the
instrument is random with respect to the treatment, the effect of the instrument on
the dependent variable (the Reduced form) divided by the effect of the instrument
on the treatment (the First stage) uncovers the causal effect of a unit change of the
independent variable on the treatment.
    Allowing for  to be heterogeneous across locations i = 1, 2, . . . , N opens the
door for the possibility that the relationship between the instrument zt-h and the
independent variable, the treatment xt , is filtered through the effect of  . Instru-
mented locations, with zi,t-h = 1, might take treatment or not, xi,t = 1 or = 0,
depending on i . This is the fundamental factor inducing relevant LATE effects
that are different from ATE effects. Importantly, note that this does not affect the
validity of the instrument.11 To formalize the result we want to focus on, assume
i affects differently the relationship between zi,t-h and the treatment xi,t across
locations i = 1, 2 . . . , N . Then we can categorize four conceptually different types
of locations, which we label, following the causal identification literature, Always
takers, Never takers, Compliers, and Defiers :

 Always takers: all i such that xi,t = 1 for all values of zi,t-h ;

 Never takers: all i such that xi,t = 0 for all values of zi,t-h ;

 Compliers: all i such that xi,t = 1 when zi,t-h = 1 and xi,t = 0 when zi,t-h = 0;

 Defiers: all i such that xi,t = 1 when zi,t-h = 0 and xi,t = 0 when zi,t-h = 1.

The instrumental variables estimator in Equation 3 identifies the LATE effects of
the instrument, that is, the effect of the instrument for the Compliers:

Theorem 1. (Imbens and Angrist, 1994) Suppose Assumption 1 holds and that the
  11
     Validity is guaranteed if xt |zt-h =1 = xt |zt-h =0 and yt |xt ,zt-h =0 = yt |xt ,zt-h =1 , where xt |zt-h
and yt |xt ,zt-h indicate, respectively, the random variable xt conditional to the realization of zt-h
and yt conditional to the realization of xt , zt-h .




                                                      10
treatment induces no Defiers, then

                       E (yt |zt-h = 1) - E (yt |zt-h = 0)
                       E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                     = E yi,t |xi,t =1 -yi,t |xi,t =0 | i  compliers
                     = E (i | i  compliers)

   This theorem helps qualifying the interpretation of the estimate of  in the
empirical implementation of Persistence studies when reasonable structures can be
hypothesized which separate Compliers as a subset of all the locations and on whether
in these structures Compliers can be characterized by a distinct distribution of  with
respect to the other types.

3.1     Abstract models of treatment take-up and persistence
To identify Complier locations and their characteristics it is generally useful to model
how the mechanisms which induces treatment take-up and persistence, so that xt =
1, can be filtered through  . We illustrate this generally, by developing four minimal
abstract models linking zt-h to xt via  . These models represent reduced-form
behavioral-equilibrium relationships, as we already noticed, without explicit micro-
foundations. It is our aim to show how this analysis is especially relevant in an
historical context and how it may guide the development of empirical strategies to
uncover the mechanisms underlying the identified causal effect. We associate these
models narratively to the papers we have selected as an example in this section.

3.1.1    Treatment take-up at t - h

Let bi denote the benefits of treatment for location i in historical times, t - h; that
is, the benefits of xi,t-h = 1 relative to xi,t-h = 0. Assume bi represents a relevant
parameter which characterizes location i, but is not observable to the econometrician.
Let c(zt-h ) denote the cost of treatment at t - h; and let the effect of the instrument
be a reduction in the cost of treatment,

                              c(zi,t-h = 1) < c(zi,t-h = 0).

   In Acemoglu et al. (2001) lower settler mortality, zt-h = 1, is assumed to lower
the cost of creating and maintaining inclusive institutions that protect property


                                           11
rights in the colony. In Ashraf and Galor (2013) the distance from East Africa
affects treatment because a shorter distance facilitates higher genetic diversity being
associated with fewer migration events after the original one "Out of Africa."
    Consider a behavioral-equilibrium relationship postulating treatment at t - h to
be determined by a simple cutoff condition: each location i = 1, 2, . . . , N is takes-up
treatment if its benefit is greater than the cost:

                                       1   if bi  c(zi,t-h )
                          xi,t-h =                             .
                                       0   otherwise

To focus on the relationship between zt-h and xt , assume that the persistence of
the explanatory variable is homogeneous (and perfect); that is, i = 1, for all i =
1, 2 . . . , N , and
                             xi, = xi, -1 , t - h    t.

Treatment can only occur at t - h and is never undermined in the course of history.
Consequently, locations can be categorized depending on their characteristic bi . Al-
ways takers are all those locations i such that bi  c(zi,t-h = 0) > c(zi,t-h = 1); and
Never takers are all i such that c(zi,t-h = 0) > c(zi,t-h = 1) > bi . Most importantly,
the Compliers whose effect is identified by the IV are those locations whose benefits
of treatment bi are higher than the cut-off when treated by the instrument, but lower
when not-treated:
                          c(zi,t-h = 1)  bi < c(zi,t-h = 0).

Finally, there are no defiers (as required by Theorem 1).
    According to this abstract behavioral-equilibrium model of treatment, for LATE
effects to be distinct from ATE it is sufficient to hypothesize that i and bi are cor-
related, i.e. that the benefits of treatment bi are at least in part obtained through
the effects of treatment on the relevant dependent variable yi,t , i . In the context
of the effects of institutional quality on economic development in Acemoglu et al.
(2001), it seems natural to think of the returns of institutional quality in terms of
economic development for a country i, i , as a measure of the benefits of treatment
bi for this country. In this context, this simple behavioral-equibrium model of in-
stitutional formation can be used to explict conditions, that may in principle be
validated empirically, and refine the interpretation of the IV estimate of the returns
of institutional quality by identifying the mechanisms leading different locations to
take up treatment or not.

                                           12
       Consider the following somewhat extreme case as further illustration.12 Assume
for simplicity that there are two types of countries, l, h with h > l , and that their
proportions is h , l = 1 - h respectively. Further, assume that c(zi,t-h ) satisfies
c(0) < l < c(1) < h . High settlers' mortality, zt-h = 0, increases the cost for the
colonial power to implement the inclusive institutions that reduce future expropria-
tion risk. Under this assumption, this cost is generally lower than the benefit, with
the exception of l countries when settlers' mortality is high, which represent then
the compliers.13 In this example, therefore, the Wald estimator identifies

                          E (yt |zt-h = 1) - E (yt |zt-h = 0)
                                                                     =
                          E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                                        h h + l l - h h
                                                                     = l                           (4)
                                               1 - h

i.e., the gains for countries with low values of  , the average value of  among the
compliers:
                     E (i | i : c(zi,t-h = 0) > bi  c(zi,t-h = 1)) = l .

Note however that, with a different cost structure, for example in the opposite ex-
treme case where high-quality institutions are adopted only by h countries and only
when their settlers' mortality is low, the instrumental variable analysis would on
the contrary identify h . We conclude that this analysis of a simple behavioral-
equilibrium model of treatment take-up, while extremely stylized, suggests the im-
portance of evaluating various specific dimensions institutional change. It suggests
notably the importance of proposing an empirical strategy that tries to test empir-
ically the underlying assumptions regarding the benefits from institutional change
to better understand what effects are identified. It also provides some nuance about
the interpretations of the contemporaneous effects of institutional quality, because
different "instruments" favoring improvements in institutional quality may operate
on a different set of compliers.
       Related arguments can be used to illustrate the possible role of heterogeneous
treatment effect in the context of Ashraf and Galor (2013). The interesting dif-
ference, in this case, consist in the fact that the treatment (genetic diversity) is
  12
     We follow Rosenzweig and Wolpin (2000) who use a similar approach to interpret IV estimates
in several labor economics studies; see the Appendix.
  13
     All that is needed in general is for settlers' mortality to affect disproportionately one group of
countries. Note that settlers' mortality only affects economic performance by changing institutional
quality directly and therefore is by assumption a valid instrument.



                                                  13
not directly the result of a political economy equilibrium choice, but is rather the
(perhaps unintended) consequence of the migration process via the serial founder
effect. This mechanism cannot be directly conceived as the outcome of an equilib-
rium model. On the other hand, genetic diversity can also be thought of as the
consequence of evolutionary processes, for example driven by mating patterns in
society. Assortative mating along any phenotypical trait, notably e.g., along ethnic
dimensions, may reduce genetic diversity by producing ethnic cleavages which might
turn into distinct homogeneous populations.
       Consider then a behavioral-equilibrium model of mating patterns along migration
events after the original one "Out of Africa" as an illustration. Let instrumented
locations i, such that zi,t-h = 1, be those which are at the economic development-
maximizing level distance from East Africa.14 These locations, by construction, are
treated by the serial founder effect: their genetic diversity is xi,t = 1; that is, genetic
diversity is such that the combination of innovation and creativity, on the one side,
and conflict and trust, on the other, induces the highest economic development.
Suppose there are two types of populations defined by their ethnicities, culture,
etc... Type h has a hump-shaped benefit from diversity, type l also has hump-
shaped benefits, but with smaller effects. Let the benefits at the peak be denoted bh
and bl , respectively. Suppose that mating strategies conducive to genetic diversity
xt = 1 are costly - say they have a cost c - and assume that bl < c < bh . Therefore,
                              
                              1      if zi,t-h = 1; or if zi,t-h = 0 and bi  c
                   xi,t-h   =                                                      .
                              0      otherwise

Consequently, the locations with returns bh are Always takers: they achieve "optimal
diversity" regardless of location. Locations with returns bl are instead Compliers;
that is, they obtain the optimal diversity xi,t = 1 only if moving "Out of Africa."
As in Acemoglu et al. (2001), it seems natural to hypothesize that i and bi are
correlated, that the benefits of treatment bi are at least in part obtained through
the effects of treatment on the relevant dependent variable yi,t , i . In this case, the
IV strategy identifies the LATE effect, that is, the average i of the locations that
  14
       This is just an innocuous change-of-variable re-normalization of the IV procedure.




                                                  14
have a different adoption rule when zt-h changes value:15

                                     E (i | i : bi = bl ) = l .

       Indeed, in the context Ashraf and Galor (2013), as in Acemoglu et al. (2001),
conditions can be assumed (in this case on the costs and benefits of evolutionary
selection through mating patterns) which give rise to distinct implications with re-
spect to LATE effects. If for instance evolutionary selection towards the optimal
diversity does not operate unless migration occurs, and if even with migration it
occurs only when there are high incentives to do so, then it is the combined effect
of migration and high incentives that generates development. In this case, the IV
would identify h , even if diversity may have low or zero effects on development for
some populations. We conclude that this simple behavioral-equilibrium model in the
context of Ashraf and Galor (2013) suggests the importance of empirically evaluating
different mating patterns, how the structure of benefits e.g., from isolating ethnically
depends on the migration, to shed light on the mechanisms linking genetic diversity
to economic development. While the stylized model we used for illustration abstracts
  15
     The Wald arithmetic is identical to (4). In fact, the running hypothesis in Ashraf and Galor
(2013), documented in the data, is more nuanced. Genetic diversity has a hump-shaped effect on
economic development, reflecting the a combination of beneficial and detrimental factors: diver-
sity is associated with a higher likelihood of innovation and creativity, but also increases conflict
and decreases trust. The simple model we have delineated can be extended to an environment
in which the instrument and the treatment take three values for xt-h and zt-h , say 0, 1, 2, repre-
senting respectively ordered distances from East Africa and measures of genetic diversity. Under
the assumptions that locations with returns bh have the evolutionary incentive to converge to the
genetic diversity which induces the highest economic development, independently of their distance
from East Africa, and that bi and i are correlated, the IV strategy identifies l . In this case,
the return are identified by calculating the Wald estimator, comparing pairwise locations. First
consider locations i with zi,t-h = 0, 1:
                                      E (yt |zt-h = 1) - E (yt |zt-h = 0)
                           0,1   =
                                      E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                                      (l l + h h ) - (l 0 + h h )
                                 =                                    = l
                                                  1 - h
Similarly, calculate the return comparing locations i with zi,t-h = 1, 2:
                                     E (yt |zt-h = 2) - E (yt |zt-h = 1)
                          1,2    =
                                     E (xt |zt-h = 2) - E (xt |zt-h = 1)
                                     (h h + l 0) - (l l + h h )
                                 =                                   = -l
                                               h + 2l - 1
Suggesting that under the assumptions made on the cost structure, the strategy identifies the least
pronounced hump-shaped benefits.




                                                 15
            Figure 3: Current variables: interacting historical process

                                               
                                       xt               yt      present




                         s             x                        past




                        zt-h          xt-h           pt-h       historical past

Note: circles indicate variables observed by the investigator. Dashed circles indicate unobserved
variables. Solid arrows indicate directions of causality. Double arrows indicate endogeneity or any
other factor preventing the identification of a causal effect (omitted variables, selection bias, etc...).
Dashed arrows indicate potential causal links. Highlighted in red is the relationships of interest.



from fertility, fertility patters would also relate to marriage and migration patters
in fundamental ways affecting the interpretation of the identified causal effects of
genetic diversity.

3.1.2       Treatment take-up at 

In this section we leverage even more than in the previous one the particular role
of history in the understanding of LATE effects. Consider the abstract behavioral-
equilibrium models delineated in the previous section but assume now that locations
can enter treatment at any time  , with t - h    t, that is, after the realization
of the instrument. One way to introduce the role of history in the determination
of treatment take-up is to let the cost of treatment depend on the instrument zt-h
as well as on the realization of a stochastic process {s } T : c = c(zt-h , s ). The
empirical model, with the addition of the effects of the stochastic process {s } T is
represented in Figure 3.
       In the context of the effects of institutional quality on economic development, for
instance, it is natural to assume the process {s } T capturing the dynamics of rele-
vant cultural variables interacting with the dynamics of institutions.16 Importantly,
the validity of the instrument zt-h , via the exclusion restrictions, is not hindered by
  16
       Bisin and Verdier (2017) model these interactions in related contexts.



                                                   16
the correlation of zt-h with the cultural process {s }t-h t , as long as culture does
not have a direct effect on economic development, that is, as long as s affects yt
only through {x }t-h t . Let again the effect of the instrument be a reduction in
the cost of treatment,

                              c(zi,t-h = 1, si, ) < c(zi,t-h = 0, si, ).

Maintain the assumption that the benefits of treatment across locations i, bi , are
correlated with i ; i.e., that the returns of institutional quality in terms of economic
development are a measure of the benefits of treatment. Suppose for simplicity a
form of perfect persistence, where treatment is never reversed in the course of history,

                        xi, = 1,   T, implies xi, = 1,  <   t.

Treatment is then still determined by a simple cutoff condition, for each location
i = 1, 2, . . . , N :
                                
                                1 b  c(z
                                   i     i,t-h , si, ) or if xi, -1 = 1
                        xi,   =                                         .
                                0 otherwise

Treatment could occur at any t - h <   t. The Compliers whose effect is identified
by the IV are those locations whose benefits of treatment bi are higher than the cut-
off when treated by the instrument, but lower when not-treated; but whether this
is the case might depend in general on the dynamics of s . As in the previous case,
since i and bi are correlated, the IV strategy identifies the LATE effect, that is, the
average i of the compliers. In this case, however, the instrument zt-h interacts with
the process {s } T . In general, bi and the process {si, } T will be correlated. In-
terpreting  as a measure of the returns of institutional quality effectively disregards
the effect of the dynamics of s , which could represent, as we have already noted,
cultural traits or social capital in the historical process of institutional change.17
The IV strategy identifies in this case the returns to the institutional quality of the
compliers that are activated by the historical processes. Different, counterfactual
histories may have activated processes with different returns.
  17
     In fact, s could also be thought of as a contributing causal factor, e.g., if a different realization
of si, would have induced an instrumented location i not to set-up high quality institutions xi, = 1.
In this case we could say that x , s are jointly causal to yt .



                                                   17
       To illustrate the role of the interaction between different processes in the course of
history, consider the analysis of the economic development of the sample of countries
colonized by European powers after 1500 in Acemoglu et al. (2002). This paper doc-
uments how i) colonial powers developed high-quality institutions disproportionally
in initially poorer countries, (a "Reversal of Fortune"); ii) the inclusive institutions
developed by colonial powers manifested their effects on economic development only
after the Industrial Revolution in 1800-1900, and not before. Consider the two fol-
lowing possible interpretations of these results.18 One, assuming wealth in 1500 as
exogenous with respect to economic development, is that historical poverty causes
growth. Another interpretation, considering poverty in 1500 as an instrument for
beneficial institutional change, is that inclusive institutions established by colonies
cause economic growth. Both interpretations are valid in principle as long as they are
qualified in terms of their effect being local. Poverty in 1500 acted locally, through
institutional change in colonial times. But institutional change in colonial time acted
locally on economic development through the Industrial Revolution.19 Both of these
local effects in principle have selected a subset of Compliers whose effect the em-
pirical analysis identifies and which depend on both institutional quality and the
Industrial Revolution. More specifically, the heterogeneity of the effects could be
intrinsic to the quality of institutions as we argued in Section 3.1.1. But could also
be due to the different nature of industrialization in time or place.20 Even if the
mechanism generating development from good institutions had homogenous effect,
heterogeneity could arise from different returns to industrialization.21 We conclude
that this analysis suggests that the interpretation of the causal effects in Persistence
studies depends in a fundamental manner not only from the historical process of the
treatment variable but also from any other intervening historical process correlated
with treatment. While generally difficult, this calls for the importance of historical
narratives to identify possibly important intervening processes. This is exactly what
  18
      See Cantoni and Yuchtman (2021, in this volume) for a related argument.
  19
      Following the logic exposed in Footnote 17, We could reasonably consider institutional quality
and the Industrial Revolution as jointly causal.
   20
      In fact, in Acemoglu et al. (2002), the identifying variation in the regression between post-
industrialization production per capita and the interaction of institutions quality and opportunities
to industrialize is the variation of U.K. industrial output over time, between 1750 and 1980.
   21
      A similar discussion could pertain, for instance, to the negative relationship between past slave
exports and economic performance within Africa, uncovered by Nunn (2008), if this effect appears
when the dependent variable, economic performance, is measured in 1980, but not when measured
in 1960, as suggested by Bottero and Wallace (2013). This would indicate the interaction of the
effects of slave trade with a more recent phenomenon, like e.g., de-colonization.



                                                  18
Acemoglu et al. (2002) do in their study of the effects of colonization, isolating the In-
dustrial Revolution as the main intervening factor in the proces of development. The
introduction of possible heterogeneous treatment effects adds a layer of complexity
and interest, suggesting the importance to better identify the relationship between
the returns to institutional change and indistrialization and their interaction in the
development process.

3.1.3      Treatment take-up and reversals

In this section we suggest the existence of circumstances in Persistence studies when
one of the assumption of Theorem 1 may not hold, namely the absence of Defiers, and
study how this changes the interpretation of the estimates. In the previous sections
we have developed minimal abstract behavioral-equilibrium models of Treatment
take-up that consist of simple cutoff conditions: each location i = 1, 2, . . . , N is
treated if the benefits bi are greater than the cost of adoption, which is reduced by
the treatment and possibly an interacting process, as in the previous section. In
these examples, as we observed, there are no Defiers: a Defier-location i would have
to be characterized by benefits bi such that c(zi,t-h = 0)  bi < c(zi,t-h = 1), which
contradicts c(zi,t-h = 1) < c(zi,t-h = 0).22
       Consider as in the previous subsection the case where treatment can be adopted
at t-h   < t and the cutoff cost are also affected by an interacting process {s } T .
Suppose the instrument zt-h - and possibly the treatment xt-h - affect {si, } T . In
this case, interestingly, non-monotonic effects of zt-h are possible, without impinging
on the validity of zt-h as an instrument for xt . These relationships in the empirical
model are represented in Figure 4.
       For instance, it is possible for the process {si, } T to act selectively on loca-
tions with zi,t-h = 0 , fostering high-quality institutions in a subset of these, against
historical odds. E.g., in the context of Acemoglu et al. (2001), extractive institu-
tions at t - h could foster, by a mechanism of substitutability between culture and
institutions, the development of cultural traits which over time lead to a reduction
of the cost of high-quality institutions and hence to treatment even location with
relatively low benefits bi .23 In this case, bi < c(zi, = 1, si, ) for any   T but
  22
     The existence of Defiers is ruled out by assumption in Theorem 1, a special case of the Mono-
tonicity assumption in Imbens and Angrist (1994). To be precise, what is required is that Defiers be
simultaneously present with Compliers: Defiers would be Compliers after reversing the definition
of treatment.
  23
     See Bisin and Verdier (2017) for a formal discussion of substitutability between culture and


                                                19
  Figure 4: Current variables: non-linear interacting historical process

                                               
                                       xt               yt      present




                        s              x                        past




                      zt-h           xt-h            pt-h       historical past

Note: circles indicate variables observed by the investigator. Dashed circles indicate unobserved
variables. Solid arrows indicate directions of causality. Double arrows indicate endogeneity or any
other factor preventing the identification of a causal effect (omitted variables, selection bias, etc...).
Dashed arrows indicate potential causal links. Highlighted in red are the relationships of interest.



bi > c(zi, = 0, si, ) for some   T .Keeping our assumption of correlation between
i and bi would induce the estimate  ^ to weigh both Compliers and Defiers (but not
Always-takers and Never-takers). Let c and d denote the proportion of Compliers
and Defiers in the population. Then, the estimator identifies:

                E (yt |zt-h = 1) - E (yt |zt-h = 0)
                E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                                                 c                        -d
                = E (i | i  Compliers)               + E (i | i  Defiers)       .                     (5)
                                               c - d                      c - d

Expression (5) is a weighted average of the treatment effects, but note that one of the
two weights must be negative, therefore the procedure estimates a net effect which
is difficult to interpret.24
    Examples of the possible role of Defiers in historical contexts typically include
cases of historical reversals in development. Consider Acemoglu et al. (2002) once
again, for instance. Relative wealth in 1500 might have fostered future growth, in
and of itself, but relative poverty as well, through institutional change in colonial
institutions.
  24
     See Heckman et al. (2006) for a discussion of the implications of violations to the monotonicity
assumption. Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) show in a general framework that the IV identifies a
weighted average of the treatment effects. In the absence of Monotonicity the weights may be
negative. Equation (5) characterizes this average in the context of our simple model.


                                                   20
times and the Industrial revolution. In this interpretation, countries which have
maintained growth from 1500 would be Compliers, while the protagonists of the
reversal of fortunes would be Defiers. Another interesting case of reversal is docu-
mented in Ashraf et al. (2010), when it is shown that more isolated locations in the
Paleolithic are more developed today. It is argued that isolation was more conducive
to innovation, through a mechanism combining less free-riding on inventions else-
where and lower predisposition to being invaded. More generally, we conclude that
the interpretation of causal effects in Persistence studies requires a careful analysis of
the distribution of treatment take-up over historical time, once again suggesting an
important role for historical narratives to guide the formal econometric IV strategy.

3.1.4      Persistence of treatment

In this subsection we entertain the analysis of the role of heterogeneous treatment
effects operating through the persistence mechanisms itself rather than directly
through treatment take-up as in the previous sections. Consider an behavioral-
equilibrium model in which treatment at t - h is perfectly determined by the in-
strument, xt-h = zt-h , but persistence is heterogeneous and depends on the value
of x : for instance treatment is more persistent than lack of treatment. Continuing
our parallel with colonial origins in Acemoglu et al. (2001), this could occur for ex-
ample because inclusive institutions, for example, are less costly to maintain once
established.25 In the context of (our interpretation of) Ashraf and Galor (2013),
where the persistence of human genetic diversity is the result of the composition of
mating patterns and the serial founder effect, heterogeneity of persistence could be
the consequence of mating patterns depending on the number of migration events,
e.g., because of the resulting distribution of phenotypical diversity, e.g., ethnic frac-
tionalization.
       A simple formalization of heterogeneous treatment effects operating through the
persistence mechanisms is obtained if the transition matrix Pr (x | x -1 ) depends
on  . This could induce different compliance across values of i . To illustrate,
assume i only takes two values, 1 < 2 , respectively in fractions 1 , 2 = 1 - 1
of locations, and the correlation between xt , xt-h with Pr(xt |xt-h ) is as in Table 2.
The population analog of the Wald estimator is:
  25
    See Przeworski (2004) for evidence regarding the heterogeneity of institutional persistence over
historical times.




                                                21
     Table 2: Heterogeneous persistence of a binary variable: Pr(xt |xt-h )

                                                1                         2
                                 xt      0            1            0            1
                                 0       p1         1 - p1         p2         1 - p2
                          xt-h
                                 1     1 - q1         q1         1 - q2         q2

                      E (yt |xt-h = 1) - E (yt |xt-h = 0)
                                                          =
                      E (xt |xt-h = 1) - E (xt |xt-h = 0)
                      (1 1 q1 + 2 2 q2 ) - (1 1 (1 - p1 ) + 2 2 (1 - p2 ))
                                                                           =
                             1 q1 + 2 q2 - (1 (1 - p1 ) + 2 (1 - p2 ))
                         i=1,2 i i (pi + qi - 1)
                                                 .
                          i=1,2 i (pi + qi - 1)

It follows that, as long as p1 + p2 = q1 + q2 , the LATE effect is different from the ATE.
In particular, consider the (natural) case in which if the persistence of the treatment
is correlated with the returns of the treatment  , that is, Pr (x = 1 | x -1 = 1) in-
creases with  . In the example of the table this would be the case if, e.g., q2 > q1
and p2 = p1 . In this case, the Wald estimator would identify a LATE effect 
                                                    26
greater than the ATE effect,             i=1,2 i i .         We conclude that a formal behavioral-
equilibrium model of persistence suggests dimensions and directions of inquiry useful
to better qualify the mechanisms driving the causal relationships identified in Per-
sistence studies that rely on the persistence of the treatment effect in history.


4         Pure persistence studies
In this section we consider the special case of the empirical model in Section 2.1 in
which the objective of the analysis is to prove the persistence over time of a variable
x . In these studies, the econometrician observes a proxy pt-h for xt-h , and, possibly,
zt-h , an instrument for pt-h . This empirical model is illustrated in Figure 2(b) which
is reproduced here for convenience, as Figure 5. We assume that zt-h is a valid
instrument for pt-h to concentrate our analysis on the interpretation of the estimates
of  when they are allowed to be heterogeneous across locations i = 1, 2, . . . , N .
Besides requiring that zt-h be correlated with pt-h , validity also requires zt-h to be
as good as randomly assigned and to satisfy the exclusion restriction, that is, zt-h
affects xt only through pt-h .
    26
         If p1 = p2 = 1/2 the LATE effect would be 2 .


                                                      22
                                 Figure 5: Pure persistence

                                       xt                       present

                                      

                                       x                        past

                                      

                      zt-h           xt-h            pt-h       historical past




Note: circles indicate variables observed by the investigator. Dashed circles indicate unobserved
variables. Solid arrows indicate directions of causality. Double arrows indicate endogeneity or any
other factor preventing the identification of a causal effect (omitted variables, selection bias, etc...).
Dashed arrows indicate potential causal links. Highlighted in red is the relationships of interest.



Assumption 2. zt-h is a valid instrument for pt-h ; in particular,

                                         cov (zt-h , pt-h ) = 0
                                   cov (zt-h , xt | pt-h ) = 0.

    The examples of empirical studies that represent this model and we use as an
illustration are listed in Table 3. All of these papers are interested in demonstrating
the persistence in history of important factors related to current socio-economic
performance: anti-semitism (Voigtländer and Voth (2012)), the role of women in
society Alesina et al. (2013), civic trust (Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)), and social
capital Guiso et al. (2016).
    While it is possible to find or collect detailed measures of these variables in
current times, the values of these variables in the past can only be measured with
proxies. In addition, in some cases, the proxies are endogenous to the process and
an historical instrument is introduced to disentangle the causal effect.
    Consider for simplicity (but the arguments extend) an environment where both




                                                   23
               Table 3: Variables in selected Pure persistence studies

                Article              xt                 pt-h                zt-h
              VV (2012)        Antisemitism      Pogroms in 1349             -
             AGN (2013)       Gender attitudes      plow use          plow suitability
             NW (2011)            Trust            Slave trade       Distance from sea
             GSZ (2016)        Civic capital        City-state          Bishop city

Note: see Figure 2(b) for relationships between variables. Abbreviations: VV: Voigtländer and
Voth (2012), AGN: Alesina et al. (2013), NW: Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), GSZ: Guiso et al.
(2016).



zt-h , and pt-h , are binary and assume that zt-h is a valid instrument for pt-h .27
The Instrumental Variable estimator coincides with a Wald estimator:

                             E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                                                                       = .                      (6)
                           E (pt-h |zt-h = 1) - E (pt-h |zt-h = 0)

Analogously to the cases in Section 3, we distinguish:

 Always takers: All i such that pi,t-h = 1 for all values of zi,t-h ;

 Never takers: All i such that pi,t-h = 0 for all values of zi,t-h ;

 Compliers: All i such that pi,t-h = 1 when zi,t-h = 1 and pi,t-h = 0 when zi,t-h = 0;

 Defiers: All i such that pi,t-h = 1 when zi,t-h = 0 and pi,t-h = 0 when zi,t-h = 1.

A version of Theorem 1 can be stated in this case.

Theorem 2. (Imbens and Angrist, 1994) Suppose that Assumption 2 holds and that
the treatment induces no Defiers, then

                              E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                            E (pt-h |zt-h = 1) - E (pt-h |zt-h = 0)
                          = E xi,t |pi,t-h =1 -xi,t |pi,t-h =0 | i  compliers
                          = E (i | i  compliers)
  27
       The validity of the instrument assumption is formally guaranteed by the following assumption:

                  E (pt-h | zt-h = 1) = E (pt-h | zt-h = 0)    First stage
                  xt |pt ,zt-h =0 = xt |pt ,zt-h =1            Exclusion restrictions




                                                  24
   The estimated parameter is generally different from E (i ) when persistence i is
heterogeneous across locations. We analizes two special cases.

4.1     Abstract models of persistence of treatment
In this section we follow the analysis of Section 3.1.4, studying in some detail the
role of heterogeneous treatment effects operating through persistence mechanism.
We develop behavioral-equilibrium models in which the persistence of the treatment
at t - h is heterogeneous. We distinguish environments with and without a valid
observed instrument zt-h and not that the instrument is not necessary to identify
persistence.

4.1.1    No instrument

Consider first the simplest case in which the econometrician does not observe any
instrument in historical time zt-h . Being interested in documenting persistence  in
the process {x } T , the econometrician only observes xt and a proxy pt-h for xt-h .
Suppose for simplicity the underlying process for xt takes the form

                                    xt = xt-h + ,

where     is a random shock. Voigtländer and Voth (2012)'s investigation of the
historical persistence of anti-semitism in German cities serves well as an illustration
of this type of Persistence studies. Lacking detailed evidence of anti-semitism in
history, this article uses pogroms in 1348-50CE in a cross-section of cities as an
imperfect proxy for it. The presumption is that the Black Death of 1348-50CE
lowered the threshold for violence which resulted in Jews being blamed and in some
cases being mass-executed in pogroms as a result. The study finds that pogroms in
1348-50CE are indeed positively correlated with various detailed measures of anti-
semitism in the 20th century in the cross-section of cities (vote shares for the Nazi
Party, number of deportees from each city, anti-semitic letters to newspapers,etc. . . ).
In this context, the shock captures all determinants of anti-semitism not operating
through its cultural persistence.
   Consider a behavioral-equilibrium cut-off model of the relationship between proxy




                                           25
pt-h and treatment xt-h :
                                        
                                        1     if xt-h > x
                               pt-h   =                     ;                           (7)
                                        0     if xt-h  x

that is, activation of the proxy is associated to treatment being sufficiently high,
even though the relationship is not necessarily causal. In the context of Voigtländer
and Voth (2012), indeed following their logic, pogroms pt-h = 1 occur in cities with
high anti-semitism xt-h . But it is not excluded that pogroms might have induced a
reinforcement of anti-semitic attitudes. Lacking data on xt-h it is only possible to
estimate
                                   xt = R + R pt-h ,                                    (8)

which identifies

                   R = E (xt |pt-h = 1) - E (xt |pt-h = 0).
                       =  · (E (xt-h |xt-h > x) - E (xt-h |xt-h  x)) ;                  (9)

that is, the true persistence parameter  times the difference in treatment between
locations with pt-h = 1 and pt-h = 0. This kind of empirical analysis therefore
reaches its objective of identifying the presence of long-run persistence: a positive
estimate of R is obtained only if  > 0. As long as pogroms are positively correlated
with antisemitism xt-h , using the pogroms variable produces an estimate of R
that converges, in limit probability, to a positive number. The estimated R can
be interpreted as the difference between treated and non-treated locations on the
average level of xt which is due to the persistence effect of xt-h .
   This interpretation of the estimate of R can be refined if we allow persistence
to be heterogeneous; that is, if we allow i to differ across locations i = 1, 2, . . . , N .
As in the examples from the previous section, hetereogeneity may occur because
persistence is somehow correlated with the occurrence of pogroms, or because some
other variable s affects persistence itself over time. Allowing for heterogeneity in i
across locations, estimating (8) identifies

                    R = E (i xt-h |xt-h > x) - E (i xt-h |xt-h  x).                    (10)

   An abstract behavioral-equilibrium model of the inter-generational transmission


                                            26
               Figure 6: A model with heterogeneous persistence

                                                        x       x
                     xt-h
                      size          1 - h - z               z         h
                        i                  l                          h
                     pt-h           no pogroms                  pogroms



of cultural traits is helpful in interpreting (10) to illustrate the implications of het-
erogeneous persistence. Suppose cultural traits survive when they are sufficiently
strongly held in the population; more specifically, e.g., a fraction of locations i, h
with xt-h > x have a high i = h so that the trait persists more easily over time
than in the remaining (1 - h ) cities, with persistence l < h (see Figure 6).28 In
this case (10) reduces to

              R = l E (x < xt-h  x) + h E (xt-h > x) - l E (xt-h < x)                           (11)

It follows then that the identified effect of persistence R can be still be interpreted
as a difference between treated and non-treated cities of the average level of xt due
to the persistence of xt-h . On the other hand, the size of the effect depends on the
distribution of xt-h and on the relationship between xt-h and persistence  across
locations. For instance, assuming x > x, we obtain

             R = h E (xt-h > x) - (l E (xt-h < x) + h E (x < xt-h  x))

Under different hypotheses, which, e.g., in Voigtländer and Voth (2012)'s context
can ultimately be reduced to how high anti-semitism in the XIVth century needed
to be to trigger a pogrom, the size of the identified effect changes. Pogroms identify
the persistence of anti-semitism in cities where they took place, not the persistence
in cities where they did not occur, because they did not occur in a random sample
of cities.29 We conclude that while it might be difficult to distinguish a priori be-
  28
     See Bisin and Verdier (2001, 2011) for models of inter-generational cultural transmission with
implications along these lines.
  29
     This model's assumptions can be mapped into the assumptions we used to build the model
in Subsection 3.1.4. In that model, the persistent variable is binary, but the correlation between
variables over time is more general than the correlations that are possible imposing the structure of
Figure 6. For example, in the model in this subsection, assume there is an underlying continuous
latent variable t-h that determines both pt-h and xt-h  {0, 1} according to different thresholds.


                                                 27
tween the different process we have hypothesised drive persistence of anti-semitism
in relations to pogroms, it would be interesting in principle and with additional his-
torical evidence we may be able to support one case over the other to improve our
understanding of the nature of persistence. More generally, the simple behavioral-
equilibrium model indicates novel and interesting empirical directions to pursue the
analysis of the persistence of cultural traits and values.

4.1.2    Instrumenting for persistence

Consider now the case in which the econometrician does observe an instrument in
historical time zt-h for pt-h . That is, consider the case where zt-h affects causally
xt-h and pt-h , while xt-h and pt-h are in principle linked by two-way causation, as in
the empirical model in Figure 2(b). The econometrician, interested in measuring the
process' persistence , observes xt and a proxy pt-h for xt-h (but not xt-h directly).
    Three examples from the literature clarify this empirical model. Nunn and
Wantchekon (2011) study the persistence of social trust, an important determinant
of current development using data from African regions. Modern surveys, such as
the Afrobarometer, provide measures of trust in the present. The historical proxy is
the size of slave trade, which varies by location and ethnicity, and may have affected
local trust in the past by generating "an environment of ubiquitous insecurity caused
individuals to turn on others". Reverse causality may also hold, however, because
communities with lower trust may experience a lower the cost to "kidnap, trick or sell
each other to slave"). To address this endogeneity the geographical distance from
the coast is used as an instrument for the size of trade. Distance from the coast
correlates with the size of slave trade and, arguably, does not affect directly current
levels of trust. The study finds that the level of social trust can be traced back to
the slave trade.
    In Guiso et al. (2016) the process {x } T represents civic capital in Italian
cities, measured, in modern times, with indicators such as the proportion of student
cheating in mathematics tests, the prevalence of non-profit associations, or mea-
sures of blood donations. The proxy for this variable in the past is whether the
city experienced self-government in the middle ages, which arguably generated a
culture of cooperation and trust that persists until current times. Indeed, the ev-
idence shows that cities that experienced self-government have better measures of
Then, knowing the distribution of t-h one can derive the conditional probabilities that are analog
to {pi , qi }, i = 1, 2 in Table 2 and compute what magnitudes the Wald estimator identifies.


                                               28
current social capital. Because this correlation may be due to omitted endogenous
factors, the paper supports these results by showing that the correlation remains
when instrumenting self-government with the presence of a bishop seat in the city
before 1400 CE. The instrument's validity is supported by the argument (advanced
by several historians) that bishops facilitated the adoption of self-government by
morally sanctioning the citizens' agreement. The presence of bishops lowers the
coordination cost required to achieve independence without affecting modern social
capital directly. The study finds that indeed, self-government in the late middle ages
determines higher civic capital today.
   In our last example of papers that conform to this framework, Alesina et al.
(2013), trace the origin of current cross-cultural differences regarding the role of
women in society (measured by labor-force participation, political representation,
and women entrepeneurship, xt ) to agricultural practices in pre-industrial periods,
proxied by plow cultivation (pt-h ). The process {x } T represents gender attitudes
and the proxy pt-h is the adoption of plow cultivation in pre-industrial times. The
argument is that practices requiring more physical strength encouraged specialization
of production by gender, affecting the perception of gender roles, which persisted in
current times even if modern market production does not require a physical strength
advantage. The adoption of plow agriculture is therefore a proxy for the perception
of gender roles, but could be affected by it, because societies that believe women
should be confined to home production are more prone to adopt agricultural practices
that comparatively advantage men. The study addresses this endogeneity using
the suitability of locations for plow cultivation as an instrument. Plow suitability
disproportionally induces the adoption of the plow, arguably without affecting the
perception of gender roles.
   In all these examples, because a valid instrument is observed for the adopted
proxy, the empirical model leads to the identification of

                      E (xt |zt-h = 1) - E (xt |zt-h = 0)
                                                              = .                   (12)
                    E (pt-h |zt-h = 1) - E (pt-h |zt-h = 0)

Following the logic of our discussion of Voigtländer and Voth (2012), an instrument is
not necessary to identify a positive . As long as pi,t-h = 1 and xi,t-h are correlated,
the estimate  will have the correct sign. The endogeneity of the adoption of the plow
in Alesina et al. (2013), for instance, does not invalidate the fact that locations which
adopted the plow in t - h are characterized by more conservative gender attitudes


                                           29
at t: locations i with pi,t-h = 1 have higher xi,t . These attitudes in the present
are the consequence of the persistence of cultural traits and attitudes. The same is
true for the identification of the persistence of trust in Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)
and of civic capital in Guiso et al. (2016), that we argued have the same structural
relationship between variables.
    However, the IV estimate of  can be interpreted as a LATE estimate of the
persistence of the process {x } T ; that is, a local effect through the specific instru-
ment adopted. For instance, the IV in Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), identifies the
persistence of community trust. Assume the benefits of trust bi are heterogeneous
across ethnic groups, for simplicity assume two levels bh > bl . Trust is then the con-
sequence of a behavioral-equilibrium outcome: adopted when its benefits are greater
than the benefits from slave trade. Let the benefit of slave trade be denoted by
d(zt-h ) and denote with zt-h = 1 high distance from the coast, with d(1) < d(0).
Assume bl < d(1) < bh < d(0) so that the ethnic groups with low value of trust
bi = bl always experience slave trade, whereas groups with bi = bh experience trade
only if they are close to the coast. In this case distance from coast induces a change
in treatment only for ethnic groups with the highest returns to trust, those where,
presumably, incentives for trust to persist are higher.30 This would imply that the
the IV parameter identifies the persistence of trust in locations where trust is more
beneficial and consequently where its persistence is higher.
    Similarly, consider Guiso et al. (2016), and assume cities have different returns
to civic capital, and persistence is higher when returns are higher. Further, assume
that cities with high returns adopt self-government in the middle ages regardless of
the triggering effect of a coordinating factor (the presence of a bishop, zt-h ), whereas
cities with bi = bl adopt self-government only through the coordination from a bishop
(if zt = 1). In this case Compliers are cities with a low return, which arguably are
less likely to experience persistence otherwise. In this case, the instrument identifies
persistence in cities with relatively low returns and consequently low persistence.
    Finally, in Alesina et al. (2013) the instrument identifies the persistence of gender
attitudes as affected by the exogenous adoption of the plow. It is conceivable that
some locations are Always Takers, that they have adopted the plow motivated by
their previous gender attitudes - independently of whether their land were suitable
  30
     For example assume that the cost of acquiring trust is random, but on average higher than the
average cost of mantaining it once acquired. Then ethnic groups with higher benefits will display
higher persistence of trust.



                                               30
for plow agriculture. If these locations are characterized by stronger persistence of
these attitudes, the instrument identifies persistence in location with relatively lower
persistence.


5    Conclusions
In this chapter, we have argued that it is often natural for heterogeneous effects
to occur in the context of Persistence studies: if different mechanisms affect the
variable of interest with different intensity over locations over time, then different
combinations of mechanisms that aggregate into the same value of the treatment
variable generate heterogeneous effects.
    Behavioral-equilibrium models can help the interpretation of the causal effects
uncovered in Persistence studies when treatment effects are heterogeneous and the
LATE parameter identified in quasi-experimental designs differs from the Average
Treatment Effect. In this context, we have shown, even minimal models of tratment
take-up may shed some light on what information the estimated effects provide, at
least conditionally on assumptions that sometimes can be empirically tested. Adding
structure, as recent and current research on the dynamics of institution and culture
is doing, can only be of help; see Acemoglu et al. (2021, in this volume); Bisin and
Verdier (2021, in this volume); Persson and Tabellini (2021, in this volume). Impor-
tantly, these arguments are independent of the soundness of econometric techniques
and of data reliability.
    The interpretation of the estimated parameters is important when Persistence
studies have policy implications. If multiple slow-moving mechanisms (with het-
erogeneous effects) underlie long-run correlations, then policies motivated by the
estimated parameters, which are not necessarily the average treatment effect, may
produce unexpected outcomes if they do not operate through the channels that are
locally identified by the research design.
    The correct interpretation of the estimated parameters is important not only for
policy implications, but also when the researcher is interested in counterfactual his-
torical analysis. When treatment effects are heterogeneous, the instrument operates
by identifying a specific historical path whose effects may be different from those
that may have been generated in a counterfactual.
    Pushing the arguments of this chapter forward, this line of analysis sheds doubts
on the notion of origin, often used in these studies. A causal relationship realized in


                                             31
history at time  with effects at time t does not preclude another historical causal
relationship realized prior to  .31 In many cases the relevant question is not what was
the origin of a phenomenon, but what are the conterfactual quantitative effect that
results from changing variables in the historical past on variables in the present. Each
variable at different points in the past may affect the present differently. This paper
highlights how the empirical implications of Persistence studies may be interpreted
using simple models that inform how these mechanisms affect the variable of interest
suggesting directions for future research.




  31
     For instance, the origin of the Mafia in Sicily has been reduced with good arguments to the rise
of socialist Peasant Fasci organizations at the end of the 19th century (Acemoglu et al., 2020); to
a price shock on sulphur and lemon in the 1850's (Buonanno et al., 2015; Dimico et al., 2017); to
the lack of city states in the XIV'th century - in turn a consequence of Norman domination (Guiso
et al., 2016); to the Paleolithic split into nomadic pastoralism in 7th millenium B.C. (Alinei, 2007).


                                                 32
Appendix: LATE for School
The clearest applications of the distinction between LATE and ATE are in la-
bor/education economics. In this Appendix we exploit Rosenzweig and Wolpin
(2000)'s comment on Angrist and Krueger (1991)'s instrumental variable approach
to estimating returns to schooling.32
       Consider the relationship between schooling attainment and earnings. A simple
regression fails to identify the causal effect of schooling because an omitted variable
bias: for example, children of higher ability may earn higher wages for given schooling
and also choose a higher schooling attainment. A valid instrument for schooling may
be adopted to identify the causal effect. Angrist and Krueger (1991) propose to use
Quarter of birth. The birth date cutoffs for school-entry age combined with minimum
compulsory schooling ages induce some children born during the last months of the
year to complete more years of schooling relative to children born at the beginning
of the year, because they are induced to start schooling at an earlier age (this is
true for example if they intend to leave school at the mandatory minimum age).
The arguably random variation in date of birth provides a "natural" instrument for
estimating the return to schooling.33
       Consider the case in which the treatment effect is heterogeneous, that is, re-
turns to schooling vary in the cross-section of students; for instance, they increase
with the underlying unobservable ability. To illustrate the difference between LATE
and ATE, limit the students' choice to one extra year of schooling after mandatory
schooling age, and assume that high ability students attain an extra year of educa-
tion regardless of their Quarter of birth, but low-ability students always intend to
drop out of school at mandatory age, and can only be "forced" to undertake an extra
year of education if, by being born late in the year, they start attending school one
year younger.
       The instrumental variable technique "works" by randomly inducing a subset of
students, low-ability students, to undertake an extra year of education. The extra
earnings gained by students not born in the first quarter, relative to the earnings of
  32
      Underlying this analysis is the debate in econometrics regarding identification power in reduced-
form causal inference design: see Angrist and Krueger (1991); Imbens and Angrist (1994); Angrist
and Imbens (1999); Deaton (2010, 2020); Heckman (1997, 1999); Heckman and Urzua (2010);
Imbens (2010).
   33
      In fact, the validity of quarter of birth as an instrument has been questioned, see Buckles and
Hungerman (2013), but for the purposes of this introduction, we assume the instrument to be valid
from an econometric standpoint.



                                                  33
those born during the rest of the year, are generated only by low-ability students
that attend an extra year of education. All other students have the same school-
ing attainment regardless of the date of birth, therefore the instrumental variable
estimate only identifies the returns for low-ability students (a LATE effect), not the
return of high-ability students, nor the average return of all students (the ATE).
   While the estimated parameter remains of great interest, this interpretation is
consequential in that it suggests that the specific IV procedure adopted, while valid,
under-estimates the returns to schooling. Furthermore, it suggests caution when
considering the policy implications of the estimates, because a different policy with
the goal of inducing higher schooling attainment may not induce the same subset of
students to comply.
   This stylized model highlights how the Quarter of birth instrument is likely to
identify the returns of the low-ability students, because arguably these students are
the most likely to leave schooling at the minimum compulsory age. It is both a
logically reasonable assumption, and an empirically testable implication that could
provide additional evidence about the interpretation of the estimated returns. It is in
this spirit that we proceed, in this paper, to formalize stylized models of persistence
studies.




                                          34
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Giuseppe De Feo, and Giacomo Davide De Luca (2020) "Weak
  states: Causes and consequences of the Sicilian Mafia," The Review of Economic
  Studies, Vol. 87, No. 2, pp. 537­581. (Cited on page 32)

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantis Sonin (2021, in this volume) "In-
  stitutional Change and Institutional Persistence," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni
  Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Hol-
  land. (Cited on page 31)

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson (2001) "The colonial
  origins of comparative development: An empirical investigation," American Eco-
  nomic Review, Vol. 91, No. 5, pp. 1369­1401. (Cited on pages 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14,
  15, 19, and 21)

        (2002) "Reversal of fortune: Geography and institutions in the making of
  the modern world income distribution," The Quarterly journal of economics, Vol.
  117, No. 4, pp. 1231­1294. (Cited on pages 18, 19, and 20)

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013) "On the origins of gender
  roles: Women and the plough," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 128,
  No. 2, pp. 469­530. (Cited on pages 8, 23, 24, 29, and 30)

Alinei, Mario (2007) "Origini pastorali e italiche della camorra, della mafia e
  della'ndrangheta: un esperimento di Archeologia Etimologica," Origini pastorali e
  italiche della camorra, della mafia e della'ndrangheta, pp. 1000­1039. (Cited on
  page 32)

Angrist, Joshua D and Guido W Imbens (1999) "Comment on James J. Heckman,"
  Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions Used in Mak-
  ing Program Evaluations"," Journal of Human Resources, pp. 823­827. (Cited on
  page 33)

Angrist, Joshua D and Alan B Krueger (1991) "Does compulsory school attendance
  affect schooling and earnings?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106,
  No. 4, pp. 979­1014. (Cited on page 33)

Angrist, Joshua D and Jörn-Steffen Pischke (2008) Mostly harmless econometrics:
  An empiricist's companion : Princeton university press. (Cited on pages 4 and 8)

                                        35
        (2014) Mastering'metrics: The path from cause to effect : Princeton Univer-
  sity Press. (Cited on page 4)

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor (2013) "The 'Out of Africa' hypothesis, human
  genetic diversity, and comparative economic development," American Economic
  Review, Vol. 103, No. 1, pp. 1­46. (Cited on pages 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, and 21)

Ashraf, Quamrul, Ömer Özak, and Oded Galor (2010) "Isolation and development,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 8, No. 2-3, pp. 401­412.
  (Cited on page 21)

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2001) "The economics of cultural transmission
  and the dynamics of preferences," Journal of Economic theory, Vol. 97, No. 2, pp.
  298­319. (Cited on page 27)

        (2011) "The economics of cultural transmission and socialization," in Ben-
  habib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O. Jackson eds. Handbook of social eco-
  nomics, Vol. 1: Elsevier, pp. 339­416. (Cited on page 27)

        (2017) "On the joint evolution of culture and institutions," Working Paper
  23375, National Bureau of Economic Research. (Cited on pages 16 and 19)

        (2021, in this volume) "Phase Diagrams in Historical Economics: Culture
  and Institutions," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of His-
  torical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland. (Cited on page 31)

Bottero, Margherita and Björn Wallace (2013) "Is There a Long-Term Effect of
  Africa's Slave Trades?" Economic History Working Paper 30, Bank of Italy. (Cited
  on page 18)

Buckles, Kasey S. and Daniel M. Hungerman (2013) "Season of Birth and Later Out-
  comes: Old Questions, New Answers," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  Vol. 95, No. 3, pp. 711­724, URL: https://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/restat/
  v95y2013i3p711-724.html. (Cited on page 33)

Buonanno, Paolo, Ruben Durante, Giovanni Prarolo, and Paolo Vanin (2015) "Poor
  institutions, rich mines: Resource curse in the origins of the sicilian mafia," The
  Economic Journal, Vol. 125, No. 586, pp. F175­F202. (Cited on page 32)



                                         36
Cantoni, Davide and Noam Yuchtman (2021, in this volume) "Historical Contin-
  gencies, Econometric Problems: The Analysis of Natural Experiments in Eco-
  nomic History," working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. (Cited on
  page 18)

Cioni, M, G Federico, and M Vasta (2021, in this volume) "The two Revolutions
  in Economic History," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of
  Historical Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland. (Cited on page 2)

Deaton, Angus (2010) "Instruments, randomization, and learning about develop-
  ment," Journal of economic literature, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 424­55. (Cited on
  page 33)

        (2020) "Randomization in the Tropics Revisited: a Theme and Eleven Vari-
  ations," Working Paper 27600, National Bureau of Economic Research. (Cited on
  page 33)

Dimico, Arcangelo, Alessia Isopi, and Ola Olsson (2017) "Origins of the sicilian
  mafia: The market for lemons," The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 77, No. 4,
  pp. 1083­1115. (Cited on page 32)

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2016) "Long-term Persistence,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 14, No. 6, pp. 1401­1436,
  DOI: 10.1111/jeea.12177. (Cited on pages 8, 23, 24, 28, 30, and 32)

Heckman, James (1997) "Instrumental variables: A study of implicit behavioral as-
  sumptions used in making program evaluations," Journal of human resources, pp.
  441­462. (Cited on page 33)

Heckman, James J (1999) "Instrumental variables: response to Angrist and Imbens,"
  The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 34, No. 4, pp. 828­837. (Cited on page 33)

Heckman, James J, Lance J Lochner, and Petra E Todd (2006) "Earnings functions,
  rates of return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond," Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Vol. 1, pp. 307­458. (Cited on page 20)

Heckman, James J, Daniel Schmierer, and Sergio Urzua (2010) "Testing the cor-
  related random coefficient model," Journal of econometrics, Vol. 158, No. 2, pp.
  177­203. (Cited on page 1)


                                       37
Heckman, James J and Sergio Urzua (2010) "Comparing IV with structural models:
  What simple IV can and cannot identify," Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 156, No.
  1, pp. 27­37. (Cited on page 33)

Heckman, James J and Edward Vytlacil (2005) "Structural equations, treatment
  effects, and econometric policy evaluation 1," Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 3, pp.
  669­738. (Cited on pages 2 and 20)

Imbens, Guido (2019) "Potential Outcome and Directed Acyclic Graph Approaches
  to Causality: Relevance for Empirical Practice in Economics," Working Paper
  26104, National Bureau of Economic Research. (Cited on page 5)

Imbens, Guido W (2010) "Better LATE than nothing: Some comments on Deaton
  (2009) and Heckman and Urzua (2009)," Journal of Economic literature, Vol. 48,
  No. 2, pp. 399­423. (Cited on page 33)

Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist (1994) "Identification and Estimation of
  Local Average Treatment Effects," Econometrica, Vol. 62, No. 2, pp. 467­475,
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2951620. (Cited on pages 2, 10, 19, 24,
  and 33)

Kelly, Morgan (2019) "The standard errors of persistence," Working Paper DP13783,
  CEPR. (Cited on page 2)

Nunn, Nathan (2008) "The long-term effects of Africa's slave trades," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, Vol. 123, No. 1, pp. 139­176. (Cited on page 18)

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2011) "The slave trade and the origins of
  mistrust in Africa," American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 7, pp. 3221­52.
  (Cited on pages 8, 23, 24, 28, and 30)

Pearl, Judea (2009) Causality : Cambridge university press. (Cited on page 4)

Pearl, Judea, Madelyn Glymour, and Nicholas P Jewell (2016) Causal inference in
  statistics: A primer : John Wiley & Sons. (Cited on page 4)

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2021, in this volume) "Culture, Institutions
  and Policy," in Bisin, Alberto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical
  Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland. (Cited on page 31)



                                           38
Przeworski, Adam (2004) "The last instance: Are institutions the primary cause of
  economic development?" Archives Européennes de Sociologie/European Journal
  of Sociology/Europäisches Archiv für Soziologie, pp. 165­188. (Cited on page 21)

Rosenzweig, Mark R and Kenneth I Wolpin (2000) "Natural "natural experiments"
  in economics," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 38, No. 4, pp. 827­874. (Cited
  on pages 13 and 33)

Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth (2012) "Persecution Perpetuated: The
  Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany*," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, No. 3, pp. 1339­1392, URL: http://dx.doi.
  org/10.1093/qje/qjs019, DOI: 10.1093/qje/qjs019. (Cited on pages 8, 23, 24,
  25, 26, 27, and 29)

Voth, Joaquim (2021, in this volume) "Persistence - Myth and Mystery," in Bisin, Al-
  berto and Giovanni Federico eds. Handbook of Historical Economics, Amsterdam:
  Elsevier North Holland. (Cited on pages 1, 2, and 7)




                                        39
