                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT AT SCALE? EXPERIMENTAL
                EVIDENCE ON SCHOOL GOVERNANCE INDIA

                                    Karthik Muralidharan
                                       Abhijeet Singh

                                     Working Paper 28129
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28129


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020


We thank Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Eli Berman, Nick Bloom, Martina Björkman-Nyqvist, Gordon
Dahl, Esther Duflo, Tore Ellingsen, Alejandro Ganimian, Joshua Goodman, Marc Gurgand,
Caroline Hoxby, Hyuncheol Bryant Kim, Paul Niehaus, Lant Pritchett, James Rauch, Imran
Rasul, John van Reenen, Sujata Visaria, Martin Williams, Kaspar Wuthrich, and several seminar
participants for comments. We are grateful to senior leadership in the School Education
Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh ­ in particular, Mr. S.R. Mohanty, Ms. Rashmi
Shami, Ms. Deepti Gaur Mukherjee, Mr. Lokesh Jatav and Mr. K.P.S. Tomar ­ for their
continuous support in evaluating this program. We are also grateful to staff at Ark, especially
Kruti Bharucha, Susannah Hares, Kanupriya Misra and Sachin Ashapure, for their collaboration
in this project. Aditi Bhowmick, Akankshita Dey, Ghazal Gulati, Krishanu Chakraborty, Nawar
El Abadi, Ramamurthy Sripada, Sabareesh Ramachandran and Urmi Bhattacharya provided
outstanding field management and research assistance. This evaluation was supported by funding
from the International Growth Centre, the J-PAL Post Primary Education Initiative, ESRC and
the DFID RISE program. This trial was registered on the AEA RCT Registry
(AEARCTR-0000851). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Karthik Muralidharan and Abhijeet Singh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Improving Public Sector Management at Scale? Experimental Evidence on School Governance
India
Karthik Muralidharan and Abhijeet Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 28129
November 2020
JEL No. C93,H75,I28,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

We present results from a large-scale experimental evaluation of an ambitious attempt to improve
management quality in Indian schools (implemented in 1,774 randomly-selected schools). The
intervention featured several global "best practices" including comprehensive assessments,
detailed school ratings, and customized school improvement plans. It did not, however, change
accountability or incentives. We find that the assessments were near-universally completed, and
that the ratings were informative, but the intervention had no impact on either school functioning
or student outcomes. Yet, the program was perceived to be successful and scaled up to cover over
600,000 schools nationally. We find using a matched-pair design that the scaled-up program
continued to be ineffective at improving student learning in the state we study. We also conduct
detailed qualitative interviews with frontline officials and find that the main impact of the
program on the ground was to increase required reporting and paperwork. Our results illustrate
how ostensibly well-designed programs, that appear effective based on administrative measures
of compliance, may be ineffective in practice.


Karthik Muralidharan
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Abhijeet Singh
Department of Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavagen 65
Stockholm
Sweden
abhijeetsingh1@gmail.com




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/851
1    Introduction
There is a widespread "learning crisis" in developing countries where, despite substantial increases
in school enrollment and average years of schooling, student learning remains very low (World
Bank, 2018). For instance, in India, nearly 50% of students in Grade 5 cannot read at
the second-grade level, despite primary school enrollment rates over 95% (Pratham, 2019).
One leading candidate explanation is the poor quality of school management and governance,
exemplified for instance by high rates of teacher absence (Chaudhury et al., 2006). Recent
evidence suggests that the quality of school management is positively correlated with both
test-score levels (Bloom et al., 2015), and value-added (Lemos, Muralidharan, and Scur, 2020).
Governments around the world are increasingly recognizing the importance of this issue, and
implementing reforms to improve school governance and management. Such reforms are
ubiquitous, and data from the World Bank show that over 84 countries have attempted some
form of these reforms (see Appendix A). Yet, despite the popularity of such programs, and the
associated fiscal and personnel costs, there is limited evidence on the effectiveness of composite
school management programs to improve learning outcomes at scale.
In this paper, we present experimental evidence on the impact of a comprehensive school
management program, which was a more intensive precursor of a variant that has since been rolled
out to over 600,000 schools in India and is expected to cover 1.6 million schools eventually. We
worked with the government of the state of Madhya Pradesh (MP) to conduct an experimental
evaluation of the first phase of this program (in 2014-16) that was implemented across 1,774
elementary schools (randomly selected from a universe of 11,235 schools). The program was
developed by the Government of MP (GoMP) and Ark, a leading international education services
provider, and aimed to incorporate several global "best practices" in school management.
The program's theory of change reflected insights from management theory, which argue that
poor management practices may persist in organizations for a combination of reasons including
managers (a) not knowing that they are performing poorly, (b) not knowing what they need to do
to improve, (c) not being motivated or held accountable for improvements or (d) not succeeding
in improving performance due to coordination and agency problems (Gibbons and Henderson,
2012). The program aimed to address each of these issues by: (a) conducting independent
customized assessments of school quality, to identify strengths and weaknesses, (b) creating
school-specific improvement plans with concrete action steps, (c) stipulating regular follow-up
by supervisory staff to monitor progress and provide guidance and support, and (d) aiming to
involve school inspectors, all school staff and parent representatives in the assessments and the
creation of improvement plans. The program also created online tools to make school assessment
results and progress reports easily accessible to senior officials in the education department.



                                                 1
An important feature of the program design was that it aimed to foster cooperation across all
actors in the education system, and to avoid an adversarial framing between administrators and
teachers. It was therefore framed as a collaborative effort to support continuous improvement of
schools, but did not formally change teacher incentives or accountability for improved outcomes.
While school-level assessments were an integral part of the intervention, the program aimed
to use them as a starting point for customized school-specific planning for improvement, and
not as a tool for accountability. The idea of continuous improvement is also similar to the
highly-regarded Japanese kaizen management system (Morgan and Liker, 2006). Overall, the
program had a coherent theory of change, and reflected perceived global "best practices". It was
the flagship education reform in MP, and international funding agencies as well as senior GoMP
officials were highly optimistic that it would improve school processes and learning outcomes.
The program was designed to be scaled up across MP in a staggered way, starting with an initial
pilot phase of 100 schools, and expanding to 2,000, 25,000, and 100,000 schools in three
phases. Our experimental evaluation was conducted in the expansion to 2,000 schools after the
program design had been adapted to the local context and stabilized during a 100-school pilot.1
Working closely with GoMP, we identified a population of 11,235 elementary schools across
five districts, and randomly-assigned 1,774 to receive the program. We randomized units into
treatment at the level of an academic cluster, the lowest unit of school administration in the state.
Clusters have around 40 schools on average, with dedicated cluster resource coordinators (CRCs)
to provide mentoring and academic support to schools. Our study design, combined with at-scale
program implementation by the government, is likely to yield estimates of program impact at a
policy-relevant scale (Al-Ubaydli, List, and Suskind, 2017; Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017).
Our primary outcome of interest is student learning. We measure this using three data sources:
(a) independently designed and administered tests of student learning in a representative sample
of 100 treatment and 202 control schools, (b) individual student-level scores on official assessments
in these schools and (c) school-level aggregate scores on official assessments across all 5435
treatment and control schools. We also collected data on teacher and student absence, conducted
classroom observations, and surveyed principals, teachers and students.
We report four main results. First, the school assessments were completed in 93% of schools
assigned to treatment and were of high quality. School improvement plans were also made and
uploaded on the program website. There was considerable variation in the assessments across
schools, both in the overall scores and in the various sub-components. In the overall ratings, 91%
of schools were classified as not meeting standards, suggesting low collusion between assessors
  1
    In addition to obtaining inputs from global experts, Ark took substantial effort to make the program
context-specific and spent 2 academic years to pilot and refine program details in 100 schools prior to the
larger-scale implementation that we evaluate. See Appendix B for details.



                                                    2
and school staff. Further, these assessments contained meaningful information, and predict future
student achievement and teacher absence, even conditional on past achievement.
Second, though the initial assessment was implemented in treated schools and was informative,
there was no sustained improvement in support or oversight in treated schools. Supervising
officials did not increase their monitoring of treated schools, whether in frequency of visits
or the content of inspections. School Management Committees, which could have exerted
community-level accountability and were explicitly targeted by the intervention, also did not
play a more active role in treatment schools.
Third, while there was no change in oversight, the program could have still improved teacher effort
and classroom processes through the information in the assessments and the school-improvement
plans. However, we find no evidence of improved pedagogy or effort within schools. Teacher
absence was high (33%) and did not differ across treatment and control schools. We also find
no impact on instructional time, use of textbooks and workbooks, or the likelihood of checking
student homework books (a measure of teacher effort). Student absence rates were also high
(47%) and unaffected by treatment. Thus, the program was ineffective in changing any observed
measure of teacher effort or student engagement.
Finally, consistent with the lack of impact on any school-level processes, we find no impact on
student learning outcomes either in the short run (3-4 months after the intervention) or over a
longer horizon (15-18 months after program rollout). This is true in both school-administered
tests, and independently-administered tests conducted by the research team. These null results
are precisely estimated and we are able to reject modestly-sized effects between 0.1 and 0.15 .
At the time that we presented these results to GoMP officials, they had already planned for the
expansion of the program to the next phase of 25,000 schools in late 2016. The impetus for
continuing the expansion (despite evidence of non-impact) was magnified by the creation of a
national program along similar lines, for which MP was designated as a "forerunner" state. This
national program has now been implemented in over 600,000 schools, is expected to reach 1.6
million schools, and is the national flagship program for improving school management. The
25,000 school expansion in MP was part of this nationwide rollout.
We complement our main experimental evaluation of the 2000 school roll-out with a
non-experimental evaluation of the 25,000 school expansion using a matched-pair treatment
control design (we also test for and verify parallel trends in test scores in prior years). We again
find no impact on student learning outcomes. Thus, even after over five years of iterating on the
design of the program and expanding its scale, it had no discernible effect on student learning.
We conducted extensive qualitative interviews with teachers, principals, and field-level
supervisory staff to obtain insights into the reasons for the program's ineffectiveness. We

                                                 3
document that, for these officials, the program was reduced to an exercise in administrative
compliance, i.e. ensuring that the required paperwork was submitted on time. Both teachers
and supervisors perceived the program primarily as a data collection effort: program delivery
effectively ceased after filing the school improvement plans and, de facto, the reform was very far
from the reflective exercise in self-evaluation and improvement envisaged in the program design.
Our first contribution is to the literature on improving management quality in developing
countries. A growing body of evidence has shown that management quality is correlated with
productivity in both the private and public sectors (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Rasul and
Rogger, 2018; Rasul, Rogger, and Williams, 2018). Further, recent experimental studies have
found that providing management consulting inputs to private firms have had long and persistent
effects on improved productivity in India and Mexico (Bloom et al., 2013; Bruhn, Karlan, and
Schoar, 2018). We provide experimental evidence on the impact of an attempt to improve
management quality in the public sector and find that even an ostensibly well-designed program
had no impact on either processes or outcomes. Our results are consistent with other recent
experimental evidence that inputs that are effective at improving learning in private schools may
not be as effective in public schools in developing countries.2
We conjecture that a key reason for this difference is that the default level of incentives for
improving learning outcomes are low for both officials and teachers in many public-sector settings
(including ours), and the intervention did not meaningfully change these. This is consistent with
growing evidence of complementarities between inputs (including knowledge) and incentives in
improving outcomes in developing countries across education, health, and even in the private
sector.3 It may also explain the contrast between our findings and evidence from the US and the
UK, where school ratings have been found to improve student performance when accompanied by
the threat of sanctions for low-performing schools and principals (Figlio and Loeb, 2011; Figlio
and Rouse, 2006; Rockoff and Turner, 2010; Hussain, 2015).4
   2
     See Glewwe and Muralidharan (2016) for a review of several experimental studies finding no impact of
providing school inputs in public schools. In contrast, Andrabi et al. (2020) find that providing grants to private
schools in Pakistan did improve learning outcomes. More recently, Bedoya et al. (2020) find that neither school
grants nor management training had any impact on student test scores in public schools in Mexico.
   3
     In education, Mbiti et al. (2019) find no impacts of providing school grants alone, modest impacts of teacher
incentives, and strong evidence of complementarities between the two. Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011)
show that trained teachers are not more effective than untrained ones in public schools, but are significantly
more effective in the presence of performance-linked pay. In health, Das et al. (2016) show that the same doctors
provide significantly better care on the same case in their private practice compared to in public clinics. Finally,
Atkin et al. (2017) show how misaligned incentives between workers and owners may limit the effectiveness of
providing workers with more productive technologies even in private firms.
   4
     Of course, this does not preclude the possibility that the intervention could have been effective even in the
absence of formal incentives, if there had been suitable investment in other complementary inputs. We discuss
several possibilities in the concluding section.




                                                         4
Second, we contribute to the literature on organizational economics (Gibbons and Roberts, 2015)
by providing experimental evidence of the difficulty of change management in large organizations.
There is a large and active literature on this subject, with several theories and case studies, but
very little well-identified evidence.5 The program we study copied several global "best practices"
that are ubiquitous in education reforms worldwide (see Appendix A). Yet, in both the 2,000
and 25,000 school implementations, we see that the program did not change either school
functioning or any ultimate outcome of interest. As shown by Abadie (2020), the value of a
well-identified and well-powered null result is especially high in a setting where prior beliefs
(demonstrated in this case by widespread adoption) on effectiveness are high.
Third, we illustrate the nature of bureaucratic incentives and how these can lead to divergence
between the perceived and actual success of a program. Specifically, our detailed qualitative
interviews illustrate how paperwork and the appearance of activity may be an end in itself even
when ultimate goals are unaffected (Gupta, 2012; Aiyar, Dongre, and Davis, 2015; Levy et al.,
2018). Thus, the program was deemed a success by administrative metrics since there was a paper
trail of assessments done and reports uploaded to prove it. This perception of success, may have
contributed to the program's nationwide scale-up to over half a million schools, despite its lack
of impact on outcomes (which would not have been known in the absence of our evaluations).6
More generally, our results provide a striking illustration of the phenomenon of "institutional
isomorphism", whereby bureaucracies focus on copying the practices of counterparts that are
perceived to be more successful, regardless of their actual effectiveness (DiMaggio and Powell,
1983; Pritchett, 2013). Such isomorphic mimicry may help to explain both the initial enthusiasm
for the program and the subsequent scale up, despite a lack of any impact. As noted by DiMaggio
and Powell (1983): "as an innovation spreads, a threshold is reached beyond which adoption
provides legitimacy rather than improves performance."
Finally, our results highlight the importance of independent evaluations of development programs
- typically designed by consultants and funded by donors and aid agencies. There are hundreds
of projects similar to the ones we study that look excellent on paper and are implemented each
year, but whose impacts are not evaluated. Doing so would help to improve program design and
implementation by increasing the scrutiny they come under, and may help to pivot public and
donor spending (of time and money) towards more effective programs.
   5
      For instance, an influential review (cited over 1,800 times) notes in its abstract that: "Theories and approaches
to change management currently available to academics and practitioners are often contradictory, mostly
lacking empirical evidence and supported by unchallenged hypotheses concerning the nature of contemporary
organisational change management (By, 2005)." Indeed, many of the "best practices" implemented in the
intervention we study are based on similarly untested hypotheses.
    6
      Our setting and results, thus, differ importantly from prior studies on ineffective governance reforms where
the interventions were poorly implemented (and later abandoned) due to subversion and resistance by lower-level
officials (see, e.g., Banerjee, Duflo, and Glennerster (2008) and Dhaliwal and Hanna (2017)). In our case, the
program was perceived to be a success, and scaled up nationwide to over half a million schools.


                                                          5
2       Background and Intervention
2.1     Setting
Our study is set in the state of Madhya Pradesh (MP), which had a population of around 72.6
million (72% rural) in 2011. It is one of India's more disadvantaged states, with a lower literacy
rate and a higher poverty rate than the national average.
The MP public education system comprises four hierarchical levels of administration. At the
apex is the state level, where policy, program, and budget decisions are taken for the full
population of over 110,000 public schools.7 Next are the district and block levels, which
coordinate policy and program implementation at a scale of 2000 and 300-400 schools.
The lowest level is the academic cluster, which typically caters to around 40 schools, and is
staffed with two Cluster Resource Coordinators (CRC) who represent the frontline interaction
of the education bureaucracy with schools. CRCs and block-level officials are meant to oversee
school functioning, monitor school compliance with official norms, exert accountability pressure,
and provide administrative support as needed. In addition, all schools are expected to have a
School Management Committee comprising representatives of parents, the school staff, and local
functionaries to provide "bottom up" community-based monitoring of schools.
Yet, despite this well-defined formal structure for school accountability, the performance of the
public education system in MP is weak. Student learning levels are low. In 2016, only 31% of
Grade 5 students in government schools were able to read a text at Grade 2 level, and only 15.3%
of Grade 5 students could do division (Pratham, 2017). There is also evidence of deterioration
of public school quality in MP in recent years. For instance, student attendance (measured by
unannounced school visits) in MP public schools fell from 68% in 2010 to 55% in 2016 (Pratham,
2017). Teacher absence was also high and rising with 2010 levels of teacher absence in rural MP
estimated at 26.2%, compared to 18.2% in 2003 (Muralidharan et al., 2017).8

2.2     Intervention
Concerned about the low quality of public schooling in the state, the Government of MP
(GoMP) made school improvement a high priority and requested technical support from the UK
Department of International Development (DFID). DFID contracted Ark, a leading education
charity headquartered in London, with a track record of leading school improvements in public
systems internationally and in Academies (Charter schools) in the UK. The program of school
    7
     The large number of schools reflects a policy priority on providing primary schools in every habitation in the
state to facilitate universal school enrollment. As a result, there are a large number of small schools, with 40% of
rural primary schools having enrollment below 60 students (across grades 1-5) in 2016.
   8
     The trend line of deteriorating school quality highlights the importance of a credible contemporaneous control
group for evaluating the impact of policy interventions.


                                                         6
inspections and feedback for improvements was informed by the school accountability regime run
by the Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (OfStEd) in the UK but
extensively adapted to the context in MP.9 This eventual intervention, officially called the MP
Shaala Gunvatta program (translated as the "MP School Quality Assurance" program), consisted
of three main components, summarized below and described in greater detail in Appendix B:

1. Developing a school rating scorecard: These were developed after extensive consultation
   and piloting. The school rating scorecard was based on structured indicators in seven domains:

       (a) Mentoring, which looks at whether there is a School Development Plan in place and
           whether there is a vision for school development;
       (b) Management, which assesses the use of financial and human resources in the school,
           morale and coordination of staff, and the effectiveness of administrative routines and
           procedures;
       (c) Teacher practice and pedagogy, which is based on detailed classroom observations
           in each grade within the school and focuses on teaching practices, teacher-student
           interactions and teacher subject knowledge;
       (d) Student support, focusing especially on availability of remedial education, support for
           students with special needs and on the absence of discrimination among students;
       (e) School Management Committee and interaction with parents, which focuses
           on the involvement of parents of students in planning of school activities as well as in
           sharing information about the academic progress of individual students;
       (f) Academic outcomes, based both on the distribution of scores based on the state-wide
           assessments (Pratibha Parv) as well as in-school testing;
       (g) Personal and Social Outcomes which assesses (based on class and school observations
           as well as interactions with students and staff), the attitudes, values, and relationships
           between the students and with teachers.

   Since the school rating was the foundation of the program, the CRC was teamed with
   an external evaluator (such as a retired headteacher) to ensure high-quality assessments.
   Schools were rated overall, and in each of the seven domains, which provided the basis for
   school-specific recommendations for improvement.10
   9
     For more details on OfStEd inspections and their impact on schools and students, see Hussain (2015)
  10
     The detailed assessment rubric intended to alleviate an important constraint for CRC effectiveness, namely
the lack of sufficient structure and training in how to conduct school inspections and how to address deficiencies
in school practice.




                                                        7
2. School Improvement Plans: The school assessments and ratings were then used to develop
   customized School Improvement Plans (SIPs). These were expected to lay out in detail the
   proposed improvements in school functioning, the concrete steps that would need to be taken
   to achieve the improvements and a deadline for the actions to be undertaken. These also
   mentioned the official(s) responsible for executing each specific task (e.g. the headteacher
   or other teachers) and for verifying that the task has been completed (e.g. the CRC or the
   School Management Committee (SMC)). Overall, the goal of the SIPs was to set schools with
   manageable improvement targets and goals, that they could aim to achieve in incremental
   steps over three-month periods.

3. Quarterly follow up visits by CRCs: These were meant to review the improvement
   made on each component of the School Improvement Plan (SIPs) The follow-up visits aimed
   to provide an external impetus to make progress towards the goals in the SIP, and set
   progressively more ambitious goals for subsequent quarters. This was an important component
   of the "theory of change" that aimed to motivate schools to deliver continuous improvement.

All assessments and School Improvement Plans (SIPs) were uploaded to a dedicated online
portal. These reports, with user-friendly visual aggregates, were available to view for any user
with requisite administrative access including head-teachers, assessors and higher officials at
cluster/block/state levels. This was intended to present relevant information for prioritization
in decision-making, and administrative follow-up.
Overall, the MPSQA program did not focus on one single component of governance (such as
inspections or incentives) because it recognized that the binding constraint for quality would
be likely to differ across schools. Given the considerable heterogeneity in school quality in the
state (which we present evidence of below), the premise of the intervention was to motivate head
teachers and teachers to focus on actions that are in their control that could alleviate constraints
to quality that they saw as being relevant to their school.


3     Study Design
3.1    Sampling and experiment design
GoMP conducted the first phase of program roll-out in 5 contiguous districts (out of a total of 51
in the state) that included the state capital (Bhopal) and 4 adjacent districts (Figure 1). These
districts had a combined population of  8 million in 2011 and 12,000 government schools, of
which GoMP aimed to treat 2000 schools.
We worked with GoMP to conduct an experimental evaluation of this program by randomizing
the assignment of schools to the program using a clustered design. Since the unit of project

                                                 8
implementation was the cluster, we randomized entire academic clusters to treatment and control
groups. We did this to minimize the possibility of spillovers between control and treatment
schools assigned to the same CRC.11 Randomization proceeded in two steps. First, we first drew
a representative sample of 153 clusters out of a total of 308, across 29 blocks in 5 districts as our
"study universe".12 Second, we randomized 51 of the 153 clusters into treatment status and 102
into control (stratified within administrative blocks). This resulted in a total of 1774 elementary
schools which were randomly assigned to treatment, and 3661 elementary schools (Grades 1­8)
assigned to the control group.
We did not collect independent baseline data before randomization, relying instead on detailed
administrative data (which includes test scores from an annual state-level standardized test).
Table 1 shows that pre-program characteristics observed in the administrative data are balanced
between the treatment and control groups. We also cannot reject equality of distributions of
school-level test scores from March 2012-13 administered in all elementary schools (see appendix
Figure C.1).13 The randomization was completed in August 2014. The government notified
treatment schools on 9th September, followed by the training of the school inspectors. School
inspections and evaluations were conducted primarily in late-September 2014.
Our study design aimed to improve the external validity and policy relevance of our results
by combining random assignment in a sample that is representative of a large population,
implementation at scale by government, and randomizing in large units (Al-Ubaydli et al., 2017;
Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017). Conducting experimental evaluations in near-representative
samples reduces the risk of site-selection bias (Allcott, 2015).14      Evaluating large-scale
implementation is relevant for policy because effect sizes have been shown to decline with size
of implementation (Vivalt, 2020). Finally, randomizing large units into treatment and control
  11
      Spillovers could, in principle, be positive (if CRCs applied the training under the intervention to control
schools) or negative (if CRCs diverted time and effort away from control to treatment schools) with the potential
to bias results from school-level randomization in an unknown direction.
   12
      We did this because the government was considering extending the program in the second year while the
study was underway. This design allowed them to do so in the non-study universe (the other 155 clusters) without
affecting the experiment validity in the study population and at no cost to study objectives or government targets.
While we use the English term "cluster" throughout the paper, these clusters are locally referred to as Jan Shiksha
Kendras or JSKs.
   13
      The existence of baseline administrative test-score data allowed us to conduct the experimental evaluation
without an independent baseline. As discussed in Muralidharan (2017), such an approach also ensured a prudent
use of research funds given the risk of either non-implementation or non-compliance with the RCT protocol by
the government. Given the scale of the implementation (which was much larger than the evaluation sample),
statistical power was higher in a design that used these resources to increase the sample size of schools that would
be tested at the end-line. This is what we did here, resulting in a large study sample of over 300 schools.
   14
      In the context of experimental evaluations of management interventions, only 25% of firms approached by
Bloom et al. (2013) chose to participate in the trial, even though the (expensive) consulting services were being
provided for free. Similarly the experiment conducted by Bruhn, Karlan, and Schoar (2018) was also in a sample
of firms that had expressed interest in the program. Thus, results in this universe of motivated firms may be
stronger than in the full population of firms.


                                                         9
status helps produce estimates that are inclusive of spillovers, which have been shown to be
salient for policy in several studies (see, e.g., Cunha, De Giorgi, and Jayachandran (2019), and
Muralidharan, Niehaus, and Sukhtankar (2020)).
This phase of program implementation also included secondary schools (N=116) in the clusters
that were randomized into treatment; secondary schools in control clusters were untreated
(N=273). Secondary schools were not, however, the focus of the program: they were not part of
the initial piloting, nor were they included in later scale-ups in the state or the national policy.
In this paper, therefore, we will only focus on results from primary and middle schools. We
did, however, collect one round of process monitoring data on secondary schools and matched
schools to administrative data on secondary school (Grade 10) exams. For completeness, all
results from secondary school are presented in Appendix C.2. We find no significant impact on
either monitoring, teaching practices, or student test scores in secondary schools as well.

3.2     Data
We use both administrative data and extensive primary data on both learning and school
processes. We collected primary data in a subset of 302 elementary schools, across the 153 study
clusters. Schools were selected using simple random sampling in each cluster.15 Specifically, we
conducted three rounds of data collection on intermediate outcomes related to teacher absence
and school functioning between September 2015 and February 2016 and conducted independent
measurement of student achievement in March 2016. The main data sources are summarized
below, with greater detail presented in Appendix D.

3.2.1    Student achievement

We use both administrative and independently-collected data on student achievement to evaluate
program impacts. Administrative test score data in primary/middle schools come from the
Pratibha Parv annual assessments which are administered to all students in Grades 1-8 in the
public schooling system. These are available to us as school-level aggregates for all schools.
Student-level data from these tests is not routinely digitized and is only recorded in physical
registers maintained in schools. We transcribed student-level test-score data from the assessments
in 2014-15 and 2015-16 in the sub-sample of schools where we collected independent data.
In primary and middle schools, we conducted independent tests in mathematics and Hindi
(the primary language of instruction) in February 2016, 18 months after the program was
launched in treated clusters. These tests were designed to capture a wide range of variation
in student achievement and will serve as our primary outcome of interest. We privileged
  15
     We selected two schools each in 149 clusters. In the remaining 4 clusters, all in one district, we could only
sample one school each due to misclassification in the administrative dataset being used as the sampling frame.


                                                       10
our independently-administered tests as core outcome measures to avoid the risk of test score
manipulation and to ensure that our outcomes captured a broad range of skills.16


3.2.2    Digital records of school assessments

We obtained all the detailed scores (for each domain, and overall) from the school assessments by
external inspectors and the CRC (for the 93% of schools in the treatment group where external
assessments were conducted). We use this data to summarize the findings of these assessments,
and to assess their quality.

3.2.3    School-level accountability and governance

Our primary metric for school level governance is teacher absence. This was collected over a
set of three visits in each elementary school in our primary data collection subsample. Teacher
absence is defined as being physically not present in school at the time of the visit. School visits
were unannounced and staggered through the workday and all teachers are deemed to be absent
if a school is found closed within working hours.
We also measured the extent and quality of school supervision. In interviews with headteachers
and teachers, enumerators collected details of the extent of monitoring by CRCs and block-level
officials, of the functioning of School Management Committees (SMCs) and whether a range
of potential monitors (Block/cluster level officials, headmasters, parents/SMC members) had
visited classrooms. In addition to establishing frequency of the visits, we also collected data on
the content of these visits both through teacher reports and by noting down the comments made
by cluster/block-level officials on physical inspection registers maintained in schools.

3.2.4    Classroom pedagogy

In two grades per elementary school in our subsample, enumerators observed one classroom
period of teaching in Hindi and Mathematics. They collected information on the time-use of the
teacher, whether they were using various instruction materials and/or changing other elements
of classroom practice. For a (randomly-selected) subset of students present on the day, they
also examined their homework notebooks to see if it had been checked by teachers and in what
detail. We collected this as a cumulative measure of past teacher effort, which is less subject to
Hawthorne effects than direct observation of pedagogy by surveyors.
  16
     Both concerns are important in our setting. Manipulation of official test scores in this setting is high (Singh,
2020) and, since the program encourages student achievement, such manipulation could plausibly differ across
treatment and control groups. A broad measure of learning is important because, in settings with substantial
mismatch between curriculum and student preparation, even large program effects may not be evident in school
exams which only focus on grade-specific syllabi (Muralidharan, Singh, and Ganimian, 2019).




                                                         11
3.3      Estimating equation
We estimate Intent-to-treat (ITT) effects using the following specification:


                                 Yis =  + 1 .T reatments + 2 .Xs +           is                              (1)

where Yis is the outcome for unit i (at the student/teacher/school level) in school s and
T reatments is a dummy variable for being assigned to treatment. Xs refers to pre-treatment
controls, measured at the school level: we control for stratification (block) fixed effects and, when
estimating treatment effects on student achievement, we additionally control for school-level
lagged achievement in state-level standardized tests (we did not collect independent baseline
data).17 Standard errors will be clustered at the level of randomization, i.e. the academic
cluster.

4        Results
4.1      Implementation and informativeness of school assessments
We focus first on the diagnostic assessments of school quality. These make up the essential first
step for this intervention but may be compromised by non-implementation, poor quality and
uninformativeness, or collusion between school staff and inspectors. The diagnostic assessments
rate schools in each of seven domains as being in one of four categories: "Above Standards",
"Meets standards", "Close to Standards", and "Below standards". The assessment also provides a
summary evaluation of each school on the same scale.
Table 2 presents the distribution of these ratings for all schools in our sample where the program
was implemented. We note three key points. First, ratings are available for 1643 schools (93%)
out of 1776 elementary schools assigned to treatment, indicating widespread implementation.
Second, there is substantial variation across schools and across indicators in the ratings in whether
schools are reported as meeting standards or not. Third, only a small minority of schools (9%)
was assessed as performing at expected standards overall. 74% of schools were judged to be
in the lowest possible category ("Below standards") in teaching and learning. The low absolute
value of ratings suggests a lack of collusion between raters and school staff.
We evaluate the quality of these assessments by testing whether the variation in school ratings is
able to meaningfully predict future outcomes, after controlling for prior test scores.18 We consider
    17
      These baseline scores are balanced across groups, both on average and across the distribution, and are used
here for improving precision. Singh (2020) shows, using an independent audit, that administrative test scores in
this setting retain ordinal information that is positive correlated over time, even though levels are overstated.
   18
      Test scores serve as the default summary statistic for categorizing school performance and the additional
effort in conducting comprehensive school assessments would only be justified if they provide useful additional
information. Note that by construction, this exercise is limited to the treatment schools who had an assessment
and is only meant to assess the quality of the external assessments and not measure treatment effects.


                                                       12
two measures of future performance (i) test scores on administrative exams in the 2014-15 school
year (which were held after the assessments were conducted) and (ii) teacher absence, which we
collect independently in unannounced visits but is not otherwise visible in the system overall.
Table 3 presents these results, and we see that even conditional on past test scores, schools with
higher assessed grades ("Close to Standards" or "Meets standards") have higher future test scores
than schools in the base category ("Below standards"). The difference between the bottom group
and the top group ("Meets standards") is large at about one-quarter of a standard deviation
and statistically significant. In our study sample, we further see that the rating that treatment
schools receive is informative of teacher absence measured in the next academic year after the
assessment. These results suggest that the design of the school ratings, done by GoMP and
Ark together, was sound and captured useful variation in school quality (measured by expected
future performance rather than just past performance). The variation in ratings across schools
also suggests that the program approach of seeking to provide customised feedback (rather than
a uniform recommendation for all schools) had conceptual merit.
These assessments were followed by the creation of the School Improvement Plans and we verified
that these had been uploaded to the online portal for all schools. The recommendations in the
School Improvement Plans differed (naturally) across schools but were comprehensive in covering
different aspects of the school assessments.19 The typical length of a SIP was 3-4 pages of bullet
points, with each action attached to a person responsible within the school for implementation
(usually the head-teacher, but occasionally other teachers or the SMC) and the person responsible
for follow-up verification that the action had been implemented (usually the CRC).

4.2     Changes in governance and pedagogy
We next assess the extent to which the school assessments, and the resulting school improvement
plans also helped to improve measures of school governance and classroom pedagogy.

4.2.1    Monitoring by officials and School Management Committees

We find no evidence of improvements in monitoring, by either higher officials at the cluster
and block levels or by School Management Committees (SMCs). This result is seen in both
administrative data on the full sample of schools, and in the independent data we collected
in the evaluation subsample of 302 schools (Table 4). We find no impact on the frequency of
monitoring visits by officials in either administrative or survey data. In the survey data, we
also find no evidence that the inspectors spent any more time in the schools, indicating that
  19
    Concrete recommendations could be, for instance, to ensure that students rated in the bottom two grades
in the state standardized exams are provided supplementary remedial instruction, to organize staff meetings to
review school progress or to host meetings with the parents of all students to increase community engagement.



                                                     13
the quality of monitoring also did not change. All schools report having an SMC, but we see
little evidence of them having been more active or being seen to be more effective in treatment
schools. We also did not see any evidence of a qualitative difference across treatment and control
schools in the content of officially-recorded feedback in inspection registers maintained at the
school level. Thus, by all available measures, we do not see any evidence of meaningful follow-up
of the school ratings that would be expected to lead to a change in governance.

4.2.2   Teacher absence, classroom practice and student attendance

In Table 5, we first document that teacher absence is high (35%) in our setting. However,
consistent with the null effect on improving accountability, we find that the intervention had no
impact on teacher absence.
It is still possible that the intervention eased information constraints faced by teachers by
providing diagnostic feedback to teachers directly, and helping them plan concrete actions. This
could, in principle, have improved pedagogical practices. However, we find little evidence of
change in pedagogical practices. Teachers in treatment schools do not appear to be more likely
to use textbooks or workbooks, praise students or check student homework. They also do not
seem to spend their time in class, during a direct observation, very differently: while there is
some suggestive evidence that they substitute some time from lecturing to small group work, the
magnitude of this change is very small (2% of a classroom period).

4.3     Changes in learning outcomes
Consistent with the lack of evidence of the intervention having changed any practices within the
schools, we find no impact on student test scores in treatment schools (Table 6). This is evident
using student-level data, both from our independently-administered tests in Math and Hindi
(Cols 1-2) and in the administrative tests across all core subjects (Cols 3-7), and in school-level
aggregated test scores for the full study population (Cols 8-9). Although we have only school-level
aggregate test scores for the full sample, the size of the study population ensures that we are
sufficiently powered to reject even modestly-positive treatment effects for most assessments. Fig
2 further compares the full distribution of student-level test scores across the treatment and
control groups: the distributions overlap near-perfectly, and treatment effects are insignificant
at almost every quintile (Table C.1).
Overall, our experimental evaluation of Phase I of the MP School Quality Assurance (MPSQA)
program finds that the program was successful in conducting external school assessments, which
were not subverted by collusion and captured meaningful variation. However, these ratings
and the subsequent creation of School Improvement Plans did not translate into any observable
change in practice or student learning outcomes.

                                                14
5        Evaluating a further scale-up
As planned by GoMP, the Phase-I implementation of the MPSQA program was followed by
a scale-up to 25,000 schools, across the state. Concurrently, the national government also
strongly encouraged the development of such a school management program. This latter variant
of the program, named Shaala Siddhi (roughly translated as "school success"), was designed for
the full country by India's apex education policy institute (the National Institute of Education
Policy and Administration or NIEPA). The program design was based on inputs from several
states, including Madhya Pradesh, whose MPSQA program was considered to be a forerunner
for the national program. The Shaala Siddhi program is now India's flagship school management
program and has been scaled up to over 600,000 schools.20 The Phase-II expansion of the school
management program in MP was conducted as part of this nationwide program.
The national program is very similar in design and ambition to the original MPSQA program,
differing in two main details. First, instead of using an external assessment for the initial rating,
the national program required schools to complete the rating exercise themselves through a
self-evaluation against the school ratings guidelines. These self-evaluations were meant to be
verified by external assessors, but the aim was to shift emphasis from an inspection-focused
system of school ratings to a reflective process of school improvement, where the schools were
directly given responsibility for self-diagnosis and suggesting improvements. Second, the School
Improvement Plan (SIP) format was made much more detailed, and required schools to list out
an even more granular set of steps that they would take to improve. Appendix E provides an
example of an SIP from this phase to illustrate the level of detail in an SIP.
In addition to the two changes above, GoMP also attempted to respond to our presenting
findings that MPSQA had no impact on either teacher behaviors or student outcomes. While
the Phase 2 expansion to 25,000 schools followed the national guidelines, the GoMP trainings
on the program emphasized that schools should focus on three areas in executing their SIP : (i)
teaching and learning, (ii) student learning outcomes, and (iii) developing a close collaboration
with parents and the community. This change in emphasis was meant to communicate a need
to move away from administrative compliance towards student outcomes. However, the basic
structure of the program was unchanged. In particular, there was neither any independent
measurement of learning nor any high-stakes consequences based on learning outcomes.
For the scale up (which commenced in Fall 2016), GoMP aimed to (a) purposively-target
the intervention to schools they identified as high-priority and (b) cover all academic clusters
(N=3181) in the state, including 8 schools in each cluster (JSK). While our primary focus in
paper is the experimental evaluation of MPSQA, we supplement this with a non-experimental
    20
    The official program website reports, as of Sept 19, 2020, that 604,824 schools had undertaken self-evaluations
in 2016-18, 632,034 schools in 2018-19, and 407,152 schools in 2019-20.


                                                        15
evaluation of the Phase-2 expansion. This allows us to present estimates of program impact
over a 4-year period of iteration and scale-up, and offer more conclusive evidence on program
impact. In addition to the 5 districts in the original evaluation, we augmented the study sample
to include tribal blocks from 5 more districts in a different region of the state (Figure 1).21
Given the purposive selection of schools for this expansion, our evaluation strategy uses a
matched-pair design which proceeds in four steps. First, we randomly selected 100 academic
clusters (10 in each district). Second, we randomly sampled two untreated schools, from the
population of all schools not already assigned to the program by the government, to serve as
comparison schools. Third, we generated a propensity score into treatment for the full set of
schools in these clusters based on pre-program administrative data. Finally, we matched one
treatment school in each cluster to one of the two potential comparison schools in the same
academic cluster based on the minimum distance in propensity scores.22
The strategy above gives us 100 matched pairs, each with a treated and a comparison school
within the same cluster. Importantly, these pairs were identified before collecting data on student
learning outcomes to assess program impact. Overall, schools selected by GoMP for Phase-2 of
the program were considerably better off on observable characteristics than non-program schools
(Table 7, Panel A, columns 1-3). This reflected a policy of prioritizing larger schools for the
program. Thus, program schools were more likely to be middle schools, and had larger enrollment,
more teachers, better facilities, and higher baseline test scores. However, in our matched-pair
sample, treatment and comparison schools are similar on most observables (columns 5-7).23
The key point for the credibility of our identification strategy is that there is no difference in
pre-program school-level test scores on the annual state-wide tests (Pratibha Parv) conducted in
every school and every grade (Panel B, columns 5-7). In constructing our matched-pair sample,
we verified that there was no difference in these test scores in any of the five years before the
program was implemented, and also find no evidence of differential trends in test scores across
the treated and comparison schools over these five years.
After identifying this matched sample and verifying balance on levels and trends in prior test
scores, we collected independent data on learning outcomes in February 2018 (18 months after
the program was notified in treated schools, and 15 months after the self-assessments and
  21
      Since the initial 5 districts were adjacent to the state capital, we aimed to further improve external
validity by including locations (tribal areas) where the population was more disadvantaged, and where program
implementation may be more challenging.
   22
      We had hoped to also conduct an experimental evaluation of the Phase-2 scale up and had also randomly
sampled two further schools in each academic cluster that were to be added to the full program roll-out by the
government. Unfortunately, GoMP was not able to dedicate resources to treating these additional schools over
and above the 25,000 school roll-out. This is why our evaluation strategy uses the randomly-selected control
schools and then matches them to the most similar treatment school in the same cluster.
   23
      The only exception is that treated schools are still more likely to be middle schools. This was unavoidable
since the treated universe had a much larger fraction of middle schools.


                                                       16
school improvement plans were prepared). We used very similar test instruments and procedures
as the first experimental evaluation. In addition to administrative data on school-level lagged
test scores, we also collected student-level data on these scores from the previous school year
(2016-17), to include as controls for estimating program impact.
As before, we estimate ITT effects, by regressing student test scores in February 2018 on the
treatment status of their school. Our estimating equation is:


                             Yigsp = g + p + 1 .T reatments + 2 .Xis +             is                         (2)

where Yigsp is the test score of student i; g , s and p index grade, school and cluster respectively.
We include fixed effects for grade (g ) to account for the imbalance in the number of middle
schools, and for the academic cluster (p ), which is the stratum within which the matching was
done. T reatment is an indicator whether a school was selected for the program, and Xis is a
control for lagged test scores. We report results from three regression specifications: (a) with no
controls for lagged scores, (b) controlling for lagged achievement at the school level from 2015-16,
i.e. the year before the program assignment and, (c) controlling for individual-level student test
scores in the state standardized tests in 2016-17, which is done soon after program notification
and training.24 Standard errors are clustered at the academic cluster level. We present results
separately for mathematics and Hindi, the two subjects assessed in our independent tests in 2018.
We present estimates on program impact in Table 8. Regardless of specification, we find no
evidence of the program having improved student outcomes. Point estimates of program impact
are close to zero when we incorporate individual-level controls for baseline achievement (cols.
3 and 6). Given the positive (purposive) selection of schools into the program, our preferred
specifications are those which control for lagged achievement, since these may better control for
any bias that remains even after the matching procedure. Estimates are sufficiently precise to
rule out modest effects regardless of specification.


6        Understanding the reasons for program failure
On paper, the program we evaluate had several promising features that should have made it
likely to succeed. It had a coherent program design that reflected both management theory and
inputs from several global experts, substantial buy-in with both the political and bureaucratic
leadership, and was the flagship education reform in the state. Yet, we find that it had no impact
on either the functioning of schools or student achievement (in either Phase-I or the scaled up
Phase-II). We now turn to understanding reasons for program failure.
    24
    By the time of the endline data collection, which is when we collected student-level administrative test score
data, it was not possible to get registers from the assessment in 2015-16.


                                                       17
To better understand how the program was implemented and perceived at the field level, we
collected extensive qualitative data through semi-structured open-ended interviews of school
staff and education officials in 6 districts during the Phase-II scale up. In each of the 6
districts, we randomly sampled three schools: one from the universe of Shaala Siddhi schools,
one more from the list of "champion schools" which were designated by the government as
effective implementers of the program, and one control school (from our matched-pair sample)
to understand business-as-usual constraints to school effectiveness, and the extent to which the
intervention alleviated these. In each district, we also randomly sampled one academic cluster
(JSK) office and one Block Education Office, where we interviewed relevant education officials
who are responsible for implementing the program. We highlight key insights below.25

6.1     How did the program actually get implemented?
Our interviews confirm the implementation of the initial parts of the program. In most cases,
teachers knew about the program, could summarize its core objectives and recalled the process
of creating self-evaluation reports and uploading school improvement plans.
They do not, however, see it as leading up to action related to greater accountability or better
pedagogy. Rather, they primarily recall the program as a source of paperwork (and logistics
associated with uploading reports). As summarized by one respondent:

           "There is a lot of documentation work. We have to make a work plan and then
       upload it, get it printed. There is so much paper work that by the time some teachers
       figured that out they had forgotten what was Shaala Siddhi itself. I do all the
       documentation work at home because I have no time in the school."
       (Headteacher, Champion School)

When asked to assess what the effect of the program was, multiple respondents spoke about
any momentum in the program having dissipated after the preparation of work plans. No
teacher or headteacher in a Shaala Siddhi program school mentioned any change in accountability
relationships, including in monitoring or support by the CRC, after the school evaluations. This
assessment of ineffectiveness is reported by school staff and even some cluster officials.

          For one year we did everything we were asked to. After that nobody asked us
       to do anything in the program. So we did not follow up on that at all. I don't
       remember what I did in the program two years ago. Those files aren't kept properly
  25
    To avoid cherry-picking cases, we interviewed a random representative sample of respondents. However, since
the aim of this section is to complement our quantitative evaluation as opposed to writing a dedicated qualitative
paper, we do not formally code all the responses from the interview transcripts. Rather, we present what we
consider to be the key insights from our reading of all the transcripts.


                                                       18
      either. Nothing has happened in the last two years at all. They gave a training once
      and then forgot about it. There should be some follow up every couple of months.
      (Teacher, Shaala Siddhi School )

          The program initially created a lot of excitement and had that energy continued,
      the program would have been succesful. There were no additional funds to prepare
      the files either. Yet the schools had prepared the files. Also, in the last four months
      nothing has happened in Shaala Siddhi. There hasn't been much of an effect of
      Shaala Siddhi. Some 3-4 teachers have been involved in this and they sat and made
      all the files. During this time, the classes were left unattended and the teaching in
      the classroom suffered. So there has been no effect of the program.
      (Cluster Academic Coordinator )

In terms of regular functioning, schools and teachers repeatedly mention weaknesses in
pedagogical support and accountability in schools. However, we find no instances of teachers
reporting that this changed as a result of Shaala Siddhi. As such, even if the quality of the
assessment reports was good, the main problem it identified (of weakness in teaching and learning
as seen in Table 2) was already well known to teachers, and there was no follow-up to improve
either governance or pedagogy.
In practice, the main consequence of Shaala Siddhi perceived on the ground was the increased
paperwork required to fill in the school assessments and improvement plans. With no impetus
for continuous improvement, it is unsurprising that the program did not change either teaching
practice or learning outcomes. In this vein, our results reinforce the findings of Berry et al. (2020)
and Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2010) who find that using low-stakes assessments aimed
at producing continuous improvement in teaching had no impact on student learning outcomes.

6.2    Why did the program fail (but yet be perceived as successful)?
The in-depth interviews confirm our main results that, despite considerable effort having gone
into the assessments and the creation of school improvement plans, this did not translate into
changes in school practice or student learning outcomes. In particular, the key place where the
theory of change appears to have broken down is at the point of conducting follow-ups to support
and monitor schools in achieving the goals outlined in their school improvement plans.
Yet, the finding that a program may have failed due to implementation weaknesses is not a
new one, and has been documented in several developing country settings. However, what is
noteworthy in our setting is that the program was perceived as successful by senior officials and
continues to be scaled up. The interviews highlight three broad reasons for program failure, and
one key (related) reason for the divergence between perception and reality.

                                                 19
The first reason for failure was the disconnect between the objectives of the program and how
it was actually perceived by those implementing it. The theory-of-change prioritized not just
assessment, but also further support and self-improvement, with a particular focus on making
changes that were within the schools' own control. In practice, however, the program was reduced
to an exercise in record-keeping and the focus was on completing paperwork and submitting
assessment reports and improvement plans as opposed to doing anything about these.
The second, and related, reason was a disconnect between the role that the program attached to
education officials and their actual role as perceived by other agents in the system. Whereas the
intervention was premised on CRCs playing a role of monitoring, accountability and coaching for
schools, in practice they are seen mainly as conduits for communication, especially of paperwork,
from schools to the bureaucracy.26 Similar evidence from other states is presented in Aiyar
and Bhattacharya (2016), who dub this phenomenon as the "post office state" where lower-level
officials are primarily used for transmitting "orders downwards" and "data upwards".
The CRCs also lack the administrative ability to hold schools to account effectively. In contrast,
block-level officials have more administrative tools to promote accountability at their disposal.
But they were too dispersed to be effective (an average block includes 300-400 schools), especially
given competing demands on their limited time. Thus, program failure was also driven in part
by the lack of investment in sufficient managerial staff and capacity in the system to perform
the additional functions that the program was premised on. Our qualitative and quantitative
findings thus provide a direct example of a "flailing state" that can design sophisticated programs
on paper, but lacks the capacity to implement them effectively (Pritchett, 2009).
The final reason relates to the field-level consequences of frequent changes in education policy
and programmatic priorities (often due to transfers of senior officials). This leads to a (real
and perceived) lack of coherence across initiatives, and a corresponding lack of engagement
by implementing staff. Respondents perceived, based on experience, that government policies
are highly transient, are often designed without considering implementation constraints, and
frequently abandoned or altered.27 As a result, they do not have any lasting effects.

          So firstly, government should run all the policies for a longer time for them to
       have a real effect. [...] If they work on one project consistently then over a period
  26
      As summarized by one of our respondents: "We get no support from the Jan Shikshak. Their job is mainly
delivering letters and some academic work. They don't even come to deliver the letters and call us to the office;
forget about academic work. I have never seen any cluster principal come to the school. If they need any teacher
from us then they call us and take them. But they never help us with anything."
   27
      Although the program was developed and iterated over 5 years, the three phases of program implementation
happened mostly in different samples. Nearly all schools in the 25,000 school scale-up would have only
experienced the program once, as a short burst of activity focused on completing the self-assessments after which
there were no follow-ups. Combined with a general proliferation of short-lived reform initiatives in education,
this view is perhaps unsurprising.


                                                       20
      of time they will achieve that. By the time the program starts achieving something
      they switch to something else. They think that the children aren't learning enough,
      education quality is falling and change the program. But if quality is the goal of the
      program, then it should be looked at in the long run. [. . . ] The government is patting
      us on the back through their policies and we show them achievement on paper by
      reporting so. On paper, all policies are a success. (Teacher, Shaala Siddhi School )

The discussion above also sheds light on the reasons for divergence between the perceived and
actual success of the program. In particular, the qualitative interviews highlight that bureaucratic
incentives are geared more towards the appearance of activity rather than actual impact. Thus,
the successful completion of school assessments and uploading of school improvement plans at
scale was the main aspect of the program that was being monitored. On these metrics, the
program was a success.
These features of government implementation extend broadly beyond education. As summarized
in a classic ethnographic study of the Indian state (Gupta, 2012, p. 48, emphasis added):

         What stands out here are higher-level officials in the administrative hierarchy
      making decisions about programs and targets that bear little relevance to realities
      on the ground; also present, in turn, are subordinates faithfully executing programs
      on paper but caring little for how well they are implemented. Targets are indeed met,
      but the ultimate goals of the programs go unfulfilled.
High-level officials are likely to be aware of these constraints. Despite this, such reforms continue
to be designed and implemented widely, and proclaimed as successes. Why might this be the case?
One compelling explanation is the idea of "institutional isomorphism" pioneered by DiMaggio
and Powell (1983) and expanded to developing country bureaucracies by Andrews, Woolcock,
and Pritchett (2017). Several direct quotes from DiMaggio and Powell (1983) apply well to our
setting. For instance, they note that:


          "Organizations tend to model themselves after similar organisations in their field
      that they perceive to be more legitimate or successful," (p. 152); "these institutional
      isomorphic processes can be expected to proceed [even] in the absence of evidence
      that they increase organisational efficiency," (p.153); and that such mimicry has "a
      ritual aspect; [organizations] adopt these "innovations" to enhance their legitimacy,
      to demonstrate they are at least trying to improve." (p. 151)


The idea of institutional isomorphism provides an organizational sociology explanation for the
persistence of ineffective policies. This phenomenon is also consistent with some models of

                                                 21
political incentives. For instance, Majumdar and Mukand (2004) provide a formal model where
policymakers may be rewarded for initiating new policies, but have incentives to persist with
policies that turn out to be ineffective because changing track may signal low competence, and
generate reputational costs. These political incentives may also explain the pressures on officials
to ensure that programs are seen to be effective regardless of their actual impact.
Thus, a key contribution of our well-identified evaluation(s) is to demonstrate the distinction
between a program "meeting targets" and appearing successful on paper, and actually improving
outcomes of interest. Doing so is especially important since the program has been scaled up to
over 600,000 schools in India alone, and the essential features of the program are similar to other
such school management initiatives around the world (as shown in Appendix A).


7        Discussion and Conclusion
This paper evaluates a comprehensive and ambitious program to improve school management
in the public sector in multiple implementations at increasing orders of scale over a four-year
period. The program was (and continues to be) a flagship national reform. It was designed
with detailed national and international technical assistance, commanded substantial support in
the higher levels of the bureaucracy, and exemplifies global best practice in a number of areas.
Yet, we find no evidence that it improved either school functioning or student outcomes. Rather
than starting a reflective process of self-improvement, as envisaged by the program design, the
program was in practice, reduced to the demonstration of administrative compliance with the
process of conducting school assessments and creating school improvement plans.
These results are directly relevant for the continuing national scale-up of this particular program,
which at full scale would incur the costs of conducting assessments and improvement plans in
1.6 million schools annually. We conservatively estimate that the annual cost of this exercise
is over 35,000 teacher-years of time and over USD 235 million.28 Similar reforms are common
in education systems around the world, including other settings with weak governance.29 Our
    28
     Based on our field interviews, we estimate that the program requires 5 days of teacher time per school just
for the training, filling out of the assessments, creating the school improvement plans and uploading them, even if
no further action is taken. At the projected scale of 1.6 million schools, this translates into a total time cost of 8
million days, and 36,363 years (at 220 days/year). Using an average teacher salary cost of INR 40,000 per month
(545 US dollars) , this translates into an estimated 237 million USD per year. This estimate is conservative: it
does not account for the cost of pensions or benefits, or adjust for well-documented teacher absence. It also does
not include the time and attention cost of senior officials, and district and block level staff.
  29
     See, for instance, the description of the Whole School Evaluation program in South Africa described in Levy
et al. (2018): the program was based on the UK's Ofsted evaluations and, as in our setting, was followed by the
Integrated Quality Management System (IQMS) focused on a first step of self-evaluation by teachers but without
any external testing of students or any formal accountability. See Appendix A for a list of projects with similar
components in various countries, all intended to improve school management.




                                                         22
results suggest that such effort is unlikely to translate into any meaningful changes in school
practices or, eventually, student achievement.
Our results are likely to be relevant for understanding more than just the failure of a particular
education policy. Management quality in the public sector has been shown to be systematically
poorer than that in the private sector (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2010), suggesting that returns
to improving it may be especially high in the public sector. Yet, while management consulting
interventions have been successful in private-sector firms that demonstrated interest in receiving
the programs (Bloom et al., 2013; Bruhn, Karlan, and Schoar, 2018), our results suggest that
doing so in the public sector is much more challenging. Our qualitative documentation of reasons
for failure highlight the constraint posed by weak bureaucratic incentives, which are more likely
to reward paperwork and the appearance of activity, rather than improved outcomes.
We cannot speak directly to what features would have led the reform to succeed. As is well
known, complex projects ­ such as improving the functioning of government departments at scale
­ require several components to be executed successfully (Kremer, 1993). Thus, a failed reform
could reflect a failure of one or more components, which cannot be econometrically identified.
Yet, reflecting on our results in conjunction with evidence from other successful attempts at
improving the quality of public service delivery in developing countries, we posit that there are
three key factors in programs that have successfully improved public service delivery at scale.
The first, is better incentives for improving either effort or outcomes. A large body of evidence
has documented the positive effects of well-designed interventions to improve incentives of
public-sector workers ranging from teachers (Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011; Mbiti et al.,
2019; Leaver et al., forthcoming) to tax collectors (Khan, Khwaja, and Olken, 2016, 2019) and
policemen (Banerjee et al., forthcoming).30 Conversely, interventions that focus primarily on
inputs have had much less success, including expensive reforms such as unconditional increases
in teacher pay (De Ree et al., 2018) as well as several school grant programs (Glewwe and
Muralidharan, 2016). The failure of the program we study adds to the evidence base on what
works to improve public service delivery at scale, and reinforces the difficulty of improving
outcomes without changing the incentives of front-line staff and supervisors to do so. In
particular, it is important to note that implementation quality is endogenous to the incentives
of agents to implement the program. Thus, the extent to which the program was only partially
implemented may itself reflect the nature of bureaucratic incentives to successfully implement
the program components that were monitored, while not doing so for those that were not.
  30
     As shown by Khan, Khwaja, and Olken (2019) and Banerjee et al. (forthcoming), incentives need not be
restricted to financial rewards, but can also include options that are more feasible in civil-service settings such as
providing more attractive job postings to higher-performing personnel.




                                                         23
A second, related but distinct, factor that may help is better visibility on outcomes at
the beneficiary level. Even without formal incentives, senior officials do monitor program
performance. The problem is that they can only do so based on what they observe. It is
noteworthy that the program we studied worked till the point where outcomes were visible to
senior officials (school assessments were completed, and school improvement plans uploaded),
but stopped working at the point where outcomes were no longer easily visible (classroom
effort, and learning outcomes). One common pattern in recent interventions that have improved
service delivery at scale is that senior officials were able to access independent data on program
performance at the beneficiary level, and monitor lower-level supervisors on these metrics.31
Thus, investing in better measurement and integrity of outcome data may yield high public
returns by enabling better monitoring of service delivery (Singh, 2020).
A third factor is staffing. This program, like many others in India, added responsibilities to a
supervisory bureaucracy that is already over-burdened and understaffed relative to their expected
workload (Kapur, 2020; Dasgupta and Kapur, 2020). The importance of dedicated program staff
is illustrated by Dunsch et al. (2017) who report that a management intervention with intensive
follow-up and support facilitated by staff from an external agency, was able to improve practices
in healthcare centres in Nigeria. However, a lighter-touch intervention which provided only
information and diagnostic feedback did not. Thus, it is possible that the program we study
may have been more effective if it had augmented staff capacity to conduct the follow-up visits
to schools to monitor progress against the goals laid out in the School Improvement Plans.32
Of course, while the discussion above reflects our views based on evidence to date, these factors
are neither necessary nor sufficient for successfully improving service delivery at scale. Improving
state capacity for service delivery is an active area of ongoing research and several promising new
approaches are being designed and tested with evidence of positive impacts from approaches
such as increasing autonomy for front-line staff (Bandiera et al., 2020) and improving training
(Azulai et al., 2020; Banerjee et al., forthcoming). There may also be complementarities across
components of bureaucratic effectiveness such as staffing, training, autonomy, measurement and
monitoring, and incentives/accountability. These are important areas for future research.
  31
     For instance Muralidharan, Niehaus, and Sukhtankar (2016) show large improvements in social welfare
payments from a reform that digitized payments and made data on payment delays visible to senior officials.
These delays could then be monitored on a regular basis. In a related vein, Muralidharan et al. (forthcoming)
and Callen et al. (2020) show that technologies like call-centres and customer-focused apps providing real-time
data, which allow senior officials to crowd-source information from final beneficiaries, may significantly increase
monitoring and improve service delivery even in the absence of formal incentives.
  32
     This is consistent with qualitative evidence that successful at-scale reforms in India have featured the creation
of program-specific staff capacity for implementation. For example, the success in consistently providing cooked
school meals in Indian public schools, even though many other routine functions fail, may be due to the hiring of
dedicated staff for cooking and delivering meals (Chakraborty and Jayaraman, 2019; Singh, Park, and Dercon,
2014). Similarly, the successful biometric smartcards payment program studied by Muralidharan, Niehaus, and
Sukhtankar (2016) augmented staffing by deploying additional locally-hired staff to make payments in villages.


                                                         24
More generally, governments and donors are constantly designing and deploying programs to
improve service delivery and development outcomes, and senior officials as well as staff often
exert considerable good-faith efforts in doing so. These programs, which are often funded by
donors and designed by experts and consultants, are typically judged based on the extent to
which the program design reflects (perceived) international "best practices", whether it was done
in partnership with government, and how many beneficiaries it "reached".
By all of these metrics, the program studied here was a resounding success and the continued
scale up reflects this official belief. Yet, as we demonstrate, no eventual outcomes changed. Thus,
a broader lesson from our study and results is to highlight the importance of disciplining such
initiatives with credible evaluations based on their impacts on ultimate outcomes of interest.
Doing so may help improve the effectiveness of billions of dollars of government and donor aid
expenditure on service delivery in developing countries.


References
Abadie, Alberto. 2020. "Statistical Nonsignificance in Empirical Economics." American Economic
 Review: Insights 2 (2):193­208. 1

Aiyar, Yamini and Shrayana Bhattacharya. 2016. "The post office paradox." Economic & Political
  Weekly 51 (11):61. 6.2

Aiyar, Yamini, Ambrish A Dongre, and Vincy Davis. 2015. "Education Reforms, Bureaucracy
  and the Puzzles of Implementation: A Case Study from Bihar." Bureaucracy and the Puzzles
  of Implementation: A Case Study from Bihar (September 1, 2015) . 1

Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John A. List, Danielle LoRe, and Dana Suskind. 2017. "Scaling for
  Economists: Lessons from the Non-Adherence Problem in the Medical Literature." Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 31 (4):125­44. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/
  jep.31.4.125. 3.1

Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John A List, and Dana L Suskind. 2017. "What can we learn from
  experiments? Understanding the threats to the scalability of experimental results." American
  Economic Review 107 (5):282­86. 1

Allcott, Hunt. 2015. "Site selection bias in program evaluation." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130 (3):1117­1165. 3.1

Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, Selcuk Ozyurt, and Niharika Singh. 2020. "Upping
 the ante: the equilibrium effects of unconditional grants to private schools." The American
 Economic Review . 2

Andrews, Matt, Michael Woolcock, and Lant Pritchett. 2017. Building state capability: Evidence,
 analysis, action. Oxford University Press. 6.2


                                                25
Atkin, David, Azam Chaudhry, Shamyla Chaudry, Amit K Khandelwal, and Eric Verhoogen.
  2017. "Organizational barriers to technology adoption: Evidence from soccer-ball producers in
  Pakistan." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3):1101­1164. 3

Azulai, Michel, Imran Rasul, Daniel Rogger, and Martin Williams. 2020. "Can training improve
  organizational culture? Experimental evidence from Ghana's civil service." Tech. rep.,
  University College London. 7

Bandiera, Oriana, Michael Carlos Best, Adnan Qadir Khan, and Andrea Prat. 2020. "The
  Allocation of Authority in Organizations: A Field Experiment with Bureaucrats." Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 7

Banerjee, Abhijit, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh.
  forthcoming. "Improving Police Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on
  Incentives, Managerial Autonomy and Training." American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy . 7, 30

Banerjee, Abhijit V, Esther Duflo, and Rachel Glennerster. 2008. "Putting a band-aid on a
  corpse: incentives for nurses in the Indian public health care system." Journal of the European
  Economic Association 6 (2-3):487­500. 6

Bedoya, Juan, Rafael de Hoyos, Mauricio Romero, and Monica Sandefur, Yanez-Pagan. 2020.
  "School management, grants, and test scores: Experimental Evidence from Mexico." Tech.
  rep., ITAM. 2

Berry, James, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukherji, and Marc Shotland. 2020. "Failure of frequent
  assessment: An evaluation of India's continuous and comprehensive evaluation program."
  Journal of Development Economics 143:102406. 6.1

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2013. "Does
  management matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1):1­51.
  1, 14, 7

Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2015.                 "Does
  management matter in schools?" The Economic Journal 125 (584):647­674. 1

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and explaining management practices
  across firms and countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4):1351­1408. 1

------. 2010. "Why do management practices differ across firms and countries?"        Journal of
  economic perspectives 24 (1):203­24. 7

Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2018. "The impact of consulting services
  on small and medium enterprises: Evidence from a randomized trial in mexico." Journal of
  Political Economy 126 (2):635­687. 1, 14, 7

By, Rune Todnem. 2005. "Organisational change management: A critical review." Journal of
  Change Management 5 (4):369­380. 5



                                               26
Callen, Michael, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, Muhammad Yasir Khan, and Arman Rezaee. 2020.
  "Data and policy decisions: Experimental evidence from Pakistan." Journal of Development
  Economics 146:102523. 31

Chakraborty, Tanika and Rajshri Jayaraman. 2019. "School feeding and learning achievement:
  Evidence from India's midday meal program."        Journal of Development Economics
  139:249­265. 32

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F Halsey
  Rogers. 2006. "Missing in action: teacher and health worker absence in developing countries."
  Journal of Economic perspectives 20 (1):91­116. 1

Cunha, Jesse M, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran. 2019. "The price effects of cash
  versus in-kind transfers." The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1):240­281. 3.1

Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Aakash Mohpal, and Karthik Muralidharan. 2016. "Quality and
 Accountability in Health Care delivery: audit-study evidence from primary care in India."
 American Economic Review 106 (12):3765­99. 3

Dasgupta, Aditya and Devesh Kapur. 2020. "The Political Economy of Bureaucratic Overload:
 Evidence from Rural Development Officials in India." American Political Science Review 114.
 7

De Ree, Joppe, Karthik Muralidharan, Menno Pradhan, and Halsey Rogers. 2018. "Double for
  nothing? Experimental evidence on an unconditional teacher salary increase in Indonesia."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2):993­1039. 7

Dhaliwal, Iqbal and Rema Hanna. 2017. "The devil is in the details: The successes and limitations
 of bureaucratic reform in India." Journal of Development Economics 124:1­21. 6

DiMaggio, Paul J and Walter W Powell. 1983. "The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism
  and collective rationality in organizational fields." American Sociological Review :147­160. 1,
  6.2

Dunsch, Felipe A, David K Evans, Ezinne Eze-Ajoku, and Mario Macis. 2017. "Management,
 supervision, and health care: a field experiment." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
 Research. 7

Figlio, David and Susanna Loeb. 2011. "School accountability." In Handbook of the Economics
  of Education, vol. 3. Elsevier, 383­421. 1

Figlio, David N and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2006. "Do accountability and voucher threats improve
  low-performing schools?" Journal of Public Economics 90 (1-2):239­255. 1

Gibbons, Robert and Rebecca Henderson. 2012. "Relational contracts and organizational
  capabilities." Organization Science 23 (5):1350­1364. 1

Gibbons, Robert and John Roberts. 2015. "Organizational Economics." In Emerging Trends in
  the Social and Behavioral Sciences, edited by R. Scott and S. Kosslyn. Wiley, 1­15. 1


                                               27
Glewwe, Paul and Karthik Muralidharan. 2016. "Improving education outcomes in developing
  countries: Evidence, knowledge gaps, and policy implications." In Handbook of the Economics
  of Education, vol. 5. Elsevier, 653­743. 2, 7
Gupta, Akhil. 2012. Red tape: Bureaucracy, structural violence, and poverty in India. Duke
 University Press. 1, 6.2
Hussain, Iftikhar. 2015. "Subjective performance evaluation in the public sector evidence from
 school inspections." Journal of Human Resources 50 (1):189­221. 1, 9
Kapur, Devesh. 2020. "Why Does the Indian State Both Fail and Succeed?" Journal of Economic
 Perspectives 34 (1):31­54. 7
Khan, Adnan Q, Asim I Khwaja, and Benjamin A Olken. 2016. "Tax farming redux:
 Experimental evidence on performance pay for tax collectors." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 131 (1):219­271. 7
Khan, Adnan Q, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Benjamin A Olken. 2019. "Making moves matter:
 Experimental evidence on incentivizing bureaucrats through performance-based postings."
 American Economic Review 109 (1):237­70. 7, 30
Kremer, Michael. 1993. "The O-ring theory of economic development." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 108 (3):551­575. 7
Leaver, Clare, Owen Ozier, Pieter Serneels, and Andrew Zeitlin. forthcoming. "Recruitment,
  effort, and retention effects of performance contracts for civil servants: Experimental evidence
  from Rwandan primary schools." American Economic Review . 7
Lemos, Renata, Karthik Muralidharan, and Daniela Scur. 2020. "Personnel Management and
  School Productivity: Evidence from India." mimeo. . 1
Levy, Brian, Robert Cameron, Ursula Hoadley, and Vinothan Naidoo. 2018. The politics and
  governance of basic education: A tale of two South African provinces. Oxford University Press.
  1, 29
Majumdar, Sumon and Sharun W Mukand. 2004. "Policy gambles." American Economic Review
 94 (4):1207­1222. 6.2
Mbiti, Isaac, Karthik Muralidharan, Mauricio Romero, Youdi Schipper, Constantine Manda, and
 Rakesh Rajani. 2019. "Inputs, incentives, and complementarities in education: Experimental
 evidence from Tanzania." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3):1627­1673. 3, 7
Morgan, James and Jeffrey K Liker. 2006. The Toyota product development system: integrating
 people, process, and technology. Productivity press. 1
Muralidharan, Karthik. 2017. "Field experiments in education in developing countries." In
 Handbook of economic field experiments, vol. 2. Elsevier, 323­385. 13
Muralidharan, Karthik, Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal. 2017. "The fiscal cost
 of weak governance: Evidence from teacher absence in India." Journal of Public economics
 145:116­135. 2.1

                                               28
Muralidharan, Karthik and Paul Niehaus. 2017. "Experimentation at Scale." Journal of Economic
 Perspectives 31 (4):103­24. 1, 3.1

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2016.   "Building state
 capacity: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India." American Economic Review
 106 (10):2895­2929. 31, 32

------. 2020. "General equilibrium effects of (improving) public employment programs:
  Experimental evidence from india." Working Paper 23838, National Bureau of Economic
  Research. 3.1

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, Sandip Sukhtankar, and Jeffrey Weaver. forthcoming.
 "Improving last-mile service delivery using phone-based monitoring." American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics . 31

Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro Ganimian. 2019. "Disrupting Education?
 Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India." The American Economic
 Review 109 (4):1426­60. 16

Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2010. "The impact of diagnostic feedback
 to teachers on student learning: experimental evidence from India." The Economic Journal
 120 (546):F187­F203. 6.1

------. 2011. "Teacher performance pay: Experimental evidence from India." Journal of Political
  Economy 119 (1):39­77. 3, 7

Pratham. 2017. Annual Status of Education Report 2016. Pratham, New Delhi. 2.1

------. 2019. Annual Status of Education Report 2018. Pratham, New Delhi. 1

Pritchett, Lant. 2009. "A review of Edward Luce's in spite of the Gods: the strange rise of
  modern India." Journal of Economic Literature 47 (3):771­80. 6.2

------. 2013. "The World Bank and public sector management: what next?"             International
  Review of Administrative Sciences 79 (3):413­419. 1

Rasul, Imran and Daniel Rogger. 2018. "Management of bureaucrats and public service delivery:
  Evidence from the nigerian civil service." The Economic Journal 128 (608):413­446. 1

Rasul, Imran, Daniel Oliver Rogger, and Martin J Williams. 2018. "Management and
  Bureaucratic Effectiveness: Evidence from the Ghanaian Civil Service." Tech. rep., The World
  Bank. 1

Rockoff, Jonah and Lesley J Turner. 2010. "Short-run impacts of accountability on school quality."
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (4):119­47. 1

Singh, Abhijeet. 2020. "Myths of Official Measurement: Auditing and Improving Administrative
  Data in Developing Countries." Tech. rep., RISE Programme, Oxford. 16, 17, 7




                                               29
Singh, Abhijeet, Albert Park, and Stefan Dercon. 2014. "School meals as a safety net: an
  evaluation of the midday meal scheme in India." Economic Development and Cultural Change
  62 (2):275­306. 32

Vivalt, Eva. 2020. "How much can we generalize from impact evaluations?"    Journal of the
  European Economic Association . 3.1

World Bank. 2018. World Development Report 2018: Learning to realize education's promise.
 The World Bank, Washington DC. 1




                                           30
Figures and Tables

                           Figure 1: Districts in the MPSQA evaluation




Notes: This figure shows the five districts of the Bhopal region included in the Phase I (experimental)
evaluation from Sept 2014 to March 2016 (in orange). The program was later scaled up across the whole
state. We evaluated the scaled-up program in 2017-18 in the original five districts, plus tribal blocks
from an additional five districts in the Indore region (in brown)




                                                  31
                Figure 2: Distribution of student test scores at endline (Feb 2016)




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of individual student test scores for grades 1-8 in mathematics
and Hindi from independent test data collection in February 2016. Test scores are standardized within
grade with a control group mean of zero and standard deviation 1.




                                                   32
                              Table 1: Balance on observed characteristics


                                 All Study Schools                    Subsample with primary data
                       Control Treatment       Diff        Diff SE   Control   Treatment   Diff    Diff SE
                       Mean         Mean      (T-C)                  Mean        Mean      (T-C)
                        (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)


 Total enrolment       81.18        76.79    -5.59**       (2.17)     84.03      77.11     -7.14   (6.32)
 No. of teachers        2.69         2.59     -0.11        (0.08)     2.71       2.67      -0.04   (0.19)
 Pupil-teacher ratio   32.76        32.34     -0.73        (1.32)     33.39      31.77     -1.26   (2.74)
 Proportion of          0.91         0.90     -0.01        (0.01)     0.95       0.91      -0.03   (0.03)
 Qualified teachers
 Rural                  0.92         0.93      0.01        (0.02)     0.91       0.89      -0.02   (0.03)
 Electricity            0.15         0.13     -0.01        (0.02)     0.16       0.16      0.02    (0.04)
 Visits from           10.36        10.38      0.10        (0.34)     10.15      10.51     0.39    (0.77)
 Block/Cluster
 officials
 State test score      66.81        67.04     -0.06        (0.63)     67.05      66.39     -0.76   (1.52)
 (Pratibha Parv)


 Observations           3661        1774                              202         100
 F-test (p-value)                             0.177                                        0.334
 F-test, number of                            5084                                          280
 schools



Notes: ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
Differences in means, and associated standard errors, are reported from regressions that
incorporate block fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the academic cluster level (level
of randomization). The F-test refers to a test of joint significance for all reported variables and
reports the F-statistics. The number of observations for the F-tests are lower than the total
number of observations due to missing data for some individual variables.
Sources:  2013-14 school-level administrative data from school census (DISE) and state
standardized tests (Pratibha Parv).




                                                      33
                   Table 2: Ranking of treatment schools by school inspectors

                                                 Percentage of schools
                                          Below    Close to   Meets     Above
 STANDARDS                              standards standards standards standards          N

 1:   School Development/Mentoring         17.5       46.9       31.6             4     1643
 2:   Management                            6.1       51.2       37.9            4.8    1643
 3:   Teaching and learning                74.3       25.4        0.3            0.1    1643
 4:   Support for students                   6        37.5       51.9            4.6    1643
 5:   SMC and engagement with parents       11        45.3       29.8           13.8    1643
 6:   Academic Outcomes                    28.2       62.6       8.9             0.2    1643
 7:   Personal and Social Outcomes          7.4       62.2       28.3            2.1    1643

 Overall                                  16.2        74.9        8.9            0      1643

Notes: These ratings are taken from the administrative data on program implementation and
include all treatment elementary schools for which data was available. The data indicate that
school inspections, and the corresponding input of assessments into the online portal, was done
for 93% of the elementary schools assigned to treatment. SMC refers to School Management
Committees.




                                              34
                          Table 3: Informativeness of school assessments



                                       School Test scores               Teacher attendance
                                            (2014-15)
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)

 Close to standard                    0.072             0.097         0.172***          0.077*
                                     (0.070)           (0.068)         (0.052)          (0.046)
 Meets standard                     0.260***          0.301***        0.258***            0.141
                                     (0.091)           (0.093)         (0.081)          (0.087)
 School test scores (2013-14)       0.388***          0.409***          0.020            -0.001
                                     (0.033)           (0.031)         (0.020)          (0.021)

 Constant                             -0.060           -0.083         0.490***         0.567***
                                     (0.062)          (0.062)          (0.046)          (0.038)

 Block fixed effects                   No               Yes              No               Yes

 Observations                         1,642            1,642             95                95
 R-squared                            0.179            0.261            0.147            0.634


Notes: ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
This table relates future student achievement and teacher absence, aggregated at the school
level, to the grades that schools received in the MPSQA school evaluation and pre-treatment
test scores. The reference category is schools which were rated "Below standards". Columns 1-2
use post-treatment administrative test scores as the dependent variable. Columns 3-4 use data
on teacher absence collected in a subsample of treated schools. Standard errors are clustered at
school level.
Sources: Administrative data on school ratings from the online program implementation portal.
 Administrative data on aggregate test scores in the Pratibha Parv assessments.
 Primary data on teacher absence from direct interviewer observations collected in three
rounds.




                                                 35
                 Table 4: Treatment effects on monitoring and SMC functioning

                                                        Control Treatment        Diff    Diff SE
                                                        Mean      Mean          (T-C)
                                                        (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)

   Inspections
   Visits by Block/Cluster officials (Full sample)  9.52              9.88       0.49     (0.41)
   Visits by Block/Cluster officials (Study sample) 9.12              9.60       0.70     (0.75)

   Time of last visit
   Within last month                                    0.36          0.42       0.08     (0.06)
   Within last 2 months                                 0.64          0.62       -0.02    (0.06)
   Within 6 months                                      0.77          0.77       -0.00    (0.05)
   Within last year                                     0.83          0.88       0.04     (0.04)

   Time spent by inspector
   Less than 30 minutes                                 0.21          0.19       -0.02    (0.05)
   More than 30 minutes                                 0.79          0.81        0.02    (0.05)
   More than 1 hour                                     0.42          0.37       -0.06    (0.06)
   More than 3 hours                                    0.02          0.06        0.03    (0.03)

   SMC Functioning
   School has SMC/PTA                                   1.00          1.00         -         -
   SMC/PTA found useful                                 0.78          0.85       0.06     (0.04)

   Last SMC/PTA meeting
   Within last month                                    0.32          0.40       0.08     (0.06)
   Within last 2 months                                 0.70          0.77       0.07     (0.05)
   Within last 6 months                                 0.96          0.96       -0.00    (0.02)
   Within last year                                     0.98          1.00      0.02**    (0.01)

   Observations (Full population)                       3597         1751
   Observations (Subsample)                             202           100

Notes: ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
Differences in means between treatment and control group, and associated standard errors, are
reported from regressions incorporating block fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
academic cluster level (level of randomization).
Sources:  2015-16 School-level administrative data from DISE.
 Official 2015- school inspection register records, transcribed during school visits.
 Primary data based on interviews with two teachers per school. Data on time of inspector
visits was collected for a subsample of 302 elementary schools. Data on time spent by
the inspector was reported by the headmaster/school in-charge. SMCs are governing bodies
comprising of representatives from the school staff, parents and local authorities which are
intended to exert community-based accountability on schools.
                                            36
          Table 5: Effects on teacher attendance, pedagogy and student engagement


                                                       Control      Treatment      Diff    Diff SE
                                                      N    Mean      N Mean       (T-C)
                                                     (1)    (2)     (3)   (4)      (5)       (6)

              
 Attendance
 Teacher Attendance                                  2070   0.67    966   0.65    -0.03    (0.03)
 Student Attendance (school-level)                   201    0.53    100   0.53    -0.00    (0.02)

 Pedagogical inputs
 Textbooks used during class                         353    0.72    177   0.71    -0.01    (0.04)
 Workbooks used during class                         353    0.12    178   0.10    -0.02    (0.03)
 Teacher praised students                            334    0.43    174   0.44     0.00    (0.05)

 Percent of class time spent on:
 -- Lecture                                          353    43.80   178   39.89   -4.28*   (2.45)
 -- Silent Work                                      352    4.90    178    4.42    -0.40   (1.45)
 -- Group Call                                       353    16.75   178   16.78    -0.00   (1.82)
 -- Small Group Work                                 349    0.86    177    2.26   1.43**   (0.71)
 -- Big Group Work                                   345    1.85    175   2.21      0.45   (0.99)
 -- Class Discipline                                 352    2.52    178    4.07     1.58   (1.03)
 -- Out of class                                     353    2.73    178   1.69     -1.03   (0.76)

 Child has HW notebooks which are checked            1511   0.40    737   0.44     0.03    (0.04)



Notes: ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
Differences in means between treatment and control group and associated standard errors are
reported from regressions incorporating block fixed effects and clustering standard errors at the
academic cluster level (level of randomization). Round indicators are included as covariates in
the estimations for teacher attendance. Student attendance is reported as average percentage of
students across three rounds of data collection at the school level and includes only schools that
were open at the time of observation.
Sources:  Attendance was collected for individual teachers over three rounds of primary data
collection in 2015-16. Where a school was found closed at the time of the inspection (always
during business hours), all teachers are marked absent. Student attendance was collected at a
school-level aggregate only.
 2015-16 Direct interviewer observation of up to two classrooms per school. Time spent on
activities was based on direct observation by surveyors and recorded in five categories: not
conducted at all, below 25%, 25-50%, 50%-75%, above 75%. We take the mid-point of the
categories to assign the percentage values here.
 2015-16 Student-level primary data collected for a random sample of students.

                                                37
                                              Table 6: Treatment effect on student achievement



                      Independent tests                     Administrative school tests                       School-level PP scores
                       Math     Hindi            Math      Hindi English Science Social Studies               Dec 2014      Dec 2015
                        (1)      (2)              (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)                      (8)           (9)

      Treatment        0.031       0.004          0.067    -0.005     0.086     -0.010         0.065            -0.024          0.072
                      (0.062)     (0.065)       (0.075)   (0.069)    (0.073)   (0.144)       (0.115)           (0.043)        (0.055)
      Constant         0.005       0.003         -0.000    0.001      0.001     0.007         -0.013            -0.018         -0.030
                      (0.023)     (0.025)       (0.033)   (0.030)    (0.033)   (0.054)       (0.047)           (0.021)        (0.024)

      Observations     9,988       9,988        18,410     18,292    18,571     7,550         9,411             5,414          5,337




38
      R-squared        0.060       0.052         0.042     0.039     0.070      0.111         0.048             0.060          0.101


     Notes : ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
     All regressions incorporate block fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the academic cluster level. The dependent variables
     in columns 1-7 are individual-level test scores normalized at mean 0 and standard deviation 1 within grade for the control group.
     The dependent variables for columns 8-9 are school-level scores normalized at mean 0 and standard deviation 1 within-year for
     the control group. The independent tests were administered to all students present on the day of the assessments. Individual
     student-level scores on the administrative school tests were transcribed from official registers for all students at the time of school
     visits. The number of observations is lower for independently-administered tests (in comparison to official tests) because of student
     absence, whereas official tests are mandatory. The number of observations for Science and Social Studies is lower than other
     subjects in the official data since these subjects are not tested in all grades.
     Source s: Student-level independent test data from February 2016.
      Student-level data on administrative school tests (Pratibha Parv) from December 2015.
      School-level data on administrative school tests (Pratibha Parv)
               Table 7: Phase 2 Matched Study: Balance on observable characteristics


                                 Full Population                         Matched Study
                     Untreated    Treated     Diff      SE       Comp. Treatment     Diff       SE
                       Mean        Mean     (2) - (1)            Mean    Mean      (6) - (5)
                        (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)


                               Panel A: School characteristics (DISE)


 Middle school          0.16       0.49     0.33***     (0.00)   0.18     0.35     0.17**      (0.08)
 Total Enrolment       53.92       99.12    44.94*** (1.01)      54.86    61.51      6.65      (4.05)
 No. of teachers        2.25       3.29     1.02***     (0.03)   2.28     2.67     0.39**      (0.16)
 Pupil-teacher         27.16       35.22    8.28***     (0.46)   28.90    25.43     -3.47      (3.35)
 ratio
 Rural                  0.96       0.92     -0.03***    (0.00)   0.94     0.90      -0.04      (0.03)
 Electricity            0.07       0.19     0.11***     (0.01)   0.07     0.13       0.05      (0.06)
 Visits from            8.92       10.21    1.20***     (0.12)   9.72     10.28      0.56      (1.08)
 Block/Cluster
 officials


                        Panel B: School-level test scores (Pratibha Parv)


 -- 2012-13            51.85       58.83    6.86***     (0.26)   54.33    53.15      1.18      (2.68)
 -- 2013-14            57.62       63.11    5.43***     (0.24)   60.10    59.06      1.04      (2.12)
 -- 2014-15            58.08       64.05    5.86***     (0.25)   59.34    60.67     -1.33      (2.27)
 -- 2015-16            63.93       67.25    3.24***     (0.20)   64.20    63.76      0.44      (1.91)
 -- 2016-17            68.36       69.42    0.95***     (0.20)   67.86    67.42      0.42      (2.00)


 Observations          18159       5264                           100     100

Notes: ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
Differences in means between treatment and comparison group in the matched study and
associated standard errors are reported from regressions incorporating academic cluster fixed
effects and clustering standard errors at the academic cluster level. The number of observations
differs slightly due to occasionally missing information for individual schools. Test scores are on
a scale from 0­100.
Source: Administrative data at the school level from school census (DISE) and standardized
tests (Pratibha Parv).                      39
          Table 8: Phase 2 Matched Study: Treatment effect on student achievement


                                                   Endline score (February 2018)
                                                  Math                        Hindi
                                         (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)            (6)

 Treatment                              0.064     0.031    0.00073     0.11      0.082     0.021
                                       (0.074)   (0.069)   (0.074)    (0.072)   (0.067)   (0.067)
 School-level PP score (2015-16)                 0.16***                        0.13**
                                                 (0.053)                        (0.053)
 Individual PP score (2016-17)                             0.13***                        0.17***
                                                           (0.0079)                       (0.0082)


 Observations                           6,143     6,143      4,173     6,149     6,149     4,164
 R-squared                              0.215     0.223      0.381     0.184     0.189     0.420

Notes: ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
Treatment schools here refer to purposively-selected program schools where the intervention was
implemented by the Government of Madhya Pradesh. Comparison schools are matched based on
pre-program observable characteristics within the same academic cluster. All regressions include
fixed effects for the cluster and for the grade of the student. PP scores refer to administrative
Pratibha Parv test scores. The number of observations declines in Cols. 3 and 6 because
individual-level lagged scores are only observed for students who were enrolled in the same
school in the previous school year and whose scores can be matched. Students in grade 1 and
grade 6 are all new entrants in a school in any given year.
Sources:  Student-level independent assessment data from February 2018.
Administrative data on school-level Pratibha Parv test scores
 Administrative data on student-level lagged test scores, transcribed manually from school records in
2018




                                                 40
Appendices

A     School Management Interventions across the world

Goals of the review

Identifying universe of potentially relevant programs

We identified relevant education projects using the World Bank Education Projects Database,
which includes all World-Bank funded projects within the education sector across the world with
starting date between 1998-2017. To identify the projects that are relevant to this paper, a search
was conducted in the database on June 2019. The search included projects conducted in primary
and/or secondary schools and did not further filter on project country or start date.
We identified programs as potentially relevant if they included at least one of the following
activities: (i) School-Based Management, (ii) Results-Based Management, (iii) School
development Planning, (iv) School-Community Relationships, (v) School Supervision, (vi)
Quality Assurance and Accreditation, (vii) Accountability Systems for Education Service
Delivery, (viii) School-Based Evaluation of Learning Assessment, (ix) School Principal
Performance Assessment, (x) Teacher Performance Assessment, (xi) Teacher Standards, (xii)
Operational Standards for Schools, (xiii) Continuous Learning Assessment, (xiv) Management
Information: Monitoring and Evaluation, (xv) Management Information: School Report
Cards/Public Information on Quality of Provision, (xvi) Management Training and Professional
Development. This resulted in a total of 160 potentially relevant projects.

Codified information

We used documentation from each project's webpage in the World Bank database to
systematically collate the information on the characteristics of each potentially relevant project.
We collected information on seven overview variables: (i) Project Name and website link (ii)
Country, (iii) Project Period, (iv) Description of project objectives, (v) Scale, (vi) School Type
(Primary VS Secondary) and (vii) Appraised Project cost (Mn $). Project-specific information
was primarily acquired through the documentation available on the World Bank projects'
websites, in particular the project appraisal documentation as well as the implementation
completion reports. Note that these overview characteristics, such as objectives, scale and cost




                                                41
refer to the full complement of activities within each country program and not just the aspects
relevant to our evaluation.33
For each project, we then noted whether it involved (any of) the following components and, if
so, a brief summary of activities under that component:

       · School Inspections: Project activities related to conducting inspections of schools such
         as classroom observations, teacher performance assessments, supervision visits, follow-up
         on school development plan implementation.

       · School Development Plans: Project activities related to introducing/enhancing schools'
         capacity to formulate and implement school development plans.

       · Management Training: Project activities related to developing the leadership and school
         management skills of educational staff such as school principals, teachers, school inspectors
         or school supervisors.

       · School Report Cards: Project activities related to the use of report cards to track and
         disseminate information on student- and school-level learning achievements.

       · School Management Committees: Project activities related to the introduction
         and/or strengthening of school management committees consisting of both school staff
         and community members. These could also be referred to in the projects as parent-teacher
         associations, mother/father committees etc.

       · Monitoring of Learning outcomes: Project activities related to monitoring the learning
         levels of students, such as continuous assessments in certain subjects, standardized testing,
         developing item banks for testing student learning, developing national learning assessment
         institutions etc.

       · Public Dissemination: Project activities related to disseminating information on the
         output of the other project activities publicly, such as publishing school reports online
         on learning achievements, disseminating school development plans, community awareness
         campaigns etc.

       · Extra Incentives: Project activities related to boosting school performance through
         various incentives such as performance-based teacher bonuses, incentive awards/grants to
         schools etc.
  33
    Further, the scale of projects was not documented in a standardized way across projects and thus could be
expressed in various metrics such as number of schools included, number of students to be benefited from the
projects, or number of school personnel involved etc.



                                                     42
Following this review, we classified projects as relevant if they included at least one of the
first three components, which are most similar to the MPSQA intervention. 160 projects in 84
countries were thus identified as relevant and are presented in Figure A.1. The 32 most relevant
projects had all three of these project components; we present a summary of these projects in
Table A.1 for illustration.




                                              43
                                      Figure A.1: School management interventions in developing countries
44




     Notes: This map is based on a review of education-focused interventions supported by the World Bank. The map includes interventions in
     a total of 84 countries. We use the project documents available online to classify if an intervention included school inspections, management
     training and/or the use of school development plans. In the figure above, we classify projects as having one, two or all three of these features.
     All programs which included school development plans included at least one of the other features as well. The list of included programs that
     contain all three components which includes 32 programs in 27 countries is provided in Table A.1 .
                                                                  Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project       Country    Pe-          Scale                    Cost          Inspections            Development Plan         Management Training        Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                    riod                        School   (Mn $)                                                                                    Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                            Type
      Acre Social     Brazil    2008-   Target: 154 550     Pri       150      School inspections to      Developing plans to        Providing training         No      No    Yes       Yes       No
          and                   2020        students         &                      monitor the              increase school       programs for teachers,
       Economic                         benefiting from     Sec                  implementation of         accountability and       state and municipal
     inclusion and                      learning quality                        school development              community          education officials, and
      Sustainable                        improvement.                           plans by state and         participation, and           supervisors.
     Development                                                               municipal secretariats.   specify various quality
        Project                                                                                               improvement
                                                                                                               subprojects.
        Basic         Yemen     2004-    10 000 schools     Pri      121.14        Investments in          Building capacity          Ensuring all basic        No      Yes   Yes       No        Yes
      Education                 2012       received >3                            establishing and           within school           education inspectors
     Development                        inspection visits                         strengthening an          communities to         and headmasters receive
       Program                          per year. 47 674                           effective school          formulate and         training supporting and
                                        teachers trained.                       inspection function.       implement school          evaluating teachers.
                                           6666 school                                                    development plans.
                                            inspectors
                                             trained.
      Ceara Basic     Brazil    2000-   982 000 Students    Pri       150         Introduction of a      Supporting the design      Training professionals      Yes     Yes   Yes       Yes       No
45




       Education                2008      benefited. 55                       pedagogical monitoring      and implementation       responsible for training
        Quality                          municipalities                       and supporting system,       process of school           school staff and
     Improvement                         adopted school                           including setting       development plans.       community members in
        Project                           improvement                          regular timetables for                                  designing school
                                             plans.                           school visits, assessing                             development plans and
                                                                               student achievement,                                  school management.
                                                                                 dropout rates, etc.
       Cundina-      Colombia   2003-      106 school       Pri       21.4      Implementation of a      Providing assistance in     Training management        No      No    Yes       Yes       No
        marca                   2006      development        &                 comprehensive quality         designing and         teams in preparing their
      Education                         plans produced.     Sec                evaluation system, e.g.    implementing school         school development
        Quality                             Project                            evaluating teacher and      development plans.          plans and entering
     Improvement                        implementation                           school management                                   courses specific to the
        Project                           was limited.                         performance, learning                               administrative, financial
                                                                                    resources etc.                                  and management needs
                                                                                                                                        of their schools.
                                                                  Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project      Country    Pe-           Scale                    Cost          Inspections             Development Plan          Management Training      Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                   riod                         School   (Mn $)                                                                                    Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                            Type
      Education    Lithuania   2002-     9000 teachers       Pri     45.41     Changing function of          Generating data on       Training principals in    No      No    Yes       Yes       No
     Improvement               2006       trained. 400        &                 school inspectors to       organizational culture      school management,
       Project                         school principals     Sec               focus more on school            and processes of           leadership and
                                            trained.                           improvement through          individual schools in           community
                                                                                self assessment and        order to monitor their       management skills.
                                                                               independent external          performance and to
                                                                                     evaluation.          assist them in preparing
                                                                                                             school development
                                                                                                                    plans.
     Education      North      2003-    26 038 teachers     Pri       19.5     Training inspectors to      Providing training of         Training school        No      No    Yes       No        Yes
     Moderniza-    Macedonia   2011        trained. 427      &                monitor and evaluate a         staff to carry out      management to conduct
       tion                            schools receiving    Sec                 school improvement          self-evaluation and      school evaluations and
      Project                             improvement                         grant program given to        formulating school          implement school
                                        grants. 324 244                         schools that develop        development plans.         development plans.
                                             students                           school development
                                        benefiting from                         plans. Also includes
                                        learning quality                           developing and
46




                                         improvement.                          monitoring standards
                                                                              for school effectiveness.
     Education      Kaza-      2017-      Target: 5400      Pri        77        Development of an         Helping community          Training staff, school    Yes     No    Yes       Yes       No
     Moderniza-     khstan     2022         rural and        &                 instrument to observe      members to contribute      leaders and community
       tion                              disadvantaged      Sec               the pedagogical practice    to and monitor school      members to build their
      Project                          schools benefiting                        of teachers in the        development plans.         skills in school-based
                                         from project.                             classroom, and                                    management, evaluation
                                                                                  improving school                                       and inspections.
                                                                                inspection practice.
      Education    Guatemala   2007-   1489 schools with    Pri       100      Training district staff     Supporting schools to      Provision of training     Yes     Yes   Yes       No        No
     Quality and               2015      trained school      &                  on supervision and              prepare school       and support for school
     Secondary                              councils.       Sec                monitoring of school       development plans with         principals and
      Education                                                                  development plan         strategies to guarantee       leadership staff.
                                                                                  implementation.          on-time entry for new
                                                                                                            first grade students.
                                                                  Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project      Country     Pe-           Scale                   Cost           Inspections            Development Plan          Management Training       Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                    riod                        School   (Mn $)                                                                                     Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                            Type
     Education      Lesotho     2016-    377 schools with    Pri       25     Financing supervision        Supporting schools in          Training school        Yes     No    Yes       No        Yes
     Quality for                2021      trained school      &               of school development       using school developing    principals and boards in
      Equality                          boards, submitted    Sec                plan facilitators by          plans aimed at          how to develop school
      Project                              development                        regional inspectors, as        increasing school          development plans,
                                         plans and school                     well as audits of school       performance with             training school
                                           report cards.                         development plan            regard to quality,            development
                                                                                   expenditures.          retention and equity of      facilitators, district
                                                                                                                  access.             education officers and
                                                                                                                                            inspectors.
     Elementary      India      2014-      4.1 million      Pri      29833        Financing school             Strengthening           Establishing a school     Yes     Yes   Yes       Yes       No
     Education                  2018    teachers trained.                            performance           capacities of SMCs to      leadership program to
      Project 3                              261 100                            assessments through       prepare and implement            enhance the
                                          headmasters                              development of           school development             management
                                             trained                               indicators, and                 plans.              competence of school
                                          (Nationwide                         conducting internal and                                    headmasters and
                                            project).                          external evaluations of                                      educational
                                                                                     the schools.                                         administrators.
47




      Enhancing    Maldives     2013-       212 schools     Pri        11        Introducing internal       Introducing school        Training school board      No      Yes   Yes       No        No
      Education                 2018     receiving school    &                 self-evaluation to help     development plans as        members and school
     Development                           management       Sec                     schools acquire       part of the school-based         directors in
       Project                            training. 3685                       information that feeds       management model.             school-based
                                        teachers trained.                      into their development                                     management.
                                                                                        plans.
       Female                   2002-       6625 head       Sec      144.62       Regular visits to         Supporting quality        Academic supervision       No      Yes    No       No        Yes
      Secondary    Bangladesh   2008    teachers trained.                        schools by regional      improvements through          and management
        School                             415 schools                         project office to ensure   the process of a school       training for head
      Assistance                          introduced to                         school standards and      development planning       teachers to support the
      Project 2                            development                             accountability.               exercise.            improved effectiveness
                                         plans. 128 000                                                                                    of teachers.
                                            SMC/PTA
                                        members trained.
       General      Ethiopia    2013-     Target: 18 139    Pri       550           Development of        Training school leaders    Leadership training for     Yes     No    Yes       Yes       Yes
      Education                 2019     200 primary and     &                  inspection systems at         in using school         school directors and
        Quality                              2 000 000      Sec                various levels, training   development plans and           supervisors.
     Improvement                         secondary school                          of inspectors and      developing a simplified
       Project 2                              students                          conducting quarterly       framework for rural,
                                          benefiting from                        school inspections in       isolated schools.
                                        improved learning                          selected regions.
                                           environment.
                                                                Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project      Country   Pe-          Scale                    Cost           Inspections            Development Plan          Management Training       Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                  riod                        School   (Mn $)                                                                                     Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                          Type
      Lagos Eko     Nigeria   2009-     4609 school        Sec       95        Auditing schools to        Introducing school       Training school leaders,    No      Yes   Yes       Yes       Yes
      Secondary               2016     principals and                         gather data on school     development plans and       district officers, and
      Education                        12606 teachers                           performance that        school grants that are          school-based
       Project                            received                           constitute the basis for   provided based on the           management
                                        management                            a school performance          plan proposals.              committees,
                                          training.                                  award.                                         particularly in using
                                                                                                                                   development plans and
                                                                                                                                     effective schooling
                                                                                                                                          strategies.
      Rajasthan      India    1999-     11 956 SMCs       Pri      188.8       Provision of school       Assigning SMCs with        Training district and      No      Yes   Yes       No        No
       District               2008    established. 766                        monitoring by cluster       responsiblity to plan    block level management
       Primary                        cluster resource                         resource personnel       school development and         in participatory
      Education                            centers                                   through              resource utilization.          planning and
     Project 1+2                      established. 620                       scheduled/unscheduled                                     supervision and
                                        000 children                        visits to observe teacher                                  providing SMC
                                          enrolled.                               performance.                                     members with three-day
                                                                                                                                    management training.
48




       Second       Vietnam   2009-    2600 education     Pri      181.4      Developing a teacher       Training supervisors      Modules for in-service      No      Yes   Yes       No        No
      Education               2016      managers and                        evaluation program and      and school principals in      training in school
       Quality                           3150 school                         teacher methodologies           evaluation and         management and the
      Assurance                           principals                            that are strongly          implementation of       use of time for full-day
       Project                             received                              associated with          school development          schooling model.
                                      management and                           improved student                  plans.
                                      school inspection                     learning outcomes, e.g.
                                          training.                          conducting classroom
                                                                                  observations.
     School Based   Mexico    2014-    18 447 school      Pri      819.95      Support capacity of       Supporting schools to        Providing school         Yes     Yes   Yes       No        Yes
     Management               2018      supervisors        &                  school directors and         implement school             directors and
       project 3                      trained. 76 000     Sec                supervisors to evaluate      development plans.          supervisors with
                                      school directors                        teacher performance                                  training in how to use
                                          trained.                               using classroom                                    the school dashboard
                                                                                  observations.                                    tool to improve school
                                                                                                                                   management practices.
                                                                 Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project     Country    Pe-           Scale                    Cost          Inspections             Development Plan        Management Training       Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                  riod                         School   (Mn $)                                                                                   Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                           Type
     Secondary        El      1997-     4500 teachers       Sec       65       Establishing a school       Enhancing school        Providing management       Yes     Yes   Yes       No        No
     Education     Salvador   2005     trained. 78 000                         accreditation system      councils' capacities to   and curriculum training
      Project                              students                             that monitors and           prepare school           for school principals
                                       benefiting from                        reports data on school      development plans.         and school councils.
                                      improved learning                      quality, including hiring
                                        envionrment.                            and training school
                                                                                   supervisors.
     Secondary     Turkey     2005-        15 000          Sec       104         Establishing a           Training educational        Establishing and        Yes     No    Yes       Yes       No
     Education                2012    educational staff                           performance            staff in developing and       training school
      Project                         trained in school                      management system for        implementing school           development
                                      plan preparation.                            continuous                      plans.          management teams in
                                           School                             improvement of staff                                 all secondary schools.
                                        development                             and institutions.
                                      teams formed in
                                        3500 schools.
       Sector      Kyrgyzs-   2013-    10 000 teachers     Pri       16.5     Training inspectors in       Supporting school       Providing training to      Yes     No    Yes       Yes       No
     Support For     tan      2019     and 1500 school      &                        observing            management in using        school directors in
49




      Education                         directors and      Sec                   teaching-learning        school development         school leadership,
       reform                            inspectors                          practices and classroom     plans through training    development planning
       Project                             trained.                                management,           and providing schools         and community
                                                                              identifying weaknesses     with templates for the         engagement.
                                                                                   and providing                 plans.
                                                                               supportive feedback.
      Second       Pakistan   2013-       8 600 000        Pri       400         Developing annual       Introducing SMCs who         Recruitment and         Yes     Yes   Yes       Yes       No
       Sindh                  2018         students         &                 school census in which          formulate and         training of education
     Education                          benefiting from    Sec               supervisors visit schools      implement school        managers and school
      Sector                          improved learning                       to collect information       development plans.           headmasters.
      Project                            environment                             on infrastructure,
                                       (Project includes                        student enrollment,
                                         entire Sindh                               teacher- and
                                            State).                               headmaster-level
                                                                                    information.
                                                                 Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project     Country    Pe-           Scale                    Cost          Inspections             Development Plan          Management Training        Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                  riod                         School   (Mn $)                                                                                      Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                           Type
       Zanzibar    Tanzania   2016-      Target: 1500       Pri       35        Boosting classroom         Assisting SMCs in         Capacity building of        Yes     Yes   Yes       Yes       Yes
      Improving               2021    teachers receiving     &                  inspections so each        formulating school        inspectors and head
       Student                        training. 170 000     Sec               teacher is inspected at      development plans.          teachers through
      Prospects                             direct                           least twice per year and                                      training.
        Project                         benificiaries of                         inspection data is
                                         the project.                           available in a more
                                                                                 usable and timely
                                                                                      fashion.
      Education    Lebanon    2010-      300 project       Pri       42.6      Piloting a system of      Designing, piloting and     Training and assisting      No      Yes    No       No        No
     Development              2018    schools receiving     &                school self-evaluation or    evaluating a program        school principals and
      Project II                          training,        Sec                school-based review as         for school-based        other educational staff
                                       inspection etc.                            the first step in         planning in which              in designing
                                        260 teachers                             developing school        school principals and      development plans and
                                           trained.                             development plans.       school council members     conducting performance
                                                                                                         are taught to use school        self-assessment.
                                                                                                           development plans.
      Education    Tunisia    2004-    800 principals      Pri      290.92     Setting up a regional        Setting up school          Training in school        No      No    Yes       No        No
50




       Quality                2010       and 42542          &                    school supervision      development plans and       development planning
     Improvement                      teachers trained.    Sec                system to monitor and      training school staff in      to school staff and
      Program -                                                                     evaluate the         developing such plans.     promoting decentralized
      (Phase 2)                                                                  implementation of                                    school management.
                                                                                school development
                                                                                       plans.
      Education    Malawi     2005-     5200 schools       Pri       32.2     Conducting interviews      Introducing the use of        Training secondary        No      No    Yes       No        No
        Sector                2010     received direct                       with students, teachers,     school development        school managers in their
       Support                            support.                              parents and school               plans.               roles, responsibilities
      Project 1                                                                  administrators to                                    and school planning.
                                                                                identify factors in
                                                                                 school and home
                                                                             environment affected by
                                                                               policy interventions.
      Education    Kosovo     2015-    Target: 45 000      Pri        11     Developing capacities of      Supporting primary       Training school staff in     No      No    Yes       No        No
       system                 2019       students in        &                        teacher             schools to prepare and     management, planning
     Improvement                      targeted schools     Sec               evaluators/inspectors to     implement multi-year       and self-evaluation.
       Project                           and 25 000                              conduct teacher           school development
                                           teachers                                performance                    plans.
                                      benefiting from                              assessment.
                                           project.
                                                                    Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project        Country     Pe-           Scale                   Cost          Inspections            Development Plan          Management Training        Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                      riod                        School   (Mn $)                                                                                     Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                              Type
       Primary                    2004-    75 000 teachers     Pri      1815      Implementing a new       Giving support to head          Providing SMC           No      Yes    No       No        No
      Education      Bangladesh   2011     and 8 000 head                           school inspection       teachers, SMCs and         members with training
     Development                          teachers received                      system, steering away         communities in               in community
      Project 2                             training. 18.5                         from mere policing       implementing school           engagement, and
                                           million children                           towards more           development plans.        training head teachers
                                             estimated to                           supportive school                                 in management, teacher
                                           benefit directly                            inspection.                                           support and
                                            from project.                                                                                    supervision.
      Secondary      Cambodia     2017-      Target: 130      Sec       40.9    Conducting school-level    Provision of grants to        Providing school          No      Yes    No       No        No
      Education                   2022      target schools                       assessments using the      schools that submit           directors with
     Improvement                           benefiting from                         "Lower Secondary         school development            leadership and
       Project                            upgraded learning                       School Effectiveness             plans.              management training.
                                          environment and                       Standards" tool, as well
                                          training provided                        as implementing a
                                            to 310 school                       self-assessment tool for
                                            directors and                               teachers.
                                            2200 teachers.
51




      Secondary      Romania      2015-      Target: 1160     Sec      243.1     On-site monitoring of     Technical assistance for    Training teachers and       No      No    Yes       No        No
      Education                   2022    schools receiving                        implementation of        the preparation and       public school directors
       Project                               school-based                         school improvement        evaluation of school        on implementing a
                                            interventions.                               plans.              development plans.       revised curriculum and
                                                                                                                                      an inclusive education.
      The Third      Argentina    1998-      198 schools      Sec       170         Training school        Technical assistance in     Training and technical      No      No     No       No        No
      Secondary                   2002     targeted in the                       supervisors in how to      implementing school         assistance for school
      Education                                project.                           guide, monitor and         development plans.            principals and
       Project                                                                    supervise the use of                                vice-principals in school
                                                                                  school development                                        management,
                                                                                plans, and establishing                                     institutional
                                                                                a permanent evaluation                                   administration and
                                                                                and monitoring system.                                pedagogical supervision.
     Nigeria State    Nigeria     2007-     1523 schools      Pri        75     Establishing a quality         Supporting the           Developing school          Yes     No     No       No        No
      Education                   2011       targeted to       &                 assurance inspection         implementation of        leadership capacity
        Sector                            implement school    Sec                   system in which          school development        through training in
        Project                             development                         training workshops are     plans for which schools    procurement, financial
                                                plans.                          provided to inspectors       may receive grants.        management and
                                                                                   to improve school                                      accountability.
                                                                                monitoring, resulting in
                                                                                annual basic education
                                                                                        reports.
                                                                  Table A.1: Relevant World Bank projects with components of school management

       Project       Country   Pe-           Scale                     Cost         Inspections            Development Plan          Management Training       Report         Test-   Dissemi-   Incen-
        Name                   riod                          School   (Mn $)                                                                                   Cards    SMC    ing     nation     tives
                                                             Type
     Reaching all    Lebanon   2016-     Target: 14 500       Pri      234     Classroom observations    Financing in the form       Training teachers and      No      No    Yes       No        No
     children with             2023     teachers per year      &                 to monitor teacher      of grants to schools for       school leaders in
     education in                      receiving training.    Sec               performance. Teacher      them to prepare and        effective instructional
       Lebanon                            780 schools to                       observation records are      implement school          techniques, student
        support                             implement                             digitalized so that      development plans.        assessment and school
        project                            development                         teacher progress can be                              management, with focus
                                              plans.                              tracked over time.                                 on fostering diversity
                                                                                                                                       and gender equity.
52
B     Details on program design and implementation

This section contains details on the intervention ­ Madhya Pradesh Shaala Gunvatta (School
Quality Assessment Program). The program was designed in partnership with the state
government of Madhya Pradesh, India, the British DFID, and Absolute Return for Kids (ARK),
based on procedures followed by the UK Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services
and Skills (OfStEd).


B.1    Theory of Change

MPSQA was conceived with the aim of devolving power to the school for overall improvement in
school quality. Schools were supported to identify the challenges hindering quality. Once areas
for improvement were identified by the school itself, they were provided with regular support
and mentoring to improve upon their processes. This would lead to an improvement in the
quality of the school (including school level processes and outcomes). The process for overall
school improvement is described in the chart below.

                   Figure B.1: Process of school improvement in MPSQA




                                              53
B.2    Rubric for school assessments

Schools were assessed on 7 standards that were spread over 9 sets of questionnaires (called
Tools). Chart 2 shows the division of the standards and elements they aimed to measure.
Based on the assessment, for each standard the school was graded as one of the following levels
(a) Exceeds expectation (b) Meets Expectation (c) Close to Expectation (d) Below Expectation.
The overall rating for the school was generated as a weighted average of these standard-specific
ratings.

                        Figure B.2: Components of school assessments




We provide the details on each standard below, with a description of indicators for all 4 grades/
levels. The assessors would fill up 9 different questionnaires/ tools which included questions
around school level processes, outcomes and interviews with different stakeholders. Questions
from across these tools mapped onto these 7 standards. The score of each standard would
then be generated using a pre-decided weightage. A weightage would then be provided to each
standard to compute the final grade of the school.




                                               54
Std 1: School Development and Mentoring

Description: The Head Teacher effectively promotes improvement in the quality of teaching
and student outcomes.


                                      Description of standards
Exceeds                    Meets                    Close                         Below

a. The school has          a. The school has          a. The school has           a. The school does not
produced a clear and       produced a clear and       produced a clear and        have a School
specific School            specific School            specific School             Development Plan.
Development Plan           Development Plan           Development Plan,
which is strongly          which includes the         although the priorities
focused on                 improvement of             identified are limited to
improvement of             student outcomes and       improvement of
student outcomes and       improvement in             infrastructure.
the quality of teaching.   teaching.

b. This is supported by    b. This is supported by    b. The head teacher         b. The head teacher
systematic classroom       regular visits to the      makes visits to the         seldom visits the
observation by the         classroom by the head      classrooms                  classroom and provides
head teacher, followed     teacher, followed by       occasionally, and these     with little or no
by feedback and            feedback and guidance      are sometimes followed      feedback and guidance
guidance to the            to the teachers to         by feedback and             to the teachers to
teachers to improve        improve their practice.    guidance to the             improve their practice.
their practice.                                       teachers to improve
                                                      their practice.




                                                     55
Std 2: Management

The school is managed well, with funding, facilities and human resources used efficiently,
satisfactory administrative routines, and a good team spirit among the staff.


                                         Description of standards
 Exceeds                     Meets                     Close                      Below

 a. The school is            a. The school is           a. In most respects the   a. The school is
 managed very well,          managed well, with         school is managed         managed poorly with
 with funding, facilities    funding, facilities and    adequately, with          inefficiencies in the use
 and human resources         human resources used       funding, facilities and   of funding, facilities
 used very efficiently,      efficiently,               human resources           and human resources,
                                                        generally used
                                                        efficiently, but there
                                                        are a few examples of
                                                        inefficiencies.

 b. Good administrative      b. Satisfactory            b. Most but not all       b. Weaknesses in
 routines (for example:      administrative routines    administrative routines   administrative routines
 record keeping and          (for example: record       are satisfactory (for     (for example: record
 time keeping),              keeping and time           example: record           keeping and time
                             keeping)                   keeping and time          keeping)
                                                        keeping)

 c. And a very good          c. And a good team         c. And the team spirit    c. And limited team
 team spirit among the       spirit among the staff.    among the staff is        spirit among the staff.
 staff, with focus on                                   satisfactory.
 school development
 and optimum use of
 facilities and resources.




                                                       56
Std 3: Teaching and Learning

The teaching demonstrates good pedagogical skills, good subject knowledge and good
interactions between teachers and students.


                                     Description of standards
Exceeds                   Meets                    Close                       Below

a. Almost all of the      a. Most of teachers        a. The majority of the    a. Only a minority of
teachers demonstrate      demonstrate good           teachers demonstrate      the teachers
good pedagogical skills   pedagogical skills         good pedagogical skills   demonstrate good
including the use of      including the use of       including the use of      pedagogical skills
formative assessment      formative assessment       formative assessment      including the use of
to meet the needs of      to meet the needs of       to meet the needs of      formative assessment
different students.       different students.        different students.       to meet the needs of
                                                                               different students.

b. Almost all of the      b. Most of the             b. The majority of the    b. The subject
teachers' subject         teachers' subject          teachers' subject         knowledge of only a
knowledge is accurate     knowledge is accurate      knowledge is accurate     minority of teachers is
and up to date.           and up to date.            and up to date.           accurate and up to
                                                                               date.

c. Almost all the         c. Most of the teachers    c. The majority of the    c. Only a minority of
teachers question the     question the students      teachers question the     the teachers question
students effectively,     effectively,               students effectively,     the students effectively,
communicate with          communicate with           communicate with          communicate with
them well and establish   them well and establish    them well and establish   them well and establish
positive relationships    positive relationships     positive relationships    positive relationships
in the classroom.         in the classroom.          in the classroom.         in the classroom.




                                                    57
Std 4: Support for students

The school is inclusive, provides equal opportunities and academic support for all students, and
promotes the students' health, safety and personal development.


                                        Description of standards
 Exceeds                   Meets                      Close                   Below
 a. The school is          a. The school is           a. The school is        a. The school falls well
 exceptionally effective   inclusive, providing       inclusive in most       short of being fully
 in providing equal        equal opportunities        respects in providing   inclusive. There is
 opportunities and         and discouraging           equal opportunities     some evidence of
 ensuring no               discrimination.            and discouraging        discrimination.
 discrimination occurs.                               discrimination.

 b. The progress of all    b. The progress of all    b. The progress of       b. The progress of
 students, including       students, including       students, including      students, including
 those with special        those with special        those with special       those with special
 educational needs, is     educational needs, is     educational needs, is    educational needs, is
 effectively tracked and   tracked and well          tracked and some         not tracked effectively
 very well supported.      supported.                support is given.        and little support is
                                                                              given.

 c. The school promotes    c. The school promotes    c. The school makes      c. The school does
 the students' health,     the students' health,     some effort to promote   little to promote the
 safety and personal       safety and personal       the students health,     students' health, safety
 development actively      development.              safety and personal      and personal
 and highly effectively.                             development.             development.




                                                    58
Std 5: The role of the SMC and school's engagement with parents and the wider
community

The school has an effective SMC, engages well with the wider community, communicates well
with parents and secures their support.


                                    Description of standards
Exceeds                 Meets                     Close                       Below
a. The SMC performs     a. The school has a       a. The school has an        a. The SMC is
its role effectively.   functioning SMC (head SMC but only the head           inactive, and there is
                        and members).             is active.                  little contact with the
                                                                              wider community.

b. The school engages   b. The school initiates      b. There is some         b. The school provides
well with the wider     wider community              contact with the wider   no information to the
community,              involvement, provides        community. The school    parents and does not
communicates well       information to the           provides a little        encourage contact.
with the parents, and   parents, and                 information to the
secures their active    encourages them to           parents and tries to
support for their       take an interest in their    make contact with
children's education.   children's education.        them.




                                                    59
Std 6: Academic Outcomes


                                     Description of standards
Exceeds                  Meets                     Close                    Below

a. 90% or more           a. 75% or more            a. 50% or more           a. Less than 50%
students are in grades   students are in grades    students are in grades   students are in grades
C or above in Hindi,     C or above in Hindi,      C or above in Hindi,     C or above in Hindi
and Maths for class 5    and Maths for class 5     and Maths class 5 or 8   and Maths class 5 or 8
or 8 Pratibha Parv       or 8 Pratibha Parv        Pratibha Parv results.   Pratibha Parv results.
results.                 results.                  Or                       Or
Or                       Or                        55% or more students     Less than 45% or more
75% or more students     65% or more students      are in division 2 or     students are in grades
are in division 2 or     are in division 2 or      above in Hindi, and      C or above in Hindi
above in Hindi, and      above in Hindi, and       Maths for grade 10       and Maths for grade 10
Maths for grade 10       Maths for grade 10        Or                       Or
Or                       Or                        55% or more students     Less than 45% students
55% or more students     65% or more students      are in division 2 or     are in division 2 or
are in division 2 or     are in division 2 or      above in all the         above all the streams
above in all the         above in all the          streams for grade 12     for grade 12
streams for grade 12     streams for grade 12

b. In most of the        b. In most of the         b. In most of the        b. In most of the
classes the students     classes the students      classes the students     classes the students
make very good           make good progress        make acceptable          make weak progress
progress and the         and the students          progress and the         and the students
students generally       generally demonstrate     students generally       generally demonstrate
demonstrate              understanding             demonstrate              understanding well
understanding            consistent with their     understanding slightly   below their test results.
consistent with or       test results.             below consistent with
better than their test                             their test results.
results.




                                                  60
Std 7: Personal and social outcomes


                                        Description of standards
 Exceeds                   Meets                      Close                     Below
 a. Almost all of the      a. Most of the students a. The majority of the       a. Only a minority of
 students attend well      attend well and are        students attend well      the students attend
 and are punctual to       punctual to school and and are punctual to           well and are punctual
 school and for lessons.   for lessons.               school and for lessons.   to school and for
                                                                                lessons.

 b. Students have very     b. Students have          b. Students have           b. Poor behaviour and
 positive attitudes and    positive attitudes and    positive attitudes and     lack of respect by a
 values, and respectful    values, and good          values, and good           minority of the
 relationships with        relationships with        relationships with         students disrupts the
 adults.                   adults.                   adults.                    learning environment.

 c. They show respect      c. They show interest     c. Students show a         c. Students show no
 and understanding of      in and some               little interest in but a   interest in and very
 local history and         understanding of local    limited understanding      little understanding of
 culture.                  history and culture.      of local history and       local history and
                                                     culture.                   culture.




B.3     Implementation of project components

1. Training of school assessors: School assessors were trained using a cascade model of
   training, which is common in large interventions in this setting. A State Resource Group
   (SRG) was created, who were designated as master trainers. This resource group of about 50
   individuals represented each of the 10 regions (each region is a group of districts) in MP. This
   SRG, in turn, trained the District Resource Group (DRG) at the regional level comprising
   of 35- 40 individuals. The DRG then trained the assessors. These trainings were spread over
   4 days and included one day of field visit, where the trainees conducted a mock assessment
   process. During this field trial the assessors collected the necessary data and then returned
   to generate the school-specific reports. There was no feedback that was given to schools and
   no action plan was developed as part of this training.

2. Assessments of Schools: Each school was assessed by a team of two assessors, one internal
   and one external. The internal assessor was the schools' corresponding Cluster Resource
   Coordinator or Block Resource Coordinator and the external assessor was a retired head
   teacher or a fresh Bachelor's of Education Graduate. This team of two spent 1-2 days
   to complete the assessments: these assessments used 9 tools (structured data collection


                                                    61
   questionnaires or protocols) to arrive at judgements on the 7 domains. The assessors could
   enter the data on their android phones/ tablets in the schools directly or came back to the
   base station and entered it on the online application. At the end of the data entry a 4 page
   report was generated which listed out the key recommendations for the schools to work on
   to improve their quality standards. As the next step, the assessors went back to the schools
   and spent half-a-day with the Head Teacher, School Management Committee president and
   members, and teachers to discuss the report and recommendations in detail. Based on these
   recommendations the group then collaboratively worked to create the School Improvement
   Plan. The entire exercise was neither prescriptive nor punitive.

3. School Development Plan and Follow up Visits: As described above, the School
   Improvement Plan was developed collaboratively. This action plan listed out all the specific
   actions that the school was to undertake over the next academic year. During this time, the
   schools were supposed to be provided with continued mentoring, monitoring and support
   from the internal assessors by quarterly follow up visits. These visits were intended to be
   part of the regular schools visits that these officials undertake but with the specific task of
   discussing the progress on the school action plan.




                                               62
C     Additional figures and tables

C.1     Phase I evaluation: Elementary schools


                       Figure C.1: Distribution of pre-program test scores




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of school-level test scores administrative test data (Pratibha
Parv) in March 2013 for the full population of randomly-assigned treatment and control schools in Phase
I of the evaluation. These were the most recent public data available at the the time of randomization
in 2014. We cannot reject the equality of distributions across the two groups (p-value of 0.67 in a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).




                                                  63
                                    Table C.1: Quantile treatment effects on independent test scores


                                      (1)        (2)     (3)     (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                     Mathematics                                        Hindi
      VARIABLES                       q10        q30     q50     q70       q90         q10       q30     q50       q70      q90

      Treatment                       -0.04       0.03      0.00   0.07*   0.03       -0.01      -0.05    -0.00   0.07*    0.03
                                     (0.03)      (0.04)    (0.03)  (0.04) (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.04)  (0.05)
      Pre-treatment PP school score 0.03***     0.07***   0.09*** 0.10***  0.02     0.05***    0.07*** 0.09*** 0.07***     0.02




64
                                     (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.02)  (0.02) (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)  (0.02)
      Constant                      -1.25***   -0.87***   -0.41*** 0.21* 1.08***    -1.36***   -0.91*** -0.33*** 0.35*** 1.29***
                                     (0.10)      (0.07)    (0.09)  (0.11) (0.08)     (0.04)     (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.09)  (0.08)

      Observations                   9,901      9,901      9,901   9,901   9,901      9,901     9,901    9,901    9,901    9,901

     Source: Student-level data from independent learning assessments conducted in February 2016.
     Note: Treatment is an indicator variable denoting schools which were randomly-assigned for program implementation. Dummy
     variables for each block are included in all regressions. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
     significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
C.2      Phase I evaluation in secondary schools


                              Table C.2: Balance on observable characteristics


                                                All Study Schools                   Subsample with primary data
                                        Control Treatment Diff       Diff SE   Control Treatment Diff Diff SE
                                         Mean     Mean      (T-C)               Mean      Mean       (T-C)
Total enrollment                        256.00    250.30    -12.32   (22.20)   265.28     250.30     -25.53 (30.11)
No. of teachers                           6.23     6.46      0.21     (0.43)    6.31       6.46       -0.06  (0.58)
Pupil-teacher ratio                      44.14    43.87      -0.99    (3.42)    44.38     43.87        0.81  (3.84)
Proportion of Qualified teachers         0.89      0.89      -0.01    (0.01)    0.89       0.89       -0.01  (0.02)
Rural                                    0.78      0.80       0.00    (0.05)    0.80       0.80        0.02  (0.05)
Electricity                               0.52     0.48      -0.05    (0.05)     0.52      0.48       -0.06  (0.06)

Class X Board Score
Total Score                                                                    266.18     265.13    -7.94   (6.59)
Hindi Score                                                                     46.07     45.94     -1.39   (1.26)
Math Score                                                                      33.75      35.54    -0.37   (1.31)
Observations                             273        116                          116        116
F-test of joint significance (F-stat)                       0.431                                   0.938
F-test, number of observations                               346                                     191


Source: 2013-14 school-level administrative data from DISE and Board scores.
Note: Differences in means between treatment and control group and associated standard
errors are reported from regressions incorporating block fixed effects and clustering standard
errors at the academic cluster level (level of randomization). The F-test refers to a test
of joint significance for all reported variables and reports the F-statistics. The number of
observations for the F-tests are lower than the total number of observations due to missing
data for pupil-teacher ratio, proportion of qualified teachers, electricity indicator and Board
scores. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.




                                                           65
                Table C.3: Ranking of treatment schools by school inspectors



                                                         Percentage of schools           N
                                                 Below    Close to    Meets    Above
                                               standards standards standards standards

     Std.1: School Development and Mentoring      8.7      22.3      60.2        8.7     103
     Std.2: Management                            3.9      36.9      46.6       12.6     103
     Std.3: Teaching and learning                53.4      39.8       5.8         1      103
     Std.4: Support for students                   1       21.4      52.4       25.2     103
     Std.5: SMC and engagement with parents       2.9       32        34        31.1     103
     Std.6: Academic Outcomes                    17.5       66       13.6        2.9     103
     Std.7: Personal and Social Outcomes          4.9      28.2      58.3        8.7     103
     Overall                                      4.9      63.1      29.1        2.9     103

Source: Administrative ARK data on school assessment grades.
Note: These ratings are taken from the administrative data on program implementation and
include all treatment elementary schools for which data was available. The data indicate that
school inspections, and the corresponding input of assessments into the online portal, was done
for 89% of the treatment schools at the secondary level.




                                                 66
                       Table C.4: Informativeness of school assessments

                                                     (1)         (2)
                                                   Board Score 2014-15

                    Close to standard                0.109        0.115
                                                    (0.106)      (0.189)
                    Meets standard                   0.150        0.159
                                                    (0.128)      (0.241)

                    Constant                         0.062        0.075
                                                    (0.095)      (0.180)
                    Pre-treatment Board Score      0.684***     0.573***
                                                    (0.063)      (0.072)

                    Observations                      87            84
                    R-squared                        0.626        0.793
                    Block FE                          No           Yes



Source:  Administrative ARK Data on school assessment grades.
 Administrative student-level data on board exam scores.
Note: This table relates future student achievement aggregated at the school level to the grades
that schools receive in the MPSQA school assessments and lagged test scores. Standard errors
are clustered at school level. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
critical level.




                                              67
Table C.5: Program effects on frequency and intensity of monitoring and School management
committee functioning

                                                     Control Treatment        Diff Diff SE
                                                     Mean      Mean         (T-C)
   Visits by Block/Cluster officials (Full sample)   3.05       2.42         -0.61 (0.42)
   Visits by Block/Cluster officials (Sub sample)    2.50       2.42         -0.18 (0.59)

   Time of last visit
   Within last month                                 0.27          0.27      -0.01   (0.06)
   Within last 2 months                              0.49          0.42      -0.06   (0.07)
   Within 6 months                                   0.70          0.68      -0.06   (0.06)
   Within last year                                  0.84          0.90      0.08*   (0.04)

   Time spent by inspector
   Less than 30 minutes                              0.14          0.19      0.05    (0.04)
   More than 30 minutes                              0.86          0.81      -0.05   (0.04)
   More than 1 hour                                  0.51          0.48      -0.04   (0.07)
   More than 3 hours                                 0.04          0.05       0.01   (0.02)

   Observations                                      116           116

Source:  2015-16 School-level administrative Dataset from DISE.
 Official 2015 school inspection register records.
Note: Differences in means between treatment and control group and associated standard errors
are reported from regressions incorporating block fixed effects and clustering standard errors at
the academic cluster level (level of randomization). The sample for the visits by block/cluster
officials in the full sample consists of 271 control schools and 116 treatment schools. Data on
time of inspector visits was collected for the subsample of 232 secondary schools. Data on
time spent by the inspector was reported by the headmaster/school in-charge. If no details
were available, a school was visited up to 3 times to complete the survey. The content of
the inspector's comments were also transcribed and do not reveal any important differences
between the treatment and control schools. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and
10 percent critical level.




                                               68
 Table C.6: Effects on teacher attendance, pedagogy and student engagement - School Level


                                                     Control     Treatment       Diff   Diff SE
                                                    N Mean        N Mean       (T-C)
 Teacher Attendance*                               116 0.78      115 0.76       -0.03   (0.02)

 Pedagogical inputs
 Textbooks used during class                       113   0.92    113   0.95    0.03     (0.02)
 Workbooks used during class                       114   0.09    113   0.05    -0.04    (0.02)
 Teacher praised students                          112   0.42    113   0.42    -0.00    (0.05)

 Time spent on activities
 % Spent on Lecture                                114   47.70   113   47.23    -2.36   (2.82)
 % Silent Work                                     114    2.36   113    3.15     0.74   (0.94)
 % Group Call                                      114   14.04   113   16.98   4.12**   (1.87)
 % Small Group Work                                114    0.11   113    0.00    -0.13   (0.09)
 % Big Group Work                                  114   2.03    113   2.05     0.06    (1.04)
 % Class Discipline                                114    2.19   113    1.22    -0.69   (0.58)
 % Out of class                                    114   1.43    113   0.61     -0.70   (0.56)

 Child has HW notebooks which are checked          114   0.35    113   0.33    -0.02    (0.04)
 Student Attendance                                116   0.51    114   0.49    -0.03    (0.03)
 Student Engagement

Source: *2015-16 teacher-level primary data from direct interviewer observations collected in
one round.  2015-16 teacher-level primary data from direct interviewer observation of two
classrooms per school.  2015-16 Primary data of homework review collected at student-level.
 2015-16 School-level primary data collected in three rounds.
Note: All data has been aggregated at the school-level. Differences in means between treatment
and control group and associated standard errors are reported from regressions incorporating
block fixed effects and clustering standard errors at the academic cluster level (level of
randomization). Round indicators are included as covariates in the estimations for teacher
attendance. Where a school was found closed at the time of the inspection (always during
business hours), all teachers are marked absent. Data on pedagogical inputs and time spent
on activities are collected for two classrooms per school in grade 9 divided equally between
mathematics and hindi. For a subset of 7 schools - only one classroom could be observed.
The variables indicating time spent on activities are based on questionnaire items which asks
if the time spent in classroom for each of these activities was below 25%, above 25% and below
50%, above 50% and below 75%, above 75% or not conducted at all, and take on five values:
0%, 12.5%, 37.5%, 62.5% and 87.5%. Student attendance is reported as average percentage
of students across three rounds of data collection at the school level. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.




                                              69
                    Table C.7: Treatment effect on student achievement


                                          Class X Board Exams
                                            (1)        (2)
                                           2015       2016

                        Treatment          0.081         0.058
                                          (0.056)       (0.060)
                        Constant           0.027         0.020
                                          (0.041)       (0.043)

                        Observations      15,346         17,242
                        R-squared         0.105          0.094


Source: Administrative student-level data on test scores in Class 10 Board examinations.
Note: All regressions incorporate block fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
academic cluster level. The dependent variables are individual-level test scores normalized at
mean 0 and standard deviation 1 within year for the control group. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.




                                             70
D     Details of Data Collection

D.1    Intervention implementation and data collection timelines

      S.No. Activity                                                    Timeline

       1.    Piloting of Shaala Gunwatta tools in 100                  2012-2013
             schools in Madhya Pradesh, India to finalise
             tools and evaluation model

       2.    Selection of treatment clusters and control           July-August, 2014
             clusters for implementation of Shaala
             Gunwatta across 5 districts in Madhya Pradesh

       3.    Assessments of treatment schools                   September-November 2014

       4.    Pratibha Parv standardized student tests                December 2014
             2014-15

       5.    Round 1 of collection of process variables from   September ­ November, 2015
             sub-sample of elementary and secondary
             schools (treatment and control)

       6.    Pratibha Parv standardized student tests                December 2015
             2015-16

       7.    Round 2 of collection of process variables from         January, 2016
             sub-sample of elementary schools (treatment
             and control)
       8.    Round 3 of collection of process variables from         February, 2016
             sub-sample of elementary schools (treatment
             and control)

       9.    Independent student tests in sub-sample                  March, 2016
       10.   Phase 2: Training of District/School staff                June, 2016
       11.   Phase 2: Completion of assessments and SIPs             November 2016
       12.   Phase 2: Independently-administered student              March 2018
             tests in elementary schools in matched sample

Note: The Phase 2 data collection refers only to the independent data that is available for both
treated and comparison schools in the matched study.




                                                71
D.2       Student Learning Outcomes

Our primary outcome, student learning outcomes, was measured through independently
administered tests in Hindi (language) and maths supervised by the research staff in March 2016.
Students in all elementary schools in the sub-sample were tested. No testing was conducted in
secondary schools.


D.2.1     Test Design & Content

The test items were a combination of questions from the state administered learning survey
(called Pratibha Parv) as well as questions from test booklets of research studies like Young
Lives and APRESt. Each test was a combination of items below and at grade level. The items
below grade level include questions that tested for basic math and literacy skills allowing us to
understand levels of learning. The grade level items helped us assess proficiency of students at
the level that the state government expected them to be. All tests were piloted in non-study
elementary schools to remove questions with little or no variation as well as to fine tune test
administration protocols.


D.2.2     Test Administration

All tests took place in the school premises within school hours. All students present on the day
of the assessment were tested. No revisits were made to assess students who were absent on
the day of the original assessment. Three different methods of test administration were used
­ individual oral, group oral and written assessments. This allows us to avoid floor effects in
assessments. The table below provided the details of the mode of administration in each grade:

 GRADE       HINDI                                                  MATHS
   1         Group Oral & Individual Oral                  Group Oral & Individual Oral
   2         Group Oral & Individual Oral                  Group Oral & Individual Oral
   3         Group Oral & Individual Oral                  Group Oral & Individual Oral
             & Written assessment                             & Written assessment
      4      Group Oral & Written assessment                   Written assessment
      5      Written assessment                                Written assessment
      6      Written assessment                                Written assessment
      7      Written assessment                                Written assessment
      8      Written assessment                                Written assessment




                                               72
1. Individual Oral Assessment: one on one assessment of each student by survey staff
   outside the classroom. This test mostly included reading of letters, words and sentences. It
   also included questions on counting objects to test basic numeracy skills. Individual oral was
   restricted to students in class 1, 2 and 3. In each class a maximum of 15 students were tested
   using this method. If more than 15 students were present, a random number generator was
   used to select the 15 students to be tested.

2. Group Oral Assessment: all students present in the class were tested together. The survey
   staff read out the question to the class and students marked answers in their individual test
   booklets. This test contained questions on vocabulary, mathematical operations and word
   problems. Group oral was restricted to students in primary grades (1,2,3,4) It was ensured
   that during administration at least two survey staff were present in the classroom to ensure
   that children followed the questions being read to them.

3. Written assessments: all students present in the class were provided the test booklet and
   were provided defined time to complete the assessment. Survey staff were instructed to let
   children complete the assessment even if the maximum time allowed had elapsed. Students
   from classes 3-8 were provided written assessments. No written assessments were conducted
   with students in class 1&2.


D.3     Details of data collection and protocols

In addition to outcome data from student achievement, we collected information on school
functioning over multiple visits (refer timeline provided in Table C.1) to the 302 elementary
across 5 districts.:


D.3.1   Principal/ Headmaster details and characteristics

  1. Included details on professional experience, methods of monitoring and evaluating
     staff. All information was collected based on in-person interview of the school
     principal/headmaster (HM)/in-charge during school hours.

  2. In some schools where the principal or headmaster hadn't been appointed, the teacher
     designated as in-charge was interviewed. If the principal/ headmaster/ designated
     in-charge was not present on the day of the visit, upto 3 visits were conducted.




                                               73
D.3.2    Teacher attendance

1. Staff attendance was collected thrice during the academic year 2015-16. Each visit
   was unannounced. In the first round of collection, several other modules were also
   administered (example ­ classroom observation, homework review, details on school
   management committees etc.). It was ensured that staff attendance was collected in the
   first/ unannounced visit. During the first round of data collection, permanent teachers in
   the state went on strike. This strike led to many schools being closed during data collection.
   In these schools, attendance data was collected in the second/ third visit. All these visits
   were unannounced.

2. In the second and third round of attendance collection, only one visit to each school was
   made. This visit was made during school hours (data on this had been collected previously).
   If the school was found closed during school hours, all staff were marked as absent.


D.3.3    Details on inspections and visits by government officials

1. Details of last and second to last visit by a government official were noted, including details
   of comments made in the official inspection register.

2. This information was collected using the official records maintained by the school (primarily
   inspection register). In cases where documentation was not available but school in-charge/
   senior teachers could provide details, survey was completed. If no details were available, a
   school was visited up to 3 times to complete the survey.


D.3.4    Details of School Management Committees/ PTAs

1. Details of SMC/ PTAs including details of last two meetings and their perceived usefulness
   were collected. The school principal/ headmaster or any senior teacher were typical
   respondents. Under the Right to Education, 2009, each elementary school is mandated
   to have a School Management Committee. In secondary schools, details of Parent Teacher
   Associations (SMC equivalent were collected).

2. All administrative details of SMC (present or not, number of members, details of meetings)
   were noted down form the official documentation maintained in the school. In cases where
   documentation was not available on the day of the visit but school in-charge/ senior teachers
   could provide details, survey was completed. If no details were available a school was visited
   up to 3 times to complete the survey.


                                               74
D.3.5    Classroom observations

1. In each school, two classrooms were observed. Classes observed were based on type of school:

             Type of school                 Grades observed                  Subject observed
 Primary school (schools from class 1 to 5) 2 and 4                     Hindi (language) and Maths
 Middle school (schools from class 6 to 8) 6 and 8                      Hindi (language) and Maths
 Secondary schools (schools from 9 to 12) 9                             Hindi (language) and Maths




2. For primary and middle schools, the selection of the combination of class and subject was
   done randomly by the research staff (who also ensured that equal number of class*subject
   combinations existed). In each school only teachers teaching the subject regularly to the
   class in the academic year 2015-16 were observed. No substitute teachers were observed. Up
   to a maximum of three visits were made to complete the classroom observation. In some
   schools, the same teacher was observed twice as they taught both subjects to be observed.
   Each classroom was observed for a maximum of 1 hour. If the teacher had already started
   teaching (10 minutes of class starting), survey staff revisited the school but did not enter
   midway during the class.

3. Staff was trained through in-class training (by using classroom videos) as well as field practice
   by visiting government schools.

4. Percentage of time spent on task: During observation, survey staff also noted down time
   spent on different activities by the teacher. The time spent was not exact but recorded in
   ranges:

   (a) Activity not conducted
   (b) Less than 25% time spent on the activity
    (c) More than 25% but less than 50% time spent on the activity
   (d) More than 50% but less than 75% time spent on the activity
    (e) More than 75% time spent on the activity


D.3.6    Homework Review

1. In each school, two classrooms were observed. In each observed classroom, homework copies
   of five randomly selected students were reviewed. A random number list was used for this


                                                 75
   selection. In the review, survey staff looked for whether the copy had been checked, and if
   checked the nature of feedback provided.

2. Information on whether or not these five children had homework notebooks was noted down.
   No substitution was made if a child did not have a homework notebook. If less than five
   students were present, notebooks of all students were reviewed. In some schools, no separate
   homework notebook was maintained. Survey staff reviewed any notebook that the teacher
   regularly corrects (which may or may not necessarily be referred to as a homework notebook).


D.3.7    Teacher Characteristics

1. All information was collected based on in-person interview of a school teacher during school
   hours. In each school a maximum of two teachers were interviewed. These teachers were
   observed teaching before the interview. In a primary school, teachers teaching class 2 and
   4 were interviewed, in middle schools, teachers teaching class 6 and 8 were interviewed and
   in secondary schools teachers teaching class 9 were interviewed. In each school, one hindi/
   language and one maths teacher was interviewed. The selection of the combination of class
   and subject was done randomly.

2. In each school only teachers teaching the subject regularly to the class in the academic year
   2015-16 were interviewed. No substitute teachers were interviewed. Up to a maximum of
   three visits were made to complete the teacher interview. If the teacher observed was the
   school in-charge, they were not interviewed a second time as many of the questions between
   the principal and the teacher interview are the same. In some schools, the same teacher was
   observed twice as they taught both subjects observed. These teachers were only interviewed
   once.


D.3.8    School Infrastructure

1. Infrastructure details were collected by inspecting the school building and facilities. A school
   staff was asked for clarifications when needed.


D.3.9    Student attendance

1. Student enrollment and attendance were recorded from the student attendance register
   present in the school on the day of survey. In some schools, summary attendance is also
   maintained. If the attendance register was not present, summary attendance records were
   used. Attendance was collected three times over the academic year through unannounced

                                                76
   visits. It was ensured that student attendance was collected in the first visit. During the
   first round of data collection, permanent teachers in the state went on strike. This strike led
   to many schools being closed during data collection. In these schools, attendance data was
   collected in the second/ third visit. All these visits were unannounced.

2. In the second and third round of data collection, only one visit to each school was made.
   This visit was made during school hours (data on this had been collected previously). If the
   school was closed, no student attendance data could be collected.


D.3.10    Initial school observation

1. Details of classes being held and general state of affairs as observed by survey staff on entering
   the school premises.

2. No clarification was sought from the school staff while noting down the state of affairs
   (including classrooms in which teachers weren't present but children were). This section
   was skipped if morning assembly or lunch hour was going on when the survey staff obtained
   consent.


D.3.11    Student surveys

For students in classes 4-8 we also conducted, at the time of the assessments, a survey to collect
details on assets owned at home, support received at home to complete homework, details
of any tuition attended, and the frequency of certain classroom practices and student-teacher
engagement.




                                                 77
     E     Example of a School Improvement Plan (Phase 2 implementation)

                                         MOTTO OF THE SCHOOL: EDUCATION IS A SEA OF KNOWLEDGE
                                     Domain 1 (A): Resources Available at the School (Availability and Sufficiency)
                         Marked Areas      Priority                                                                  Responsible                  Expected
     Standard    Level                                Points of Proposed Actions                                                                                          Timeline
                         for               Order                                                                     Person at                    Departmental

                         Improvement                                                                                 School Level                 Assistance

                                                                                                                                                  From
                                                                                                                     Name           Designation              What
                                                                                                                                                  Who

                                                      Fence will be made shaping locally available plants like
     1. School           Boundary
                 1                         Medium     henna, ipomoea, leucina, lantana etc. and will be taken        Mr. XX         School                   Financial    03/08/2018
     Campus              Wall/ Fencing
                                                      care of.                                                       Mrs. XX        HM                       Assistance

                                                                                                                                    SMC
78




                                                                                                                                    President

                                                      In absence of space for garden, plants will be grown in

                                                      flower pots. As an alternative arrangement for flower pots,
                                                                                                                     Mr. XX         School
                                                      old pitchers, buckets, plastic containers, bottles etc. will
     2. School                                                                                                       Mrs. XX        HM                       Financial
                 1       School Garden     Medium     be used after decoration.                                                                                           05/01/2017
     Campus                                                                                                          Children's     SMC                      Assistance
                                                      In absence of space for garden and fencing, indoor plants
                                                                                                                     Cabinet        President
                                                      will be grown in flower pots.
                                                                                                                     All Staff      Members
                                                      In case of insufficient space being available, small plants

                                                      will be grown.

                                                      The students will be provided plants as rewards.

     3. School           Space for                    The biggest hall of the school will be used for assembly.
                 1                         Medium                                                                    All Staff      All Staff     Blank      Blank        01/04/2017
     Campus              School                       The assembly will be done at available open space.

                         Assembly
     4. Playground,
                           Sports Material
     Sports Material   1                     Medium   Material for indoor and outdoor games will be procured.      Mr. XX      School              Financial    12/08/2017
                           & Appliances
     & Appliances                                                                                                  Mrs. XX     HM                  Assistance

                                                                                                                               SMC

                                                                                                                               President

                                                      After forming the sections suitable for rooms available in

     5. Classrooms                                    the school, the arrangements will be made that the sizes
                       1   Size of Rooms     High                                                                  All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank        01/04/2017
     & Other                                          of the rooms match the ratio of the students.

     Rooms                                            Bigger sized additional rooms will be demanded.

                                                      Sufficient number of furniture will be demanded for
     6. Classrooms                                                                                                             School
                           Arrangement                teachers and students.                                       Mr. XX                          Financial
     & Other           1                     High                                                                              HM                               04/01/2018
                           of Furniture               Furniture will be arranged with community assistance.        Mrs. XX                         Assistance
     Rooms                                                                                                                     SMC
79




                                                      Furniture will be acquired through School Gift Scheme
                                                                                                                               President
                                                      (Shala Upahar Yojana).

     7. Classrooms         Room for Head              One room of the school will be arranged for School Head.     Mr. XX      School              Financial
                       1                     High                                                                                                               01/09/2017
     & Other               of the School              Additional room will be demanded.                            Mrs. XX     HM                  Assistance

     Rooms                                            TV and radio sets will be demanded.                                      SMC
                                                                                                                               School
     8. Power &                                                                                                    Mr. XX                          Financial    04/07/2018
                       1   TV & Radio        Low      TV and radio sets will be arranged with community                        President
                                                                                                                               HM
     Appliances                                                                                                    Mrs. XX                         Assistance
                                                      assistance.                                                              SMC

                                                      TV and radio will be received through School Gift Scheme.                President

                                                      Electrify connection will be taken for the school.                       School
     9. Power &            Arrangement                                                                             Mr. XX                          Financial
                       1                     Low                                                                               HM                               05/01/2018
     Appliances            of Power                                                                                Mrs. XX                         Assistance
                                                                                                                               SMC

                                                                                                                               President
                                                  Electric fittings will be made in the building, for which

                                                  help will be taken from community electrician.

                                                  Electric fittings will be demanded.

                                                  Lighting arrangement and fans will be demanded for all
                                                                                                                          School              Connection
     10. Power &          Electric                rooms.                                                      Mr. XX
                      1                    Low                                                                            HM                  will be        04/01/2018
     Appliances           Appliances              Light and fans will be arranged with community              Mrs. XX
                                                                                                                          SMC                 demanded
                                                  assistance.
                                                                                                                          President           through. . .
                                                  Light and fans will be acquired through School Gift

                                                  Scheme.

                                                  Local newspapers and other educational magazines will be
                          Acquisition of                                                                      Mr. XX      School              Financial
     11. Library      2                    High   subscribed.                                                                                                05/01/2018
                          Newspapers &                                                                        Mrs. XX     HM                  Assistance
                                                  Newspapers and magazines available at teachers'/
                          Magazines                                                                                       SMC
                                                  students' residence will be collected.
                                                                                                                          President
80




                          Hall & Reading          Closed or unused rooms will be developed as library.        Mr. XX      School              Financial
     12. Library      2                    High                                                                                                              01/09/2018
                          Space for               If rooms are not available, through the block, we will      Mrs. XX     HM                  Assistance

                          Library                 demand that that is included in the district plan.                      SMC

                                                  Books (other than text books) will be acquired @ 10                     President
                          Acquisition of                                                                      Mr. XX      School              Financial
     13. Library      2                    High   books per student.                                                                                         01/05/2017
                          Books                                                                               Mrs. XX     HM                  Assistance
                                                  Books will be protected from moisture.
                                                                                                                          SMC
                                                  We will prepare a list of experiments mentioned in the
                                                                                                                          President
     14. Laboratory       Procuring               science textbooks for class VI to VIII.

     (where           1   Basic            High   According to the list, we will provide apparatus required   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank          01/03/2017

     applicable)          Apparatus               to do these experiments.

                                                  We will use mathematics kits to clarify the concepts of

                                                  mathematics.
                                                         We will prepare mathematics kits with easily available

                                                         material like wood, paper, cardboard etc.

                                                         We will develop one of the closed/ unused rooms of the
     15. Laboratory             Developing                                                                          Mr. XX    School
                       1                          High   school for laboratory.                                                           Blank   Blank        04/01/2018
     (where                     Science and                                                                         Mrs. XX   HM
                                                         We will procure instruments and apparatus from the fund
     applicable)                Mathematics                                                                                   SMC
                                                         available under "Tod-Fod-Jod" (Split, break and
                                Laboratory                                                                                    President
                                                         assemble) Club programme.

     16. Computer

     (where            No Provision

     applicable)

                                Ramp                     Ramp will be constructed as per standards set by the
     17. Ramp          1                          High                                                              Mr. XX    School              Financial    24/05/2018
                                Construction             state.
                                                                                                                    Mrs. XX   HM                  Assistance

                                                                                                                              SMC
81




                                                                                                                              President

                                                         Kitchen shed will be constructed as per standards set by
     18. MDM,                                                                                                                 School
                                                         the state
     Food and                   Availability of                                                                     Mr. XX    HM                  Financial
                       1                          Low                                                                                                          02/02/2018
     Utensils (where            Kitchen Shed                                                                        Mrs. XX   SMC                 Assistance

     food is cooked                                                                                                           President
                                                         If any unused/ additional room is available, we will be
     in school
                                                         develop it as a store room cum kitchen shed.
     campus)
                                                         In order to cook and serve food, utensils of appropriate

     19. MDM,                   Cooking                  sizes will be procured in appropriate number based on      Mr. XX    School              Financial
                       1                          Low                                                                                                          19/04/2018
     Food and                   Utensils                 number of students.                                        Mrs. XX   HM                  Assistance

     Utensils (where                                     Utensils will be acquired with community participation               SMC

     food is cooked                                      and under school gift scheme.                                        President

     in school

     campus)
                                                 Sufficient number of pitchers, tanks, drums, cans etc. will
                        Availability of
                                                 be arranged for drinking water storage.                        Children's   Children's
     20. Drinking       Sufficient
                    1                     High   In case of tap water supply to the school, help of students,   Cabinet      Cabinet      Blank   Blank   01/06/2017
     Water              Drinking Water
                                                 children's cabinet members, teachers, and SMP members          All Staff    All Staff
                        Regularly
                                                 will be taken for storage.

                                                 In case handpump is installed in the school, students will

                                                 be assigned responsibility on rotation basis.

                                                 Help of SHG(s) will be taken for drinking water storage.

     21. Hand
                                                 Water for hand-washing will also be stored along with
     washing        1   Water Supply      High                                                                  Children's   Children's   Blank   Blank   07/07/2017
                                                 drinking water.
     facilities                                                                                                 Cabinet      Cabinet

                                                                                                                All Staff    All Staff
82




     22. Hand                                    Separate place will be fixed for hand-washing of students.
                        Place for
     washing        1                     High   Appropriate arrangement will be made for pre-lunch
                        Hand-washing
     facilities                                  hand-washing so that all students can wash their hands

                                                 properly: -- Hand-washing in queues ­ class-wise

                                                 hand-washing ­ hand-washing under supervision of

                                                 teachers/ monitors/ children's cabinet.

                                                 Based on number of students, arrangement of taps or

                                                 buckets/ utensils will be made at the place fixed for

                                                 hand-washing.
                                Separate toilet

                                will be made
                                                             Separate toilet will be made for students with physical
     23. Toilets       1        for students        Low                                                                 Mr. XX    School      Financial    03/08/2018
                                                             disability.
                                with physical                                                                           Mrs. XX   HM          Assistance

                                disability.                                                                                       SMC

                                                                                                                                  President

                                                  Domain 1 (B): Resources Available at the School (Quality and Utility)
     1. School
                       1                            Low
     Campus

     2. Playground,

     Sports Material   1                            Low

     & Appliances

     3. Classroom &
83




                       1                            Low
     Other Rooms

                                                             Good quality wiring and ISI marked switch boards will be
     4. Power &                 Wiring &                                                                                Mr. XX    School      Financial
                       1                            Medium   fixed.                                                                                        04/01/2018
     Appliances                 Switch Board                                                                            Mrs. XX   HM          Assistance
                                                             Their periodic checkup and required repair will be done
                                                                                                                                  SMC
                                                             for safety.
                                                                                                                                  President
     5. Library        2                            Low

     6. Laboratory

     (where            1                            Low

     applicable)

     7. Computer

     (where            No Provision

     applicable)
                           Quality of                Ramp will be constructed as per standards set by the
     8. Ramp           1                   Medium                                                                Mr. XX       School               Financial    05/02/2018
                           Ramp                      state.
                                                                                                                 Mrs. XX      HM                   Assistance

                                                                                                                              SMC

                                                                                                                              President

     9. MDM,                                         MDM related utensils will be kept clean.

     Cooking &             Cleanliness &             Food will be kept covered.
                       1                   High                                                                  All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank        01/04/2017
     Utensils (where       Hygiene                   Cooking and food serving place will be cleaned regularly

     food is cooked                                  so that food is hygienic.

     in school                                       Clean water will be used to wash vegetables, pulses, rice

     campus)                                         etc.

     10. Drinking
                       1                   Low
     Water
84




     11.
                           Importance of             Teachers will explain the importance of hand-washing to
     Hand-washing      1                   High                                                                  All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank        20/01/2017
                           Hand-washing              students.
     Facilities

     12. Hand-
                           Monitoring of             Hand-washing of students will be monitored regularly
     Washing           1                   High                                                                  Children's   Children's   Blank   Blank        02/05/2017
                           Hand-washing              with the help of monitor/ children's cabinet.
     Facilities                                                                                                  Cabinet      Cabinet

                                                                                                                 All Staff    All Staff

                                                     Toilets will be made functional through their required
     13. Toilets       1   Repair          Medium                                                                Mr. XX       School               Financial    06/05/2017
                                                     repair.
                                                                                                                 Mrs. XX      HM                   Assistance

                                                                                                                              SMC

                                                                                                                              President

                                                    Domain 2: Teaching-Learning & Their Assessment
                                                   Teachers will introduce the students with their

     1. Teachers'         Discussion on            subject-wise educational requirements/ achievements and

     Understanding    2   Academic          High   provide them learning material accordingly.                      All Staff   All Staff   01/04/2017

     about students       Achievements             In teacher-parent meeting/ on other occasions, teachers

                          and                      will discuss with parents and introduce them with

                          Educational              educational requirements and achievements of students.

                          Requirements             Educational requirements and achievements of students

                          of Students              will be mentioned in the portfolio.

                                                   After recognising individual distinctions of the students,

                          Individual               different educational activities will be organised. For
     2. Teachers'
                          Distinction              instance:
     Understanding    2                     High                                                                    All Staff   All Staff   01/05/2017
                          based                    Listening activities (stories, poems etc.) for the students
     about Students
                          Assistance               understanding by listening.
85




                                                   Picture, chart, graph, comics etc. for the students

                                                   understanding by observing.

                                                   Individual/ group home-work/ project work will be given

                                                   to the students based on their interest/ aptitude.

                                                   School Head will identify the teachers with better required
     3. Teachers'         Sharing
                                                   teaching skills.                                                             School
     Subject &        2   Subject           High                                                                    Mr. XX                  01/04/2017
                                                   In the weekly meetings, the identified teachers will present                 HM
     Educational          Knowledge &
                                                   before all persons the skills in which they are more
     Knowledge            Teaching Skills
                                                   competent.

                                                   The list of identified teachers with their specialization will

                                                   be provided to the cluster centre so that subject knowledge

                                                   and teaching skills can be shared at cluster level.
                                               Educational visits of students will be made to to the

                       Providing               neighbouring schools engaged in innovative schemes of the

                       Experience of           department.

     4. Teaching       Educational             Activity Based Learning (ABL)/ Active Learning Method
                   2                    High                                                                   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/12/2017
     Plans             Programmes              (ALM)

                       Prevailing in           Headstart

                       the State               Smart Classes

                                               Mathematics-Science Kit

                                               The teachers of the schools, engaged in effective use of

                                               those schemes, will be invited in our school for experience

                                               sharing/ demonstration.

                                               Prior to developing teaching lesson plan, teachers will read
86




                       Teaching Plan           the learning needs of the students mentioned in the
     5. Teaching
                   2   Preparation as   High   portfolio.                                                      All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   02/03/2017
     Plans
                       per Learning            Activities suitable for students' learning needs will be

                       Needs                   identified, like ­ listening activities for students learning

                                               by listening, group work for group learners, etc.

                                               learning needs based activities will be included in the plan.

                       Teaching Plan
                                               Examples based on local language/ dialect, local culture,
     6. Teaching       Preparation
                   2                    High   customs, crops, climate, business etc. will be selected         All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     Plans             Linking Local
                                               during the teaching plan preparation.
                       Environment

                                               Students' interaction in learning activities will encouraged
                       Creating
                                               and not treated as indiscipline.
     7. Learning       Interactive
                   2                    High                                                                   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   06/05/2017
     Environment       Environment in

                       Classrooms
                                                Those activities will be adopted in which students can

                                                learn with their friends, e.g. pair work, role play, group

                                                work etc.

                                                We will ask such questions which can enable the students

                                                linking new knowledge with their previous knowledge

                                                while answering the same.

                                                We will appreciate the viewpoint of every student.

                                                In order to develop reading habit in students, we will

                                                provide them easy and interesting books.

     8. Teaching-       Encouraging             After reading an essay/ story/ poem individually, in pair

     Learning       2   the Students     High   or in group, we will tell them to ­                           All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/07/2017

     Process            for Self-study          Repeat the same in their own words.

                                                Develop questions based on the same.
87




                                                Develop any similar event or story.

                                                Search the solution in a lesson or a book if a problem is

                                                given.


                                                We will teach the students to prepare the following things:

                                                - Poster

                        Getting                 - Motto/ thought writing
     9. Teaching-
                        Teaching-aid            - Static model
     Learning       2                    High                                                                 All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/05/2017
                        Prepared by             - Dynamic model
     Process
                        Students                - Flash cards

                                                - Word wheels etc.


                                                After organising competition based on skills required for

                                                teaching material preparation, we will reward the students.
                                                 Teachers and students will form the rules of classroom
                                                                                                                Children's   Children's
     10. Classroom       Classroom               discipline.
                     2                    High                                                                  Cabinet      Cabinet      Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     Management          Discipline              Corrective actions for the students avoiding these rules
                                                                                                                All Staff    All Staff
                                                 will also be decided by teachers and students.

                                                 We will associate class monitors to follow the classroom

                                                 rules.

                                                 As per need of the activity, we will make seating
     11. Classroom       Meeting
                     2                    High   arrangements in queues, pairs, small group circles, or big     All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Management          Arrangement
                                                 circles.

                         Improvement

                         in Assessment           In staff meetings and parent-teacher association meetings,
     12. Students'
                     2   Outcome          High   we will discuss the required improvement measures in           All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     Assessment
                         Based Learning          individual social qualities and other sectors.
88




                         Process

                         Assessment of           The class teacher or subject teacher will make remarks on
     13. Students'
                     2   Different        High   every student's academic achievement and individual            All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Assessment
                         Dimensions              social qualities in the portfolio once in every 15 days.

                                                 When needed, the students will be shown video lessons
     14. Use of          Use of
                                                 compiled on a smartphone.
     Teaching-       2   Educational      High                                                                  All Staff    All Staff    Blank   Blank   06/05/2017
                                                 Apart from the textbook content, the teachers will study
     Learning            Sources
                                                 available learning materials to increase their own and well
     Resources
                                                 as students' understanding and use the same linking with

                                                 the lesson.

                                                 For training in effective use of educational sources, public

                                                 teachers (Janshikshak) will apprise BAC, DIET through

                                                 the School Head.
                                                    In weekly staff meetings, we will discuss the use of
     15. Use of
                           Sharing                  educational sources and share the same.
     Teaching-
                       2   Educational      High    After forming social media group of teachers, we will share   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/06/2017
     Learning
                           Sources                  them digital material.
     Resources
                                                    We will provide educational material compiled in the

                                                    school to respective JSK/ cluster.

                                                    If demanded by other schools, we will share them

                                                    educational material.

                                                    We will organise monthly reflection meetings, in which the

     16.                   Classroom                teachers will share their remarkable classroom teaching

     Self-reflection   2   Teaching         High    experiences.                                                  All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   06/05/2017

     of Teachers on        Experiences              We will seek solution to problems in classroom teaching

     Teaching-                                      through group thinking.
89




     Learning                                       We will change teaching plans and methods based on

     Material                                       findings of the thinking.

                                             Domain 3: Progress, Achievement and Development of Students
                                                    We will prepare class-wise list of students who are
     1. Students'          Marking
                       1                    High    irregular or absent for a long time.                          All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Attendance            Absent/
                                                    We will also prepare the list of students coming to school
                           Irregular
                                                    late and leaving early.
                           Students
                                                    Parents will be informed of student's absence/ irregular

                                                    presence in PTA meetings.
     2. Students'          Information on
                       1                    High    Parents will be informed of student's absence/ irregular      All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Attendance            Absence
                                                    presence through classmates/ children's cabinet.

                                                    Parents will be informed of student's absence/ irregular

                                                    presence through SMS on their mobile phones.
                                                    Students' absence will be recorded on their diaries and

                                                    their parents' signature on the same will be taken every

                                                    month.

                                                    The column of absent student will neither left blank nor

                                                    marked with (.). Instead, L will be marked for prior
     3. Students'          Attendance
                       1                     High   information of absence and A will be marked for absence      All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Attendance            Record
                                                    without information.

                                                    Class-wise data of absence will be displayed in attendance

                                                    register and school notice board within one hour from

                                                    opening of the school.

                                                    A calendar of cultural and co-educational programmes will

                                                    be prepared.
                           Participation
     4. Students'                                   Cultural and co-educational programmes to be organised
                           in Cultural and                                                                                   School
90




     Participation &   1                     High   in the school will be organised in a way that more and       Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   02/03/2017
                           Co-educational                                                                                    HM
     Engagement                                     more students could participate and parents could see
                           Programmes
                                                    them.

                                                    Each student will be assigned different task in the

                                                    programmes.

                                                    Inter-school games and cultural competitions will be

                                                    organised in the JSK schools.

                                                    Best performing students of cultural and co-educational

                                                    programmes will be rewarded.

                                                    One teacher of the school will be selected cultural

                                                    in-charge. Similarly, students will also be selected

                                                    class-wise in-charge.
                                                   All subject teachers will review the progress of the

                                                   students from each class in every three months. Along

                                                   with all subjects, students' co-educational areas and
     5. Students'         Monitoring of
                      2                     High   individual social qualities will also be discussed. The ups     All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Progress             Progress
                                                   and downs in progress of each student in all areas will be

                                                   noted.

                                                   Based on the findings, students' learning progress and

                                                   attitudes in the subjects will be noted, like ­ students of

                                                   class VII feel difficulty in theorems in Math, or students of

                                                   class V-A are unable to understand the concept of

                                                   preposition in English; after annual function, students of

                                                   class VI-B have started reciting poems, etc.

                                                   Based on learning progress and attitudes, the teachers will
91




                          Change in
     6. Students'                                  make necessary changes in their teaching; for instance:
                      2   Teaching          High                                                                   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Progress                                      solar/ lunar eclipse by role play, local values by match
                          Methods
                                                   sticks etc.

                                                   Individual and social indicators will be developed in PTA
     7. Students'
                          Discussion with          meetings.                                                                   School
     Individual and   1                     High                                                                   Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
                          Parents                  Parents will be invited in different celebrations of the                    HM
     Social
                                                   school.
     Development
                                                   Parents will be requested to take in these indicators in

                                                   their domestic environment also.

                                                   In order to acquire basic abilities of Hindi, English and
                          Improving
     8. Students'                                  Mathematics, opportunity will be provided for regular
                      1   Basic             High                                                                   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Achievements                                  dictation, script reading, oral and written everyday
                          Capabilities
                                                   mathematics activities and reading library books.
                          Identifying
     9. Students'                                    Based on continuous assessment, subject-wise tough
                      1   Tough Points      High                                                                      All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Achievements                                    points for every child will be identified.
                          of Subjects

                                         Domain 4: Performance of Teachers and Their Professional Up-gradation
                                                     Newly appointed, promoted or transferred teacher will be
     1. Orientation       Introduction of
                                                     introduced with all teachers organising special meeting.                     School
     of New           1   New Teachers      Medium                                                                    Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   04/05/2017
                                                     Newcomer teachers will be provided information regarding                     HM
     Teachers             in School
                                                     the school, like ­ what facilities are available at what place

                                                     in the school or may be provided by which teacher.

                                                     Newcomer teachers will be explained and assigned their

                                                     responsibilities.

                                                     In case of a teacher's absence without information, the

     2. Teachers'         Action on                  school head will assure at his/ her level whether the                        School
92




                      1                     High                                                                      Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   01/09/2017
     Attendance           Absent                     teacher's absence has any proper reason.                                     HM

                          Teachers                   Written complain of the teachers absent without any

                                                     proper or prior information will be made to the JSK

                                                     in-charge.

                          Alternative                For alternative educational arrangement, a register will be
     3. Teachers'
                      1   Arrangement       High     maintained, in which period-wise signature of teachers           Mr. XX      School      Blank   Blank   01/06/2017
     Attendance
                          of Teachers                substituting absent/ on-leave teachers will be taken.                        HM

                                                     All teachers including the school head will sign the

                          Teachers'                  teachers' attendance register twice ­ after arriving and
     4. Teachers'                                                                                                                 School
                      1   Attendance        High     before departing.                                                Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     Attendance                                                                                                                   HM
                          Record
                                                      Prior information of leave will be provided by application,

                                                      but in special circumstances, information through

                                                      M-Mitra App, SMS, Email or telephone will be valid,

                                                      which will be mentioned in teachers' attendance register.

                                                      Within half an hour after the school starts, the teachers'

                                                      attendance register will be finalised.

     5. Targets for                                   Teachers will set their performance targets themselves.
                           Performance
     Distribution of   2                     Medium   All teachers of the school will discuss the innovations to    All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
                           Target Setting
     Functions and                                    be done in education and work according to the decisions

     Performance                                      made.

                                                      Teachers will monitor their targets themselves and submit

                                                      its written report to the school head periodically.

     6. Targets for
93




     Distribution of       Distribution of            Teachers will be assigned responsibilities based on their
                       2                     Medium                                                                 Mr. XX      School      Blank   Blank   02/11/2017
     Functions and         Functions                  ability, specific interest in work and consent.
                                                                                                                                HM
     Performance

                                                      Based on findings of their discussion, teachers will

     7. Preparation        Change in                  introduce required changes in teaching-learning process                   School
                       2                     Medium                                                                 Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank   01/11/2017
     of Teachers As        Teaching-                  according to change in syllabus or textbooks.                             HM

     Per Changing          Learning                   In case of any difficulty in any new content or teaching

     Needs of              Process As Per             method, the school head will inform Janshikshak, BAC,

     Syllabus              Change                     DIET.

                                                      Apart from observation by school head and prescribed

                                                      proforma, students' progress and achievements will be
     8. Monitoring         Review of                                                                                            School
                       2                     High     included in the review of performance and will be             Mr. XX                  Blank   Blank
     of Teachers'          Teachers'                                                                                            HM                          01/03/2017
                                                      discussed with teachers.
     Performance           Performance
                                                     The school head will discuss the performance of teachers

                                                     with students, parents and SMC members and update the

                                                     teachers with their suggestions.

                                                     Teachers will discuss and reflect on their performance in
     9. Monitoring       Reflection on                                                                                         School
                     2                     High      weekly staff meetings.                                           Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     of Teachers'        Teachers'                                                                                             HM
                                                     They will help each-other with mutual cooperation and
     Performance         Performance
                                                     suggestions.

                                                     Innovations being introduced at various levels in the field
     10.                 Encouraging                                                                                           School
                     2                     Medium    of education will be discussed in weekly staff meetings.         Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   04/08/2017
     Professional        Innovation                                                                                            HM
                                                     Teachers introducing any innovation will be rewarded at
     Up-gradation
                                                     school level and their activities will be reported to cluster/
     of Teachers
                                                     JSK and portal so that others are also benefited with the

                                                     same.
94




                                                     After arrival of a teacher from a training or professional

     11.                 Sharing                     up-gradation programmes, knowledge and skills acquired                    School
                     2                     Medium                                                                     Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   01/10/2017
     Professional        Training Inputs             by him/ her will be shared with other staff teachers.                     HM

     Up-gradation                                    Teaching material received in these programmes like

     of Teachers                                     modules, handouts, CDs, digital media, softwares will be

                                                     shared with all colleague teachers.

                                                  Domain 5: School Leadership and School Management
                                                     Suggestions of children's cabinet and SMC members will
     1. Vision &         Preparation of                                                                                        School
                     2                     High      be invited for preparing school up-gradation action plan.        Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
     Direction           School                                                                                                HM
                                                     Their suggestions for the action plan will be noted and
     Setting             Up-gradation
                                                     included In the same based on their merit.
                         Action Plan
                                                 Review meetings will be organised to review the

                                                 completion and quality of work as per priority, in which
     2. Vision &          Review of                                                                                     School
                      2                   High   members of SMC and children's cabinet will also               Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   05/05/2017
     Direction            Up-gradation                                                                                  HM
                                                 participate.
     Setting              Action Plan
                                                 Solution of incomplete works and difficulties will be

                                                 sought through discussion. If needed, Janshikshak/ BAC/

                                                 BRC/ DIET will be informed for additional assistance.

                                                 In order to effect change in identified areas, we will

     3. Leading for       Execution of           allocate the responsibilities on the basis of interest,                School
                      2                   High                                                                 Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   06/04/2017
     Change &             Change                 experience and ability.                                                HM

     Improvement                                 We will record the changes occurring during the

                                                 implementation.

                                                 School head will organise workshops time to time to
95




                                                 update all teachers, students, children's cabinet members
     4. Leading for       Making Aware
                                                 and SMC members with the changes occurring in the field                School
     Change &         2   on              High                                                                 Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
                                                 of education and their requirements.                                   HM
     Improvement          Requirements
                                                 Understanding towards these changes will be developed
                          of Change
                                                 during these workshops, which will be mentioned as

                                                 reports at the end of the workshops.

                                                 During these workshops and meetings, clear goals will be

                                                 set for the school and improvement strategy will be

                                                 designed.

                                                 In every three months, the school head will lead collective
     5. Leading           Reflection on                                                                                 School
                      2                   High   thinking with respective teachers on students' progress.      Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
     Teaching &           Students'                                                                                     HM

     Learning             Progress
                                                 During the collective thinking, popular methods or

                                                 teaching and learning will be considered to be continued

                                                 or changed.

                                                 Class-wise and subject-wise 'Learning Indicators' will be
     6. Leading           Improvement
                                                 compiled and teachers will be told to study the same.                 School
     Teaching &       2   in Teaching-    High                                                                Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
                                                 Available literature on student-centric methods and                   HM
     Learning             Learning
                                                 innovation based learning will be compiled and teachers
                          Methods
                                                 will be told to study the same.

                                                 After thinking on needs of improvement in teaching and

                                                 learning, effective methods will be adopted to effect

                                                 positive changes in the same.

                                                 The responsibility to act on and monitor the areas of

     7. Leading the       Collective             improvement identified in the school up-gradation action
96




     School           2   Assessment of   High   plan as per point of action will be assigned to staff and    Mr. XX   School   Blank   Blank   05/04/2017

     Management           Progress               SMC members according to their interest, consent and                  HM

                                                 ability.

                                                 THe school head will hold regular discussion with

                                                 teachers, parents, children's cabinet, and SMC members.
     8. Leading the       Designing                                                                                    School
                      2                   High   During the discussion, they will be invited to provide       Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
     School               Strategy for                                                                                 HM
                                                 suggesions for development and progress of the school.
     Management           Management
                                                 Based on suggestions received, the strategy for

                                                 development and progress will be designed as school

                                                 up-gradation action plan.

                                                       Domain 6: Inclusion, Health and Safety
                                                 In any situation, the students will not let feel that they
     1.                   Equal
                                                 have been marked due to any special ability or weakness.              School
     Environment      2   Opportunity     High                                                                Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   02/05/2017
                                                                                                                       HM
     for Inclusion        for

                          Participation
                                                   In different educational programmes like lecture, essay

                                                   competition, etc. and in co-educational programmes like

                                                   games and sports, cultural programmes etc., the three

                                                   groups will be provided equal opportunity to participate.

                                                   Teachers' consultation sessions will be organised in which

                                                   they will guide the students to participate in the activities

                                                   based on their ability and interest.

                                                   In children's assembly and prayer assembly, we will tell
     2. Inclusion of       Inspiring
                       2                  Medium   inspiring stories on success of SWSN.                           All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   01/03/2017
     Students with         SWSN
                                                   We will arrange screening of inspiring films based on
     Special Needs
                                                   SWSN.
     (SWSN)
     3. Inclusion of
                                                   JSK/ cluster/ DIET will be made aware with the demand
     Students with         Training of
                       2                  Medium   for teachers' training for inclusion of SWSN in the classes     Mr. XX      School      Blank   Blank   25/05/2017
97




     Special Needs         Teachers
                                                   of other students.                                                          HM
     (SWSN)

                                                   In order to deal with disasters, a campaign will be

                                                   organised to create awareness in the school and community
     4. Students'          Disaster
                       2                  Medium   through songs, plays, films, discussion, rally etc.             All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   07/07/2017
     Safety                Management
                                                   A plan will be prepared to deal with emergencies and the

                                                   plan will be reviewed time to time.

                                                   For emergency exit, additional doors/ gates will be

                                                   constructed in classrooms or school building.

                                                   Phone/ mobile numbers for emergency contact will be

                                                   kept stored in mobile phones of all teachers.

     5. Students'          Safety                  Contact numbers of parents will be recorded for making
                       2                  Medium                                                                   All Staff   All Staff   Blank   Blank   05/07/2017
     Safety                Arrangements            contact with them.
                                                 After developing contacts with Nirbhaya unit, we will get

                                                 demonstration and training for assistance and safety.

                                                 For repair of building for safety reasons, we will inform

                                                 the JSK/ BRC/ DPC/ DEO at once.

                                                 We will get help of village panchayat/ municipality for

                                                 safety from rodents, insects, and venomous animals.

                                                 Counseling sessions for students and parents will be

                                                 organised to reduce the fear of study and good

                                                 performance.
     6. Emotional                                                                                                           School
                     2                  Medium   Academic assistance will be received from DIET faculty        Mr. XX                    Blank   Blank   04/07/2017
     Safety                                                                                                                 HM
                                                 members towards age based adolescent education.

                                                 Counseling sessions for students and parents will be

                                                 organised on adolescence related problems.
98




                                                 After developing contacts with Nirbhaya unit, we will get

                                                 demonstration and training for assistance and safety.

                                                 Any sensitive female teacher will be given the

                                                 responsibility of emotional counseling, grievance redressal

                                                 and dealing with requirements.

                                                 Teachers, students and SMC members will be given

                         Creating an             responsibility for monitoring of health, sanitation &
                                                                                                               Children's   Children's
     7. Health and       Environment             hygiene.
                     2                  High                                                                   Cabinet      Cabinet      Blank   Blank   01/04/2017
     Hygiene             for Health,             A committee will be formed to implement the Clean
                                                                                                               All Staff    All Staff
                         Sanitation &            School Scheme, which will organise awareness programmes

                         Hygiene                 like workshops, street shows, slogans, film screening etc.

                                                 for students and parents.

                                                 Health workers, doctors, and voluntary organisation will

                                                 be linked with these events.
                                               If any health problem is noticed in students, we will

                                               inform and counsel the parents.

                                                       Domain 7: Community Participation
                                               Any SMC meeting will not be organised without setting

                                               an agenda.
     1. SMC
                       Meeting                 The school head will set the agenda of the SMC meeting                 School
     Formation &   1                    High                                                                 Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   05/09/2017
                       Agenda Setting          based on teachers, children's cabinet members,                         HM
     Management
                                               requirements of school and other sources like feedback

                                               from parent-teacher association.

                                               The SMC members will be made aware of the agenda

                                               before the meeting.

                                               Apart from financial and basic issues, educational,

                                               co-educational and other issues will be included in the
99




                                               agenda.

                                               Every month, at least one SMC meeting will be organised

                                               with prior information and fixed agenda.

                                               While fixing the date/ time of the meeting, it will be kept

                                               in mind that there should be no special festival or fair on

     2. SMC            Presence of             the day of meeting in which the members are likely to be
                                                                                                                      School
     Formation &   1   Members in the   High   busy.                                                         Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   05/08/2017
                                                                                                                      HM
     Management        Meeting                 Respective SMC members will be informed of the date

                                               and time of the SMC meeting through the teachers or

                                               children's cabinet members.

                                               In SMC meetings, incentive programmes like, distribution

                                               of free uniforms, textbooks, money for bicycles, etc. will

                                               be done by the members.
                                                For attending meeting, the members will convince

                                                students to try to call their parents in the meeting. On

                                                these days, the school will organise cultural activities and

                                                rewards will be distributed by members.

                                                We will make the SMC members aware towards education

                        Compliance of           related programmes, provisions and acts like Right to

      3. SMC            Educational             Education, SSA, incentive schemes etc.                                  School
                    1                    High                                                                  Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   04/04/2017
      Empowerment       Programmes/             For awareness, we will discuss with members, read out                   HM

                        Provisions/             documents and explain them, and if facilitated, we will

                        Acts                    provide them handouts.

                                                We will deliver the message of provisions and acts to the

                                                members through street plays.

                                                We will request the members that in case of violation of
100




                                                provisions/ acts, they inform the school head immediately.

                                                We will involve the SMC members in preparation of

      4. SMC            Preparation &           school up-gradation action plan and respect their ideas/                School
                    1                    High                                                                  Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   12/08/2017
      Empowerment       Implementa-             suggestions.                                                            HM

                        tion of School          After preparation of the plan, we will inform the members

                        Up-gradation            in SMC meeting about the same.

                        Action Plan             After providing the list of school requirements, the SMC

                                                members will be told to contact neighbouring NGOs/
      5. School-        Collaboration                                                                                   School
                    2                    High   corporate bodies (big industries) and alumnis and get          Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   06/04/2017
      Community         with Industry                                                                                   HM
                                                their help.
      Correlation       Houses/
                                                In order to fulfill the requirements, we will publicize the
                        Community
                                                School Gift Scheme and get its benefits.
                                                 Subject teachers will mark the topics in the syllabus that
                         Linking Local
      6. Community                               can be linked to the local milieu. For instance, aquatic
                         Knowledge/
      as Learning    2                    High   animals for students of riverside schools, birds and         Mr. XX   School   Blank   Blank   12/05/2017
                         Skills with
      Resource                                   animals for near forest schools, industry related                     HM
                         Subject
                                                 information for schools of industrial towns/ cities etc.

                                                 School and community will organise various programmes
      7. Community       Organising the                                                                                School
                     2                    High   jointly. The venue may be school or any local place.         Mr. XX            Blank   Blank   18/05/2017
      Empowerment        Programmes                                                                                    HM
                                                 Active participation of community members will be
                         Jointly
                                                 attempted in these programmes as in program

                                                 chairmanship, prize distribution, moderation, vote of

                                                 thanks.
101
