                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CITE UNSEEN: THEORY AND EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECT OF OPEN ACCESS
      ON CITES TO ACADEMIC ARTICLES ACROSS THE QUALITY SPECTRUM

                                        Mark J. McCabe
                                       Christopher Snyder

                                      Working Paper 28128
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28128


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The authors are grateful to Ted Bergstrom, Laura Braunstein, David Card, Brett Danaher, Barbara
DeFelice, Stefano DellaVigna, Robert Johnson, Elizabeth Kirk, Andreas Moxnes, Nina Pavcnik,
and participants at the American Economic Association Annual Meetings and International
Industrial Organization Conference for helpful comments. The authors thank Mark Bard, Jamie
Bergeson-Bradshaw, Yilan Hu, Ella Kim, Scot Parsley, Reagen Readinger, Kyle Thomason, and
JasonWei for excellent research assistance. Joseph Brightbill at Clarivate provided the Web of
Science category data used in our insider/outsider analysis. Funding for the citation data used in
this and earlier papers was supported by a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. Work
on this paper was supported by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The authors are
grateful for the generous funding from these sources. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark J. McCabe and Christopher Snyder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cite Unseen: Theory and Evidence on the Effect of Open Access on Cites to Academic Articles
Across the Quality Spectrum
Mark J. McCabe and Christopher Snyder
NBER Working Paper No. 28128
November 2020
JEL No. D83,L17,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

Our previous paper (McCabe and Snyder 2014) contained the provocative result that, despite a
positive average effect, open access reduces cites to some articles, in particular those published
in lower-tier journals. We propose a model in which open access leads more readers to acquire
the full text, yielding more cites from some, but fewer cites from those who would have cited the
article based on superficial knowledge but who refrain once they learn that the article is a bad
match. We test the theory with data for over 200,000 science articles binned by cites received
during a pre-study period. Consistent with the theory, the marginal effect of open access is
negative for the least-cited articles, positive for the most cited, and generally monotonic for
quality levels in between. Also consistent with the theory is a magnification of these effects for
articles placed on PubMed Central, one of the broadest open-access platforms, and the
differential pattern of results for cites from insiders versus outsiders to the article's field.


Mark J. McCabe
Questrom School of Business
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 48109
and SKEMA Business School, Université Côte d'Azur (GREDEG)
Sophia Antipolis, France
prof.mark.mccabe@gmail.com

Christopher Snyder
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction
Academic journals play a key role in certifying and disseminating research among scholars. An
ongoing debate concerns whether this role might be better performed by open-access than tradi-
tional journals. Traditional journals earn most of their revenues through library subscription fees,
which for commercial publishers have risen to the point that they present a substantial barrier to
access.1 This barrier is removed by open-access journals, which allow free online access to their
articles.2
    Based in part on early studies reporting huge citation benefits from open access3 --as much as
300%--officials began issuing subsidies and mandates for open-access publication. For example,
the European Union issued an open-access mandate for recipients of Horizon 2020 grants, totalling
over 80 billion euros over the life of the program. Pending legislation in the United States (the Fair
Access to Science and Technology Research Act) mandates open access for grant recipients across
a dozen federal agencies.
    One of our previous papers, McCabe and Snyder (2014), called into question the validity of
these early studies' findings. We showed that such huge estimated effects arise spuriously in a
cross section when one fails to account for differences in quality between open- and closed-access
content. Using detailed panel data, we generated an estimate of the open-access effect of over
600% in a specification mimicking the early literature by omitting any fixed-effect controls. This
   1 Ted  Bergstrom and coauthors have provided a series of studies making the point that prices charged by for-profit
journals exceed those charged by non-profit journals by a large factor (Bergstrom 2001, Bergstrom and Bergstrom
2004, Bergstrom and Rubinfeld 2010). For general analyses of journal pricing levels and trends see Dewatripont et al.
(2006) and Section 2.2.2 of Eger and Scheufen (2018).
    2 For background on various points made in this and the next paragraph, including an overview of the market for

academic journals, the open-access debate, the development of open-access journals, and open-access mandates by
grant funders, see Chapter 2 of Eger and Scheufen (2018).
    3 Lawrence (2001) found that articles in the proceedings of a computer-science conference available both online

and in print received 336% more cites than those available only in print. Harnad and Brody (2004) found that physics
articles for which the authors deposited pre-prints on arXiv (an open-access repository of scientific pre-prints) received
298% more cites than those not deposited opn arXiv. Davis and Fromerth (2007) found a 35% citation advantage for
mathematics articles deposited on arXiv. Antleman (2004) found that articles for which full-text versions were freely
accessible via Google were cited 46% to 91% more than others in across four disciplines. Walker (2004) found that
articles in an oceanography journal for which authors purchased hybrid open access received 280% more downloads
than others. Eysenbach (2006) studied the effect of open access on citations to articles published in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, finding as high as a 43% citation boost from open access. See Craig et al. (2007)
for a survey of the early literature measuring the citation benefit of open access.




                                                            1
estimate was reduced to a modest 8% in our preferred specification controlling for quality with a
rich set of fixed effects.
    McCabe and Snyder (2014) leveled some of the provocative results of the previous literature
but raised some provocative results of its own. The 8% boost from open access was found to
be concentrated among the higher-tier journals in the sample; open access led to a significant
reduction in cites among the lower-tier journals in the sample. That open access could actually
reduce cites is surprising and begs explanation. Is it a statistical fluke, perhaps associated with
having broken the results down into too many categories or, worse, indicating a problem with the
overall methodology? Or is it a systematic outcome, further study of which could contribute to a
deeper understanding of the mechanism by which open access boosts citations?
    The present paper provides theoretical and empirical support for the latter view. In Section 3,
we construct a simple theoretical model offering an explanation of the negative effect of open
access for low-quality content. The idea behind the model is that open access facilitates acquisition
of full text of the article. The obvious effect is to garner cites from readers who cannot assess
its relevance until after reading the full text. There may be a more subtle effect going in the
other direction. Some readers may cite articles that they have not read, based on only superficial
information about its title or abstract, perhaps rounding out their reference list by borrowing a
handful of references gleaned from other sources. If the cost of acquiring the article's full text is
reduced by a move to open access, the reader may decide to acquire and read it. After reading it,
the reader may find the research a poorer match than initially thought and may decide not to cite it.
For the lowest-quality content, the only hope of being cited may be "sight unseen" (pun intended).
Facilitating access to such articles may end up reducing their citation counts.
    The theory provides a plausible explanation for possible negative effects of open access on
citations. Indeed, Monte Carlo exercises based on the theory suggest that negative open-access
effects may be the rule rather than the exception. The theory also provides testable predictions
that may not have been obvious ex ante but which emerge naturally from the simple model. A
distinctive pattern is predicted for the open-access effect across the quality spectrum: the open-
access effect should be increasing in quality, ranging from a definitively negative open-access


                                                 2
effect for the worst-quality articles to a definitively positive effect for the best-quality articles.
This quality gradient is predicted to be steeper the more convenient is open access. In an extension
of the model distinguishing between cites coming from outsiders versus insiders to the article's
field, we provide several factors leading outsiders to cite unseen more liberally than insiders. By
undoing some of this citing unseen, open access is predicted to reduce outsider citations over a
larger range of the quality spectrum than insider citations.
   The rest of the paper after Section 3 is devoted to empirical analysis. Sections 4 and 5 describe
the data and methods. The sample is the same as in McCabe and Snyder (2014), consisting of
citation counts for over 200,000 articles in subfields of science over a ten year period during which
open access was an emerging policy. Here we take full advantage of article-level detail, while the
previous paper aggregated the data by combining all the articles published by a journal in a year.
We rely where possible on the methodology developed in the previous paper, extending it where
necessary to accommodate the article-level analysis.
   The results are presented in Sections 6 and 7. Section 6 reprises the main provocative results
from the previous paper and links them to the theory. Section 7 reports new results breaking articles
into quality bins, where the bins are based on cites received by articles during a pre-study period.
This provides more detail on how the open-access effect varies across the quality spectrum. As
a further test of the theory, we see if a different pattern emerges if an open-access article is also
posted on PubMed Central, a huge, open-access repository of science articles offering particularly
convenient access. This allows us to test comparative-statics effects with respect to the convenience
of open access.
   We find that the patterns of the estimates across the quality bins correspond quite closely with
those predicted by theory. The open-access effect is roughly monotonic over the quality spectrum.
Articles in the lowest-quality bins (receiving zero or one cite in the pre-study period) are harmed
by open access; those in the middle experience no significant effect; only those in the top bin with
11 or more cites in the pre-study period experience a benefit from open access. Moving from open
access through the journal's own website to open access through PubMed Central pivots the open-
access effect so that it is even more sensitive to quality, resulting in greater losses to low-quality


                                                  3
articles and greater gains to high-quality articles. PubMed Central access reduces cites to articles
in the zero- or one-cite bins by around 14% while increasing cites to articles in the bin with 11 or
more cites by 11%.
    When we divide cites by their source, from insiders versus outsiders to the article's field, we
find different patterns over the quality spectrum. Inside cites show the same pattern of negative
open-access effects in low-cite bins and positive in high-cite bins as we find in our basic results,
but the positive effects are observed for a broader range of bins, even those with moderate numbers
of cites. By contrast, the effect of open access on outsider cites is negative across virtually the
entire quality spectrum.


2. Literature Review
Our paper is part of the literature that attempts to identify the causal effect of open access on ci-
tations more carefully by moving beyond simple cross-sectional regressions.4 Davis et al. (2008)
conduct a field experiment, randomly selecting articles from American Physiological Society jour-
nals for open access, finding little causal effect. Gaule and Maystre (2011) take an instrumental-
variables approach, instrumenting for authors' endogenous decision to pay a $1,000 fee to have
their Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) articles openly accessible using the
timing of budget cycles, again finding little causal effect. Evans and Reimer (2009) and McCabe
and Snyder (2014) take a panel-data approach to identification of the causal effect. Incorporating
fixed effects, they measure the change in cites to a given journal volume over time as it moves
from closed to open access compared to control volumes that do not change during that period.
Both find about an 8% average effect of open-access. Mueller-Langer and Watt (2018) look at the
effect of hybrid access (open access at a gated journal purchased by the author) using a similar
   4 In addition to the early studies reviewed in footnote 3, more recent cross-sectional studies include Atchison and
Bull (2015) in political science and Tang, Bever, and Yu (2017) in ecology. Piwowar, et al. (2018) study a cross
section of 100,000 articles across many disciplines, attempting to control for quality by including article age and field
variables. Li, et al. (2018) (see also related work by Yan and Li 2018) study a panel of journals over time, allowing
them to estimate the effect of a change in access status for a given journal compared to control journals that do not
change access status over the period. This identification strategy may not hold quality constant because the contents of
the journal changes over time. The move to open access may attract a different caliber of article; the move may signal
broader changes to journal operations including altering editorial standards.



                                                           4
difference-in-differences approach, but in their case the difference in open access stems from a
policy granting authors at certain institutions free hybrid access at Springer journals. They find
no effect of hybrid access for articles having freely accessible pre-prints but a 6­8% citation boost
for other articles. Staudt (2020) takes a difference-in-differences approach comparing National
Institutes of Health (NIH) funded articles to matched controls before and after an NIH issued an
open-access mandate, estimating around a 4% open-access effect. Bryan and Ozcan (2020) study
the same mandate but look at citations in subsequent patents rather than academic articles, finding
a 27% effect. The papers cited in this paragraph employ convincing empirical strategies for causal
identification, but none provides theory or empirical results across articles of different qualities as
does the present paper.
   The theoretical section of our paper contributes to the growing theoretical literature on the
economics of open access, including Shavell (2010); Mueller-Langer and Watt (2010); Mueller-
Langer and Scheufen (2013); McCabe, Snyder, and Fagin (2013); McCabe and Snyder (2015);
and McCabe and Snyder (2018). Most closely related are models that focus on heterogeneity in
quality across articles, including McCabe and Snyder (2005), McCabe and Snyder (2007), Jeon and
Rochet (2010), Armstrong (2015), Scheufen (2015), Feess and Scheufen (2016), and Besancenot
and Vranceanu (2017). A novel aspect of the present model is that we separate the option to cite
from the option to read, allowing for the emergence of a new strategy: citing unseen.
   The present paper is related to the broader literature looking for "long tail" or "superstar"
effects of Internet distribution. Recent studies suggest that online retailing boosts sales more for
products in the long tail, in markets ranging from clothing (Brynjolfsson, Hu, and Simester 2011) to
video sales (Elberse and Oberholzer-Gee 2008). McCabe and Snyder (2015) find that the increase
in citations from moving from print to digital access through JSTOR is fairly uniform across article
qualities. We share an interest in measuring potential heterogeneity in effects between popular
and unpopular items, but we study a change in the price of Internet access rather than the move
from off-Internet to on-Internet distribution. The theoretical model and findings that open access
disproportionately benefits superstar content and reduces cites in the long-tail are new in the present
paper.


                                                  5
3. Theory

3.1. Model
At the outset of the game, we take as given the existence of a continuum of citable articles. Let q 
[0, 1] denote a given article's quality, a random variable that has a distribution over the population
                                                                       1
                                                       ¯=
of articles characterized by density function (q). Let q               0 q (q) dq     denote the expected value
of q. We model quality as the probability that the article is relevant to a reader's research. More
formally, relevance characterizes the match between the given article and an individual reader, a
Bernoulli random variable equaling 1 (success) with probability q and 0 (failure) with probability
1 - q. An article may be low quality because it is badly written, poorly executed, on a narrow topic,
or some combination of these reasons.
   Articles attract cites from a continuum of readers with mass normalized to 1. Readers have
different types corresponding to the gross benefit b  0 each receives from citing relevant research.
Assume b is continuously distributed on its support, (0, ). Let P be the probability measure
associated with b. While we do not deny the possibility that a large mass of readers have b = 0
in practice, such valueless readers end up ignoring the article in equilibrium in the model, so are
irrelevant to the analysis.
   Readers are the only strategic players in the game. Readers can apply one of three strategies
to each article. First, they can simply ignore the article. Second, they can cite the article without
reading it, based on its title, abstract, or other superficial information--the strategy referred to as
"citing unseen" in our title. Third, they can acquire the article's full text, read it, and issue a deep
cite if it turns out to be relevant. Our baseline model assumes readers choose strategies before
learning the article's q, knowing only the distribution of q over the population of citable articles.
   Normalize a reader's payoff from not citing an article to Vn = 0. His or her expected payoff
from citing unseen is
                                         1
                              Vu =                                   ¯b - (1 - q
                                             [qb - (1 - q)s](q) dq = q         ¯)s.                         (1)
                                     0

An article of quality q provides an expected gross benefit of bq, the value to the reader of type b of
citing relevant research times the probability q an article of that quality is relevant. Subtracted off


                                                          6
of this expected gross benefit is the expected cost of leaving a bad impression on one's audience
when one cites poor or irrelevant research. This expected cost equals the probability 1 - q that the
reader happens to have cited an irrelevant article times the sanction s > 0 that his or her audience
issues in that event.5
    A reader's expected payoff from acquiring the full text of the article is

                                            1
                               Vf =                                    ¯(1 + )b - a.
                                                [q(1 + )b](q) dq - a = q                                             (2)
                                        0


Equation (2) differs from (1) in three ways. First, the cost a > 0 of acquiring the full test of the
article has been subtracted. This cost includes any associated fees, the hassle and delay for articles
that are not immediately available on the reader's computer screen after a few mouse clicks, and
the effort involved in reading and digesting the article. Second, readers who acquire the full text
of the article learn whether the article is a match for their research. This allows them to avoid the
sanction s from citing an irrelevant article. Third, deep cites have more value for readers' research
than superficial cites, captured by the factor  > 0 multiplying the gross benefit.


3.2. Equilibrium Citations
Let Bn (a) be the set of reader types who strictly prefer not to cite a given article in equilibrium,
Bu (a) the set of types who strictly prefer to cite unseen, and B f (a) the set of types who strictly
prefer to acquire the full text. Recalling the normalization Vn = 0, we have


                                         Bn (a) = {b | 0 > max{Vu , V f }}

                                         Bu (a) = {b | Vu > max{0, V f }}                                            (3)

                                         B f (a) = {b | V f > max{0, Vu }}.


The arguments of Bn (a), Bu (a), and B f (a) emphasize their dependence on a, stemming from the
dependence of V f on a shown in equation (2). The specification of all inequalities as strict in (3)
   5 Itis straightforward to add a physical cost c of composing the citing passage and bibliography entry. We omit c
from the presentation because the results are qualitatively similar and because, in practice, the physical cost is likely
to be much smaller than the reputational harm from citing irrelevant research.


                                                             7
         Case (i):                            ()                       ()                       ()
                                                                                                               
          > 1+ 1 
                                     0                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                  



         Case (ii):                        ()                                 ()
                                                                                                               
           1+ 1 
                                    0              
                                                  ()

Figure 1: Sets of Reader Types Pursuing Various Citing Strategies. Bn (a) denotes the set of reader types b
preferring not to cite, Bu (a) the set preferring to cite unseen, and B f (a) the set preferring to acquire full text. See
equation (3) for formulas.


is without loss of generality because the distribution of types is continuous, implying indifferent
types have zero measure.
    Combining equations (1)­(3), straightforward algebra can be used to show that Bn (a) is a non-
empty interval containing the lowest values of b and that B f (a) is a non-empty interval containing
the highest values of b. Thus, Bu (a) must form an interval between Bn (a) and B f (a). It is straight-
                                                                                        ¯)s.
forward to show that interval Bu (a) has positive measure if and only if a > (1 + )(1 - q
    Figure 1 provides the precise formulas for the bounds between sets Bn (a), Bu (a), and B f (a).
The figure presents the two cases depending on whether Bu (a) has positive measure. To gain some
intuition for the equilibrium, focus on the richer of the two cases, case (i). We see that an interval
of the lowest types do not cite the article; their gross benefit is too low to justify any sanction
or acquisition costs. Higher types in the next set engage in the strategy of citing unseen. Their
gross benefit from citing is high enough to risk the sanction of citing an article that turns out to be
irrelevant. The highest types acquire the full text because their marginal benefit, b, from citing
deeply rather than superficially is high enough to justify the high acquisition cost that defines case
(i). In case (ii), the low acquisition cost that defines this case leads any reader who decides to cite
the article to acquire the full text and cite it deeply. Hence, no reader engages in citing unseen in
this case.
    Having characterized readers' equilibrium citing behavior, it is a simple matter to tally up the
cites received by a given article. The article receives no cites for each type in Bn (a) and one cite
for each type in Bu (a). For each type in B f (a), the article is cited with the probability q that the


                                                            8
reader finds the article to be relevant after seeing the full text. Combining these considerations, the
mass x(q, a) of cites received by an article of quality q is


                                      x(q, a) = P(Bu (a)) + qP(B f (a)).                                       (4)


A key feature of equilibrium is that a reader who acquires the full text generates fewer expected
cites than one who cites unseen. This will generate some of the counterintuitive comparative-static
effects investigated next.


3.3. Open-Access Effect
In this subsection, we study the comparative-static effect on an article's citation count, x(q, a),
of a move from closed to open access. We model the move from closed to open access as a
decrease in acquisition cost from ac to ao < ac . Open access decreases acquisition cost for readers
at institutions who did not subscribe to the fee-based journal: those readers would have to pay a
charge (typically $40 as of this writing) for the article or go through the interlibrary loan process
and wait for the article to be delivered. Even for readers at subscribing institutions, the move to
open access facilitates access the article, relieving the reader from the series of steps needed to
access the article via library resources.
    The move from closed to open access can have a variety of effects depending on which case
from Figure 1 is relevant. To focus on interesting outcomes, we assume that ac is high enough
to tempt some readers to cite unseen. More formally, the following parametric assumption is
maintained throughout the analysis:


                                                             ¯)s.
                                             ac > (1 + )(1 - q                                                 (5)


It is straightforward to prove that (5) is necessary and sufficient for a positive measure of readers
to engage in citing unseen under some regime in the model.6
   6 Assume (5) holds. Then (i) is the relevant case from Figure 1 under closed access. In this case, Bu (ac ) is a
non-degenerate subinterval of (0, ) and so has positive measure since the distribution of types is assumed to have
support (0, ). Hence, a positive measure of types engage in citing unseen under some regime. Assume instead that


                                                        9
    Proceeding with the analysis, condition (5) ensures that, under closed access, (i) is the relevant
case from Figure 1. The move from closed to open access may leave the model in case (i) or may
shift the case to (ii), leaving us with two possibilities to analyze depending on the value of ao .
                                       ¯)s, so that (i) is the relevant case under both closed and
Assume first that that ao > (1 + )(1 - q
open access. Then, the reduction in acquisition cost from ac to ao leaves the boundary between
Bn (ac ) and Bu (ac ) the same but shifts the boundary between Bu (ac ) and B f (ac ) to the left. Some
types who cited unseen under closed access switch to acquiring the full text under open access.
This switch reduces the article's citation count because citing unseen generates one cite per reader
but acquiring the full text only generates a cite with probability q. For the highest quality articles
(q = 1), the conversion of types from citing unseen to acquiring the full text does not affect total
citations because all readers who acquire the full text are certain to find it relevant and cite it. For all
other articles of quality q < 1, however, the move from closed to open access strictly reduces cites.
The reduction is greater the lower is the value of q because the types who have been converted into
acquiring the full text are less likely to result in cites when q is low.
    Next, assume ao  (1 + )(1 - q
                                ¯)s. The move from closed to open access changes the relevant
case from (i) to (ii), generating two effects. All the types that were in Bu (ac ) switch into B f (ao ).
This switch contributes to a reduction in the article's cites since acquiring the full text is less likely
to generate a cite than citing unseen. Another effect is that B f (ao ) extends beyond the boundary
of Bu (ac ), cutting into Bn (ac ). This implies that some of the types that did not cite under closed
access acquire the full text under open access, contributing to an increase in the article's cites.
The two effects work in opposite directions; which dominates depends on the quality q of the cited
article. If q is low, the article loses more cites from types switching from citing unseen to acquiring
the full text since the full text is unlikely to generate a relevant cite for low q. The opposite is true
if q is high. Hence, when ao  (1 + )(1 - q
                                         ¯)s, the effect on citations is monotonically increasing
in q, negative for q near 0, and positive for q near 1.
    The preceding analysis provides an intuitive sketch of the following proposition, proved for-
(5) is violated. Then (ii) is the relevant case under closed access. It is also the relevant case under open access since
ao < ac . Thus, both Bu (ac ) and Bu (ao ) have zero measure, implying that no positive measure of readers engages in
citing unseen.



                                                          10
mally in the appendix. To make the statement of the proposition precise, some further notation is
required. Let (q, ac , ao ) denote the marginal effect on cites when an article of quality q moves
from closed to open access, measured as a proportional change:

                                                     x(q, ao ) - x(q, ac )
                                   (q, ac , ao ) =                         .                          (6)
                                                          x(q, ac )

Subscripts on (q, ac , ao ) denote partial derivatives with respect to those arguments.

Proposition 1. Assume (5) holds. For all q  [0, 1], q (q, ac , ao ) > 0 and qq (q, ac , ao ) < 0. If ao 
           ¯)s, then (q, ac , ao ) < 0 for all q  [0, 1) and (1, ac , ao ) = 0. If ao < (1 + )(1 - q
(1 + )(1 - q                                                                                          ¯)s,
then (q, ac , ao ) < 0 for q sufficiently close to 0 and (q, ac , ao ) > 0 for q sufficiently close to 1.

   The proposition states that the open-access effect (q, ac , ao ) is an increasing, concave function
of article quality q. Though the sign of the open-access effect is ambiguous, the proposition makes
a strong case that negative values are not anomalous. For all parameters, the open-access effect
is negative for some articles--a range of the lowest-quality ones. For some parameters, the open-
access effect is negative for almost all articles (i.e., except for a set of zero measure).
   Figure 2 illustrates the proposition with bin-scatter plots from a Monte Carlo exercise. Details
behind the exercise including the distributions and parameters used are provided in the figure notes.
The dots are averages of the open-access effect (q, ac , ao ), plotted at the midpoint of each of
twenty equal-sized quality bins. The only difference between the two curves regards the parameter
ao , with the black curve setting a high value for ao and the gray curve setting a low value for ao .
   All the claims made in the proposition are illustrated in the figure. Both curves are strictly
increasing and concave. The reader can verify that the parameters behind the black curve satisfy
                ¯)s. Consistent with the proposition in this case, the black curve lies below the
ao > (1 + )(1 - q
horizontal axis for all q < 1, approaching the horizontal axis as q approaches 1. The reader can
                                                                         ¯)s. Consistent with the
verify that the parameters behind the grey curve satisfy ao < (1 + )(1 - q
proposition in this case, the grey curve crosses the horizontal axis, becoming positive for suffi-
ciently high values of q. Notice that, for the quite standard functional forms and parameters that
we have chosen for the Monte Carlos, negative values of the open-access effect are the rule rather
than the exception.

                                                     11
                      


                                                                       Low 

                                                                                               
                                                                                          
                                                                       High 




Figure 2: Monte Carlo Exercise Illustrating Basic Results. Dots are averages of the open-access effect (q, ac , ao ),
plotted at the midpoint of each of twenty equal-sized quality bins constructed from 10 million Monte Carlo draws. The
exercise uses a uniform [0, 1] distribution for q and a standard half normal for b, implemented by taking the absolute
value of a random draw from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The exercise sets  = 2.5,
s = 0.25, and ac = 1, parameters which the reader can verify satisfy (5). The only difference between the two curves
regards the value of ao , with ao = 0.5 for the black curve and ao = 0.1 for the gray curve. The same 10 million draws
were used for each curve.


3.4. Platform Convenience
This subsection explores how the open-access effect varies with the convenience of the open-access
platform. While the pecuniary costs associated with open access are the same on any platform--
access by definition being free--non-pecuniary costs may differ across open-access platforms. For
example, free access via PubMed Central may be more convenient than via the journal's website
because it is a huge archive that readers may be accustomed to using, and thus involves more
efficient access. We allowed for possibly positive values of ao to reflect such non-pecuniary costs.
To reflect the differential non-pecuniary costs of different open-access platforms, we will introduce
two possible values of the open-access acquisition cost: the cost associated with a broad open-
access platform, aB                           N          B    N
                  o , and with a narrow one, ao , where ao < ao . We use the labels "broad" and

"narrow" to provide a concrete idea of why one open-access platform may involve lower non-
pecuniary costs than another, but we have in mind any factors that make open-access platform b
more convenient than platform n.
    The next proposition states the intuitive result that when the move from closed to open access


                                                         12
entails a larger reduction in acquisition costs, the open-access effect is intensified. Geometrically,
the graph of (q, ac , ao ) as a function of q rotates counterclockwise, becoming even more steeply
positively sloped. The magnitude of the open-access effect experienced at both extremes of quality
is exaggerated, becoming weakly more negative for the lowest-quality (q = 0) articles and weakly
more positive for the highest-quality (q = 1) articles. The appendix contains a formal proof.

Proposition 2. Assume (5) holds. Consider an increase in the convenience of the open-access plat-
form, lowering aN        B   N                                                                       B
                  o to ao < ao . The slope of the open-access effect strictly increases: q (q, ac , ao ) >
q (q, ac , aN
            o ). The negative open-access effect for the lowest-quality articles becomes weakly more
negative: (0, ac , aB                 N
                      o )  (0, ac , ao ) < 0. The non-negative open-access effect for the highest-
quality articles becomes weakly more positive: (1, ac , aB                    N
                                                            o )  (1, ac , ao )  0.


   Figure 2, drawn to illustrate various cases in Proposition 1, serves to illustrate Proposition 2 as
well. The curves are identical except for the assumed value of ao . The move from the black to the
grey curve can be thought of as an increase in the convenience of open access. The black curve
shows the open-access effect from a narrow platform with access cost aN
                                                                      o and the grey curve from

a broad platform with lower access cost, aB    N
                                          o < ao . As predicted by the proposition, the move from

the black to the grey curve is a counterclockwise pivot, exaggerating the negative effect for q near
0 and exaggerating the positive effect for q near 1.


3.5. Insiders Versus Outsiders
This subsection models differences in the citing behavior of readers depending on whether they
are insiders--coming from the same discipline as the article they may cite--or outsiders--coming
from a different discipline. These differences in citing behavior may then translate into differences
in the open-access effect. We will model two main differences.
   It is reasonable to suppose that the sanction s for an irrelevant cite depends mostly on the
perceptions of knowledgeable scholars in the discipline. These scholars must know both the cited
and the citing articles, typically requiring the articles to come from the same discipline, in turn
requiring that the citing reader be an insider in the cited article's discipline. A reader who is
an outsider is less likely to suffer much of a sanction. Scholars with the knowledge to judge
irrelevance may not interact enough with the citing reader to have their opinion matter. Scholars

                                                   13
in the same discipline as the citing reader would be in a poor position to judge the relevance of his
or her cite to an unfamiliar discipline. We model this difference by assuming that the sanction is
higher for an insider than an outsider. More specifically, to simplify the analysis while at the same
time approximating reality, we suppose that the positive sanction s > 0 is fixed for insiders; for
outsiders we take the limit as the sanction vanishes: s  0.
    The analysis for insiders is identical to what we found before since we have fixed the same
positive sanction for them. All the various cases from Proposition 1 continue to be possible.
    To analyze the case of outsiders, observe that after imposing the limit s  0 in Proposition 1,
the outcome is pinned down to case (i), and moreover Bn (a) becomes vanishingly small. The only
effect of a reduction in a for outsiders is to shift some readers from citing unseen to acquiring the
full text, which must reduce cites. Before stating this result formally in the next proposition, we
introduce some further notation. Let superscripts O and I indicate variables related to outsiders and
insiders, respectively. Thus BO       O           O
                              n (a), Bu (a), and B f (a) denote the sets of outsider types who do not

access the article, cite it unseen, or acquire the full text. Let xO (a, q) = PO (BO          O O
                                                                                   u (a)) + qP (B f (a))

denote the number of cites from outsiders, where PO is the conditional probability measure on
outsider types b. Let O (q, ac , ao ) = [xO (q, ao ) - xO (q, ac )]/xO (q, ac ) denote the open-access effect
on outsider cites. Define PI , xI (q, a), and I (q, ac , ao ) analogously for insiders. The following
proposition is an immediate corollary of Proposition 1.

Proposition 3. The open-access effect for outsiders, never positive, is negative for all but the
highest-quality article: O (q, ac , ao ) < 0 for all q  [0, 1) and O (1, ac , ao ) = 0.

Note that the right-hand side of condition (5) equals 0 when s = 0, implying that (5) holds auto-
matically for outsiders; so there is no need to explicitly assume the condition in the statement of
Proposition 3.
    Thus far, insiders are identical to the generic readers of the baseline model. A possible dif-
ference is that well-informed insiders may have considerable information about an article before
accessing it, perhaps based on a general familiarity with articles in their discipline, perhaps based
on an ability to make sharp inferences ex tempore from an article's author, title, or abstract in-
formation within one's discipline. We model this feature formally by assuming that a proportion

                                                     14
  (0, 1] of insiders are "smart," able to observe q before accessing the article; the remaining 1 - 
proportion are ordinary insiders who as before only know the distribution of q but not the realized
value for the article before accessing it.
   Analysis of smart insiders is more complicated than before because the number of cites is no
longer linear in q as it was in equation (4). The sets BI          I
                                                        u (a) and B f (a) become functions of q for

readers who can see q before deciding on their strategy. Some general results for extreme values
of q are still available, stated in the next proposition.

Proposition 4. Assume (5) holds. For the lowest-quality articles, the open-access effect for in-
siders is the same negative value as for generic readers: I (0, ac , ao ) = (0, ac , ao ) < 0. For the
highest-quality articles, the open-access effect for insiders is lower than that for generic readers
(i.e., 0 < I (1, ac , ao ) < (1, ac , ao )) unless (1, ac , ao ) = 0 in which case 0 = I (1, ac , ao ) =
(1, ac , ao ).

The proof in the appendix again works closely with Figure 1. The difference for smart insiders is
                                                                                 ¯.
that the known value q must be substituted everywhere in the figure for the mean q
   Figure 3 provides bin-scatter plots for a new Monte Carlo exercise illustrating possible out-
comes of the insider/outsider model. Details behind the exercise are provided in the figure notes.
The dashed curve shows the open-access effect for ordinary insiders, equivalent to generic readers
in this variant of the model. They experience a negative effect for low q and positive effect for high
q. The grey curve represents the open-access effect for outsiders. They are formally identical to
ordinary insiders except that the sanction has been reduced from s = 0.3 to s = 0 for them. As ex-
pected from Propostion 3, the black curve is everywhere below the horizontal axis and approaches
the axis as q approaches 1.
   The black curve represents the open-access effect for insiders when some of them are smart.
The sanction for these readers has been returned to the original positive level for regular insiders
but now a fraction  = 0.75 of them are smart and can see the value of q for articles before
acquiring the full text. As expected from Proposition 4, the curve approaches that for the regular
insiders as q approaches 0 and is between the generic reader's curve and the horizontal axis as q
approaches 1. For values of q between 0 and 1, the figure illustrates the possibility of a highly
non-monotonic open-access effect, in this example rising above the horizontal axis for a "pocket"

                                                   15
                                                                 Ordinary insiders =
                           With smart                             generic readers
                            insiders

                     0                                                                          
                                                                                           1
                                                                             Outsiders




Figure 3: Monte Carlo Exercises Illustrating Insider/Outsider Analysis. As in previous figure, dots are averages
of the open-access effect (q, ac , ao ), plotted at the midpoint of each of twenty equal-sized quality bins constructed
from 10 million Monte Carlo draws. Here, rather than the baseline model used in the previous figure, reader behavior
is governed by the insider/outsider model. The distributions and parameters are the same as in the previous figure
except for two differences. To emphasize certain features of the curves, s has been adjusted slightly, from s = 0.25 to
s = 0.3. The fraction of smart insiders is set to  = 0.75.


of some relatively low values of q, dipping back below for larger q, and rising above the horizontal
axis again for the highest values of q. While such a drain-pipe shape is not guaranteed--indeed, the
curve reverts to the monotonic gray curve in the limit   0--Figure 3 documents the possibility.
The theoretical possibility that the open-access effect is highest for a "pocket" of moderate rather
than the highest quality articles hinges on the presence of smart insiders in the model. Such insiders
are smart enough to avoid citing mediocre articles unseen. For them, the main effect of a move
from closed to open access is to increase the measure obtaining full access, which can translate into
a large open-access effect  since  is measured as a percentage increase over a potentially very
small base of cites that a mediocre article would receive from smart insiders under closed access.
    Overall, our insider/outsider analysis has several empirical implications. We expect the open-
access effect for outsiders to be negative across the quality spectrum. The effect should also be
negative for insiders citing the lowest-quality articles. Insiders may exhibit positive open-access
effects for higher quality articles; the effect may exhibit non-monotonicities and may be highest
for articles of intermediate rather than the highest quality.




                                                         16
3.6. Other Extensions
In the model, facilitating access to the article's full text can reduce cites by giving the reader a more
precise signal of the article's quality, possibly reducing cites to low-quality articles. This is one
possible mechanism behind a negative open-access effect, but other mechanisms might be possible
having similar empirical implications.
    The move from closed to open access was modeled as reducing the reader's access cost from ac
to ao . The move could entail another, indirect effect, explored in a first extension. The acquisition
cost falls not only for the reader but also for the reader's audience. Thinking of s as the expected
sanction received conditional on citing an irrelevant article--multiplying the reputational harm
conditional on the irrelevant cite being discovered times the probability of discovery--when the
cost of acquiring the cited article falls for the reader's audience, this increases the probability they
discover the irrelevant cite. A move from closed to open access in this extended model increases
the expected sanction from sc to so > sc in addition to reducing access cost, ao < ac , for the reader.
The next proposition implies that the higher sanction depresses cites to open-access articles. Let
x(q, ac , sc ) and x(q, ao , so ) denote cites, respectively, to a closed- and open-access article in this
extended model, where the added argument emphasizes dependence on the expected sanction,
which can vary under closed and open access.

Proposition 5. Let so > so in the extended model allowing sanctions to be greater under open
access. Then x(q, ao , so )  x(q, ao , so ), with strict inequality if and only if

                                                             ¯)so .
                                             ao > (1 + )(1 - q                                                 (7)

Let (q, ac , sc , ao , so ) = [x(q, ao , so ) - x(q, ac , sc )]/x(q, ac , sc ) denote the open-access effect in the
extended model. Since x(q, ac , sc ) is independent of so , it is immediate from Proposition 5 that
(q, ac , sc , ao , so ) is nonincreasing in so and strictly decreasing if and only if (7) holds. Thus, a
negative open-access effect only becomes more likely if open access has the added indirect effect
of increasing sanctions.
    Another way open access could reduce cites is by intensifying competition among articles to
be cited. For example, acquiring the full text of an article may increase the chance that readers


                                                        17
encounter a substitute article in the reference list that they prefer to cite as the basis for a particular
idea. Alternatively, the platforms or search techniques used by readers when looking for open-
access articles may lead them to notice more related articles than when looking for closed-access
articles. Either way, lower quality articles are more likely to lose in the competition. If open
access intensifies an article's exposure to competition, it can reduce cites, especially to low-quality
content.
    The insider-outsider model assumed that the key difference between outsiders and ordinary in-
siders in that outsiders face little sanction for citing irrelevant content. This effect can be amplified
                                                                         ¯ from citing because the
if it is assumed in addition that outsiders obtain a lower average value q
probability of a good match is lower. Refer to Figure 1, in particular case (i), the relevant case for
                                    ¯ shifts the boundary between Bu (a) and B f (a) right. For
outsiders when s = 0. A decrease in q
                   ¯, virtually all outsider citing under closed access would be unseen, leading the
very low values of q
move to open access to generate an even larger reduction in cites.
    The model has the unrealistic implication that certain types of reader may end up citing all
articles. To avoid this implication, the population of articles could be reinterpreted as being just
those in a narrow topic area rather than all academic articles. Alternatively, we could add an
awareness function, A(q), equal to the probability that the reader knows about the existence of the
article, a necessary condition to be cited. Then no reader would end up citing all articles, just the
smaller set of those of which he or she is aware. The awareness function would factor out of 
and not affect any of our implications for the open-access effect.


4. Data
Our analysis is based on the sample of 100 science journals used in McCabe and Snyder (2014).
The sample is built around the subfield of ecology, which we selected among the subfields of hard
science for several reasons: (a) it is a well-defined subfield, (b) it involves a manageable number of
journals, and (c) it experienced substantial growth in open access. The sample includes all of the
ecology journals in Thomson ISI's set of indexed journals. This accounts for 60% of the journals in
the sample. Of the remaining 40%, 60% were taken from botany, the most closely related subfield

                                                    18
to ecology, and 40% from multidisciplinary science and biology, presuming that some ecology and
botany research is published in such general-interest journals. We selected the top journals from
these latter two categories, ranked based on the standardized ISI yearly impact factors averaged
over the period 1985-2004. We restricted the overall number of journals to 100 because of the
considerable expense and effort involved for each additional journal. The appendix provides a
table listing the sample journals by field.
   The dataset merges citations data together with historical information on online and open ac-
cessibility. The citations data was acquired from Thomson ISI. For each of the 100 journals in our
sample, ISI lists every article published since 1996. Each published article is linked to all cites
from the over 8,000 ISI-indexed journals for each year from 1996 to 2005. To this basic citation
data we merged hand-collected information on whether the full-text article was available online
or open access. To determine online availability, we determined the date on which each journal
issue was placed online either on the journal's own website or one of the major digital aggregators
by contacting publishers and aggregators, cross-checking their reports using libraries' electronic
journal catalogs and the Internet Archive (www.archive.org). We collected information on open
access for each issue in a similar way.
   The resulting dataset from these two sources includes observations for over 230,000 individual
cited articles, indexed by i. Let j(i) index the journal, v(i) the volume, and p(i) the year in which
article i is published. Our dataset has a panel structure because each article receives cites each year,
from the year it is published until the end of the sample period in 2005. Let t index the citation year.
Note the distinction between the dataset's two time indexes: p(i) indexes the year the cited article
was published, while t indexes the year the citing article was published. Because the average article
comes out in the middle of the ten-year sample period and hence has five years of observations for
citations, the full panel contains over 1.2 million article-citation-year observations. The articles in
our sample received 4.8 million cites from ISI-indexed articles over the sample period.
   Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the dataset. One average, articles received 3.78 cites
per year. The standard deviation of yearly cites (11.69) is quite high, as is the range, from a
low of 0 (the case for nearly half of the observations) to a high of 1,145 (received the year after


                                                  19
                                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Combined Sample


 Variable                               Mean            Median             Std. Dev.   Min.      Max.

 Publication year                     1998.99            1999.0              2.47      1996      2005
 Citation year                        2002.00            2002.0              2.46      1996      2005
 Age                                     3.00               3.0              2.46         0          9
 Cites in year                           3.78               1.0             11.69         0     1, 145
 Top-ranked journal indicator            0.72               1.0              0.45         0          1
 Online-access indicators
    · Partial                            0.18                 0.0               0.38     0          1
    · Full                               0.68                 1.0               0.47     0          1
 Open-access indicators
    · Partial                            0.09                 0.0               0.29     0          1
    · Full                               0.18                 0.0               0.38     0          1
 PubMed-access indicators
    · Partial                            0.04                 0.0               0.20     0          1
    · Full                               0.07                 0.0               0.26     0          1

Notes: Panel dataset consists of 1,268,386 observations for 231,407 articles.


publication by the 2002 article in Nature describing the sequencing of the human genome). The
next row reports statistics for an indicator for top-ranked journals, constructed by ranking journals
within our sample using the same impact factor used to select journals for inclusion in the sample,
and then setting the indicator to 1 if the article appears in a journal in the top half of this ranking.
While this indicator divides the number of journals in half by design, many more than half of the
article-level observations (72% to be precise) appear in top-ranked journals because these tend to
publish more articles each year.
    The last four rows of Table 1 provide information on indicators for online and open access. For
68% of the observations, article i was available online through some channel for the full year t .
For a much smaller fraction of observations, 18%, article i was openly accessible for the full year
t . We will focus on full online and full open access throughout the analysis. The regressions will
also include indicators for partial online and partial open access--set to 1 if some of the content in
the volume containing the article was available in the indicated way for some of the year but not
all of the content for the full year--but we will not focus on those results because partial access is
a catch-all category combining observations with various durations of access.




                                                         20
5. Methodology
To account for the count-data nature of citations in our panel-data setting, we use a fixed effects
Poisson estimator with the following conditional mean:


   E Citesit Ageit , Accessit , p(i), j(i) = exp i +  p(i)t +  1            2        2
                                                               j(i) Ageit +  j(i) Ageit +  Accessit .   (8)


Citesit denotes the number of cites to article i in year t , Ageit = t - p(i) denotes the article's age, and
Accessit denotes a vector of variables capturing the nature of access to the article. The remaining
variables are parameters to be estimated: i is an article fixed effect,  p(i)t is a time effect possibly
varying for each publication year × citation year combination,  1        2
                                                                j(i) and  j(i) are coefficients on

a quadratic age profile separately estimated for each journal, and  is a vector of parameters cap-
turing access effects. Wooldridge (1999) provides a Poisson quasi-maximum-likelihood (PQML)
estimator for equation (8), which, as long as the conditional mean is specified correctly, produces
consistent estimates of the parameters for any positive conditional distribution of Citesit (Poisson,
negative binomial, or other).
    Including article fixed effects, i , in (8) helps remove the bias that plagued cross-sectional stud-
ies of the open-access effect cited in the introduction. If higher quality articles are more likely to
be openly accessible, the open-access coefficient in previous studies may just be picking up quality
differences between open- and paid-access articles. The time effects  p(i)t help control for several
patterns widely observed in citation data--documented in the present dataset by McCabe and Sny-
der (2015)--that could otherwise confound the results. McCabe and Snyder (2015) document the
hump-shaped path of citations for an article as it ages, peaking two to three years after publication
(in the case of the sampled science articles) before gradually petering out. It is important to control
for the age profile to avoid, for example, confounding the natural decline in citations after age
three with the effect of open access that might have started then. McCabe and Snyder (2015) also
document a rising secular trend in citations, likely reflecting the growth over time in the number of
indexed journals, articles per journal, and cites per article. It is important to control for this secular
growth to avoid confounding it with the effects of online and open access, both of which become


                                                    21
more prevalent later in the sample. The included time effects  p(i)t are flexible enough to control
for a distinct citation age profile for each yearly cohort of articles having an arbitrary shape. The
 p(i)t are simultaneously flexible enough to control for secular growth in citations that differs by
vintage of content and that has an arbitrary shape. The quadratic age profile involving coefficients
1      2
j(i) ,  j(i) contributes to the flexibility by controlling for a citation age profile with a possible hump

shape that differs across journals within a cohort. McCabe and Snyder (2015) demonstrated the
importance of including this rich set of controls, showing that omitting one or another of them
produced unreliable results.
   Indicators for online and open access, both partial and full, are contained in the Accessit vector
in equation (8). Two challenges must be overcome for our access indicators to provide consistent
estimates. First, the access variables must be exogenous, i.e., orthogonal to the error given by the
difference between observed citations and the conditional expectation in (8). Given the wealth
of controls included in the conditional expectation, the nature of access to an article is plausibly
orthogonal to the remaining error. Consider the example of Plant Physiology, shown in Figure 4.
In 2001, the journal allowed open access to a whole tranche of volumes through 1999. After that,
the journal maintained a policy of making articles available open access after a two-year embargo
behind a pay wall. This pattern of maintaining a fixed embargo period combined with episodes in
which a tranche of back issues is made openly accessible is fairly typical and seems to be based
more on technological convenience than on departures from the expected pattern of cites to a
volume.
   The second challenge is that the access variables must exhibit some independent variation
from the other regressors. For example, if each volume of a journal were made openly accessible
after the same embargo duration after publication, the open-access indicator would be completely
collinear with the volume's age. As Figure 4 shows, this is not typically the case. Paradoxically, the
tranche of 1996­99 volumes that Plant Physiology made openly available in 2001 helps identify
the effect of open access on cites because simultaneously turning on the open-access indicator
hits different volumes at different points in their age profiles. The 1996 volume is first openly
accessible in its fifth year after publication, the 1997 in its fourth year, the 1998 in its third, and


                                                   22
                                              2006

                                              2005

                                              2004




                 Date of Open Accessibility
                                              2003

                                              2002

                                              2001

                                              2000

                                              1999
                                                                                                          Plant Physiology
                                              1998
                                                                                                          PNAS
                                              1997

                                              1996
                                                  1996   1997   1998      1999        2000         2001       2002           2003
                                                                       Volume's Publication Year

Figure 4: Patterns of Open Accessibility for Example Journals. Shows the earliest full year of open access for
volumes of two journals in our sample, Plant Physiology and PNAS.

                       Figure 4: Pattern of Open Accessibility for Example Journals
so forth. The 1996 volume  provides information on what the citation age profile should look like
through the fourth year in the absence of open access. If the 1998 volume deviates from this pattern
in 2001, say experiencing a jump relative to expectations, this jump can be attributed to the effect
of the start of open access in that year. For this identification strategy to be valid, one must be
able to purge secular time effects using data from other journal volumes of the same vintage but
having a different pattern of open access. Our data satisfy this requirement. First, most journals in
our sample are never openly accessible, providing a natural control sample. For journals that have
some open access in our sample, the timing of open access follows idiosyncratic patterns. In the
case of PNAS, the 1996 and 1997 volumes were already open access by 2001. PNAS granted open
access to slightly different tranche of volumes in 2001 than Plant Physiology.


6. Aggregate Results
In this section we reprise some of the provocative results from McCabe and Snyder (2014) that
motivated the theory presented in Section 2. Table 2 presents the coefficients of interest from
specifications of a count-data model along the lines of equation (8), allowing various interactions
with the full-open-access indicator in different columns. Although the regressions contain all the
controls listed in the table notes, to conserve space we only report the results for open-access in-


                                                                            23
                                Table 2: Open-Access Results for Combined Sample


 Variable                                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)

 Partial open access                                       0.044                      0.046                     0.039
                                                          (0.024)                    (0.024)                   (0.023)
 Full open access                                          0.081
                                                          (0.027)
    (a) Interacted with top-50 journal                                                0.085
                                                                                     (0.027)
    (b) Interacted with bottom-50 journal                                           -0.185
                                                                                    (0.059)
    (c) Interacted with no PubMed access                                                                        0.072
                                                                                                               (0.085)
    (d) Interacted with PubMed access                                                                           0.046
                                                                                                               (0.033)

 Test of interactions conducted                                                     (a) = (b)                 (c) = (d)
 2 test statistic                                                                    17.1                       7.3
 Articles                                                  154,744                  154,744                   154,744
 Panel observations                                        941,795                  941,795                   941,795

 Article fixed effects                                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects                  Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                            Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Full online-access indicator                               Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                             Quadratic                 Quadratic                 Quadratic

Notes: Each column is a different specification of a regression using Wooldridge's (1999) PQML procedure. Depen-
dent variable is cites to an article in a citation year. Results converted into marginal effects exp( ) - 1, where  is the
Poisson regression coefficient and exp( ) is the incidence rate ratio. Robust standard errors clustered at the journal
level reported in parentheses. Reported sample size is smaller than in Table 1 since we report observations remain-
ing after dropping articles contributing no identifying variation to coefficients of interest in presence of article fixed
effects, both articles having only one year of citation data and articles receiving no cites over the sample period (in
which case dependent variable is constant within the fixed-effect group). Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed
test at the  10% level,  5% percent level,  1% level.


dicators. The reported standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the journal
level. Regression coefficients have been converted into marginal effects interpretable as propor-
tionate increases.
    The results in column (1) show that full open access increased cites by 8.1%, statistically
significantly different from 0 at the 1% level. The effect of partial open access is about half that of
full access, 4.4%, consistent with partial access averaging to about half a year of access.7 This is
   7 Although   the regressions in Table 2 are run on article-level data with article fixed effects while the comparable


                                                           24
the set of results leading us to conclude that open access causes a small positive boost to citations
on average in the sample.
    The remaining columns break the results down into categories to look for sources of hetero-
geneity. Column (2) allows the marginal effect of full open access to differ between the 50 top-
ranked journals in our sample and the remaining 50. The marginal effect for the top-50 journals,
8.5%, is similar to the basic result we obtained before dividing journals by rank. The marginal
effect for the bottom-50 journals provides the surprise motivating the present paper: it is signif-
icantly negative, with open access leading to a 18.5% reduction in cites for these journals. An
explanation consistent with the theory is that articles in the bottom-50 journals tend to be to the
left of the quality spectrum in Figure 2, experiencing a negative open-access effect, while articles
in the top-50 tend to be to the right of the quality spectrum, experiencing a positive open-access
effect.
    In column (3) we estimated separate marginal effects for open access solely through the jour-
nal's own website on the one hand and through PubMed Central (in addition to the journal's web-
site) on the other. While access solely through a journal website continues to have a significantly
positive effect, additional access through a potentially broader platform (PubMed) is significantly
smaller and indeed is not significantly different from zero. This is surprising at first glance because
it is natural to suppose if open access boosts cites on average, open access through a yet more con-
venient channel should boost cites even more. Here, we are seeing the opposite: more convenient
access appears to reverse the benefits from open access. An explanation consistent with theory is
that offering PubMed access in addition to open access through the journal's website is akin to
moving from a narrow to a broad open-access platform, reducing non-pecuniary costs of accessing
the article. This results in a pivot in the curve capturing the open-access effect in Figure 2 from the
light to the dark curve. Both losses and gains are exaggerated, but if losses are exaggerated more
(technically, if the probability-weighted integral between the curves to the left of their intersection
is greater than to the right), then the overall effect of adding PubMed access could be to reduce the
regressions in McCabe and Snyder (2014) are run on considerably more aggregate volume-level data with volume
fixed effects, the two sets of results are identical. The results are guaranteed to be identical because the other regressors
besides the fixed effects are the same in both sets of regressions and these other regressors do not vary across articles
within a volume.


                                                            25
average estimated open-access effect. The regression in column (3) is too crude to test this claim,
so we turn to more detailed results next.


7. Results for Quality Bins

7.1. Baseline Results
This section provides more detailed estimates of the effect of open access for articles at differ-
ent points in the quality spectrum. A traditional approach would be to apply quintile regression,
minimizing the sum of asymmetrically weighted absolute residuals to yield estimates of specific
quintiles. Unfortunately, while this method has been extended to the case of count data (Machado
and Silva 2005), no such estimator has been developed for panel count data.
    Our version of quintile analysis consists of estimating equation (8) separately for each of five
quality bins formed on the basis of their citation counts. In order to avoid bias due to selection
of the sample based on residuals, we use different data when constructing these quality bins than
we use to estimate the regressions. We use citations in the first two years after publication (called
the "selection period") to form the quality bins but run the regression using cites in the third and
later years (called the "regression period"). We later report results where the bins are based on
percentiles (quintiles) of cites, but our preferred procedure will form five bins based on absolute
numbers of cites. This is our preferred procedure for forming the bins because enough articles
have the same number of cites, especially at the low end of zero, one, or two, that quintile bins
end up dividing articles with the same number of cites period into different quintiles at random.
Fortunately, we will see that the results are robust to binning procedure.8
    Five quality bins were formed: articles with no cites in the first two years after publication,
articles with one cite, articles with 2­5 cites, articles with 6­10 cites, and the remaining articles
with 11 or more cites. Table 3 provides descriptive statistics on cites in the ex post period in each
   8 McCabe   and Snyder (2015) discuss conditions under which binning based on citations in an ex ante period does
not lead to bias. Although based on a different sample--business and economics rather than science journals--
extensive analysis there showed that the results were similar whether one, two, or three years of cites were included in
the ex ante period and whether gaps of various lengths were allowed between ex ante and ex post periods. We use the
same length for the ex ante period (two years) and for the gap (zero years) as the preferred procedure in that paper.



                                                          26
                                Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Citation Bins


                                                            Cites each year over regression period
 Cites in
 selection period       Obs.             Mean           Median             Std. Dev.          Min.   Max.

 0 cites             361, 657             0.53            0.0                 1.28             0         59
 1 cite              126, 426             1.66            1.0                 2.27             0         50
 2-5 cites           183, 734             3.54            3.0                 3.77             0         87
 6-10 cites           67, 745             7.63            6.0                 6.35             0        126
 11+ cites            89, 106            24.96           17.0                31.90             0     1, 071




of these bins. Not surprisingly, cites are strongly correlated across the two periods, as shown by
the increase in mean cites reading down that column.
   Table 4 reports the results from estimating equation (8) separately for each of these five bins.
Each column of the table represents a separate regression. As in Table 2, the regressions include
a rich set of controls, but for space considerations we only report coefficients for the open-access
variables of interest. The controls are identical to those used in Table 2 with one exception. Table 2
included quadratic age profiles for each journal to help control for hump-shaped citation age pro-
files specific to each journal. The sample used for Table 4 excludes the first two years of citation
data used to select the bins. Given that the peak of the citation age profile is reached two years after
publication, the profile remaining after truncating the first two years is roughly linear, adequately
captured by linear age profiles for each journal. We found the time series remaining after dropping
the first two years of data for each article to be too short to reliably estimate quadratic age profiles.
   The results for partial open access are again about half of those for full open access fairly
consistently throughout the table, so the discussion will focus on the full-open-access results. The
result is negative for the first three bins and positive for the last two. The ­12.3% marginal effect in
the 1-cite bin and the 7.7% marginal effect in the 11+ cite bin are both significant at the 1% level.
Figure 5 provides a clearer picture of how the results compare to theory. Each dot is the plot of the
estimated full-open-access effect from Table 4 on the vertical axis against median cites for each bin
during the selection period reported in Table 3 on the horizontal axis. The curve is a quadratic fit to
the points, providing a summary view of the pattern of the results. The fitted curve displays many


                                                       27
                                    Table 4: Open-Access Results by Citation Bins


                                                                            Cites in selection period
 Variable                                         0 cites          1 cite         2­5 cites       6­10 cites      11+ cites

 Partial open access                             0.000            -0.083          -0.017            0.001           0.034
                                                (0.041)           (0.030)         (0.034)          (0.021)         (0.010)
 Full open access                               -0.046            -0.123          -0.045            0.010           0.077
                                                (0.060)           (0.026)         (0.040)          (0.025)         (0.013)

 Articles                                         31,008           21,271          35,245          13,496          17,775
 Panel observations                              162,735          107,622         173,469          65,357          86,371

 Article fixed effects                             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects         Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                   Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Full online-access indicator                      Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                     Linear          Linear           Linear          Linear          Linear

Notes: Each column is a separate regression including observations falling into indicated bin. Bins formed by summing
cites in selection period (first two years after publication). Observations in selection period are omitted from the
regressions, reducing the sample size relative to that reported in Table 1. Sample sizes are further reduced by dropping
articles contributing no identifying variation to coefficients of interest in presence of article fixed effects, both articles
having only one ex post year of citation data and articles receiving no cites over the ex post period (in which case
dependent variable is constant within the fixed-effect group). Regressions use Wooldridge's (1999) PQML procedure.
Dependent variable is cites to an article in a citing year. Results converted into marginal effects exp( ) - 1, where  is
the Poisson regression coefficient and exp( ) is the incidence rate ratio. Robust standard errors clustered at the journal
level reported in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the  10% level,  5% percent level,
 1% level.



of the features predicted by theory: it starts out below the horizontal axis for the lowest quality
articles and eventually rises above it for the highest quality articles. It is monotonically increasing
and concave.
    Tables B2 and B3 provided in Appendix B demonstrate the robustness of the results to alter-
native structures for the bins. Like Table 4, Table B2 forms bins based on absolute numbers of
citations but uses different numbers to form the bins: 0 cites, 1­2 cites, 3­9 cites, and 10+ cites.
This scheme results in one fewer bin. The results are still consistent with Table 4. The effect of
full open access is negative for the lowest bins and positive and significant only for the highest
bin. Rather than binning based on absolute number of cites during the selection period, Table B3
bins articles based on cites relative to other articles published in the same year. The bins are asym-
metric. The first bin is the largest, containing articles in the 0-50 percentile. All the articles had


                                                             28
                                                                 0.20        Table 4 Results
                                                                 0.15
                                                                 0.10                                                 Basic estimates
                                                                 0.05
                                                                 0.00
                                                                 -0.05
                                                                 -0.10
                                                                 -0.15
                                                                 -0.20
                     Open-access effect (proportionate change)




                                                                         0                 5           10            15                    20

                                                                 0.20        Table 5 Results
                                                                 0.15                                                     With PubMed
                                                                 0.10
                                                                 0.05                                                Without PubMed
                                                                 0.00
                                                                 -0.05
                                                                 -0.10
                                                                 -0.15
                                                                 -0.20
                                                                         0                 5           10            15                 20

                                                                 0.20        Table 7 Results                                Insider cites
                                                                 0.15
                                                                 0.10                                                     Outsider cites
                                                                 0.05
                                                                 0.00
                                                                 -0.05
                                                                 -0.10
                                                                 -0.15
                                                                 -0.20
                                                                         0                 5           10            15                 20

                                                                                               Median cites in bin

Figure 5: Plot of Results by Citation Bins. Plots results from separate regressions by citation bin collected from
several tables. Each dot is the plot of the open-access effect for a citation bin against against median cites in that bin.




                                                                                                 29
no cites in the selection period in this percentile, so there was no reason to divide it further. The
remaining four percentiles have equal 12.5% widths for symmetry. The results in Table B3 are
nearly identical to those in each of the corresponding bins in Table 4. We conclude that the results
are robust to different binning procedures.


7.2. Interactions with PubMed Access
Table 5 separates the effect of full open access into access solely through the journal's own website
in row (a) and additional access through PubMed in row (b). Access solely through the journal's
own website produces almost identical estimates to those for full open access that are not separated
by channel in Table 4. The results that are interacted with PubMed access are noticably different.
The negative effects in the three lowest-quality bins are exaggerated as is the positive effect for
the highest-quality bin. Now articles in the 0-cite bin suffer a 13.5% decline in cites from this
enhanced form of open access, significant at the 10% level. The articles in the 11+ cite bin gain
11.4%, significant at the 1% level. The open-access results interacted with PubMed access differ
significantly from those interacted with no PubMed access at the 1% level for the lowest and
highest cite bins.
   The pattern of the results is again best seen in a graph. The results from Table 5 are plotted
in the middle panel of Figure 5. The results interacted with no PubMed access are plotted as
the black dots and fit by the black quadratic curve; the results interacted with PubMed access
are plotted as the grey dots and fit by the grey quadratic curve. As predicted by theory--see, in
particular, Figure 2--the increase in convenience of access when the article is posted on PubMed
pivots the curve so that the lowest-quality articles are harmed even more by this form of access and
the highest-quality articles benefit even more.
   Given that the coefficients line up fairly well with the fitted quadratic curves through them
and that the quadratic curves resemble those used to illustrate the theory, we have a fairly strong
demonstration that the empirical results support the model's theoretical predictions. The one place
where the results depart from the theory is in the non-monotonicity in the effect of full open access
moving from the 0-cite to the 1-cite bin. In the initial results abstracting from PubMed access


                                                  30
                        Table 5: Results by Citation Bins Interacted with PubMed Access


 Variable                                     0 cites         1 cite   2­5 cites    6­10 cites   11+ cites

 Partial open access                         -0.007          -0.085    -0.019         0.000       0.035
                                             (0.045)         (0.029)   (0.034)       (0.020)     (0.009)
 Full open access
    (a) Interacted with no PubMed access     -0.056          -0.126    -0.048         0.007       0.085
                                             (0.064)         (0.027)   (0.041)       (0.023)     (0.008)
    (b) Interacted with PubMed access        -0.135          -0.141    -0.059        -0.001       0.114
                                             (0.066)         (0.036)   (0.047)       (0.022)     (0.007)

 2 statistic from test of (a) = (b)          18.7               1.1      0.7           1.2        7.2
 Articles                                     31,008          21,271    35,245        31,215      17,775
 Panel observations                          162,735         107,622   173,469       156,875      86,371

 Article fixed effects                         Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects     Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Partial online-access indicator               Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Full online-access indicator                  Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                 Linear         Linear     Linear       Linear       Linear

Notes: See Table 4 for applicable notes.


reported in Table 4, the marginal effect dips from -4.6% to ­12.3% before rising again to ­4.5% in
the 2­5 cite bin. The results interacted with no PubMed access exhibit similar non-monotonicity.
The non-monotonicity is less pronounced in the results on the interaction with PubMed access.
There, there is hardly a dip between the ­13.5% effect in the 0-cite bin to the ­14.1% effect in the
1-cite bin.
    The disaggregated results by quality bin in Table 4 dovetail with the aggregate results from
Table 2. This pattern that open access reduces cites in lower bins and increases cites in higher bins
echoes the findings from column (2) of Table 2 that open access reduced cites for the bottom-50
journals and increased cites for the top-50 journals. The PubMed effect estimated in column (3)
of Table 2 for the combined sample--small and not significantly different from 0--is consistent
with negative open-access effects observed for low-quality articles (for which the grey curve in the
middle panel of Figure 5 falls below the horizontal axis) averaging out positive effects observed
for high-quality articles (for which the grey curve rises above the horizontal axis).




                                                        31
                          Table 6: Descriptive Statistics for Insider/Outsider Analysis


 Variable                            Mean            Median            Std. Dev.          Min.           Max.

 Cites in year in total               1.80              1.0                3.41            0             133
 Cites in year from insiders          1.00              0.0                2.17            0              83
 Cites in year from outsiders         0.76              0.0                1.66            0              80

Notes: Descriptive statistics for subsample of botany and ecology journals in our dataset, which are amenable to
measuring insider and outsider cites. Resulting panel has 622,500 observations for 114,961 articles.


7.3. Insider Versus Outsider Cites
This subsection presents open-access estimates broken down by whether cites are coming from
insiders versus outsiders relative to the cited journal's field. The first step in identifying insiders and
outsiders is to restrict our cited sample by eliminating multidisciplinary-science journals. These 17
journals cover such broad areas that nearly all scientists could be regarded as insiders to them. The
remaining 83 titles are in more narrow fields of ecology and botany. For a botany journal, a cite is
classified as inside botany if and only if the citing journal has botany as one of its ISI-designated
subjects. An analogous procedure is used to classify cites as inside or outside ecology.
    Table 6 provides descriptive statistics for the restricted sample used in the insider/outsider anal-
ysis. Excluding multidisciplinary-science titles cuts the number of articles and panel observations
about in half compared to Table 1. The loss of observations is disproportionate to the number
of titles cut, which is expected since the typical multidisciplinary-science journal publishes con-
siderably more articles per year than a more specialized botany or ecology journal. The average
botany or ecology journal obtains 1.80 cites per year in total across inside, outside, and ambigu-
ous sources, fewer than the 3.78 cites in our original sample including multidisciplinary-science
journals, reflecting the fact that the field journals in our sample obtain fewer cites per article than
the more general, multidisciplinary-science journals. On average, the restricted sample receives
1.00 insider cites (56% of total) and 0.76 outsider cites (42% of total). The residual 2% of cites
come from multidisciplinary science and popular science titles, which cannot be unambiguously
classified as outsider or insider.
    Table 7 reports estimates of the marginal effect of open access by citation bins where the depen-


                                                       32
                                 Table 7: Insider/Outsider Results by Citation Bins


                                                                          Cites in selection period
 Variable                                        0 cites         1 cite        2­5 cites       6­10 cites     11+ cites

                                                     A. Insider cites

 Partial open access                           -0.144           -0.096           0.015           0.080          0.149
                                               (0.055)          (0.033)         (0.025)         (0.094)        (0.081)
 Full open access                              -0.158           -0.112           0.018           0.084          0.205
                                               (0.031)          (0.038)         (0.023)         (0.040)        (0.083)

 Articles                                        24,014         13,420          14,377            2,226          678
 Panel observations                             125,261         67,678          69,967           10,479         3,059

                                                    B. Outsider cites

 Partial open access                           -0.065           -0.108         -0.040           -0.080         -0.223
                                               (0.031)          (0.054)        (0.054)          (0.069)        (0.073)
 Full open access                              -0.163           -0.198         -0.118           -0.087          0.065
                                               (0.044)          (0.040)        (0.029)          (0.076)        (0.083)

 Articles                                        30,095         13,499          10,678             913           156
 Panel observations                             157,040         67,603          51,256            4,185          729

 Article fixed effects                            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects        Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                  Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Full online-access indicator                     Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                    Linear         Linear          Linear           Linear         Linear

Notes: Each column of each of panels A and B reports a separate regression including observations falling into bin
indicated in column heading. Only insider cites are used for the dependent variable in panel A and only outsider cites
in panel B. The same subset of cites used for the dependent variable is used to form bins: i.e., only insider cites during
selection period are used to form bins in panel A and only outsider cites in panel B. Regressions use subsample of
observations from botany and ecology journals described in Table 6. Specification is otherwise identical to that in
Table 4; see that table for applicable notes.


dent variable is insider cites in panel A and outsider cites in panel B. The results for insider cites
exaggerate the monotonic pattern compared to any yet seen, even those interacted with PubMed
access, the estimate for the 0-cite bin is the most strongly negative and for the 11+ cite bin is the
most strongly positive. Outsider cites in panel B of Table 7 are negative for all except the 11+
cite bin, which is not statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level (although the
coefficient on partial open access in this bin is negative and significant).



                                                           33
   To help visualize patterns, the last panel of Figure 5 graphs the results from Table 7 along with
quadratic curves fitting the points. The curves resemble their theoretical counterparts in Figure 3.
Of the two theoretical curves for insiders in Figure 3, the dashed one for ordinary insiders and the
solid black one including a fraction of smart insiders, the one for ordinary insiders one appears
to fit the empirical results for insiders better. The implication is that insiders may not obtain
appreciably better signals of quality in advance of access than outsiders. Comparing the theoretical
and empirical curves for outsiders, the estimated open-access effect for outsiders is monotonic in
quality as predicted by theory but is not everywhere negative. The positive result for the highest-
quality bin may be due to noise or may reflect the possibility that outsiders also face a sanction for
irrelevant cites, just smaller than insiders'.


8. Conclusions
In solving some of the methodological problems associated with estimating the causal effect of
open access, our previous work (McCabe and Snyder 2014) uncovered some surprising findings.
While open access was found to cause a modest positive boost to cites on average, some content
was found to be harmed by open access, in particular, content in the bottom half of journals in our
sample of science journals. A further puzzle was that PubMed Central, a convenient repository
that should facilitate easy access, was found to boost cites less than access through the narrower
platform of the journal's own website.
   This paper offers theoretical and empirical arguments suggesting that the previous results were
not statistical flukes but predictable features of the market for academic journals. The intuition
here is that open access increases the payoff from acquiring the full text of an article (at least for
scholars at institutions that cannot afford the subscription fee for the closed-access journal) while
leaving the payoffs of other strategies--not citing it or citing it based on superficial information--
unchanged. For the articles of the lowest possible quality, citations decrease because some readers
switch from superficially citing to acquiring the full text of these articles. While these readers
would have cited these articles unseen, once they acquire them, they are almost certain to find that
they are not worth citing. The theory thus shows that a negative open access effect for low-quality

                                                 34
content is not a quirk by a predictable outcome from reasonable citation behavior on the part of
readers.
    The theory generates a range of predictions beyond a possible negative open-access effect
for some content. The predictions are readily summarized in Figure 2, showing that the open
access effect is negative for the lowest-quality articles, positive for the highest-quality articles,
and monotonic and concave throughout the range of article qualities. The theory predicts that
improving the convenience of open access--as would be associated with placing the article on
a broad platform like PubMed Central--should rotate the open-access effect so that it is even
more sensitive to article quality, exaggerating the citation losses experienced by the lowest-quality
content and the citation gains experienced by the highest-quality content.
    The empirical results from separate regressions for bins of articles formed on the basis of cites
in a pre-study period line up closely with the theoretical predictions. Articles in lower citation
bins are harmed by open access (the marginal effect as low as ­12.3%, significant at the 1% level);
articles in higher bins benefit (the marginal effect as high as 7.7%, significant at the 1% level).
With few exceptions, the open-access effect is monotonic in quality over the bins. PubMed access
rotates the open-access effect, exaggerating the citation losses for low-quality content and the gains
for high-quality content, just as would be predicted by a theory under the assumption that PubMed
access involves lower non-pecuniary costs than access solely though the journal's own website.
    We find dramatic differences between the effect of open access on cites from insiders versus
outsiders to the article's field. The open-access effect is shifted downward for outsider cites com-
pared to insider cites, with negative effects for all quality bins but the last (which is not statistically
significantly different from 0 for the full-open-access variable but is statistically significantly neg-
ative for the partial-open-access variable). This comparison is consistent with outsiders engaging
in more citing unseen than insiders under closed access, which theory predicts if outsiders face
little sanction for irrelevant cites, amplified by low average match quality with outside content.
Open access leads outsiders to move from citing unseen to full access, often determining that the
low-quality content is unsuitable for citing, leading to stronger negative open-access effects for
outsiders. Though the model of smart insiders, who obtain a good signal of quality even before


                                                    35
accessing, raised the possibility that the open-access effect can be nonmonotonic in quality for
them, our empirical estimates for insider cites did not reveal such nonmonotonicities. We may not
need to assume a different process generates quality signals for the two types of reader; it may be
                                                                        ¯).
enough to assume they differ in parameters (sanction s and mean quality q
    Taken together, these results suggest fairly strong "superstar" effects of open access, a new
result in this literature. This substitution away from low- to high-quality articles is evidence of
better matching that would appear to benefit readers as well as authors of the higher quality papers.
Authors of lower quality articles, as well as lower quality journals, appear to be the net losers in
the competition for reader attention. To our knowledge we are the first to suggest a mechanism
through which open-access can generate winners and losers and the first to find evidence of this
possibility.




                                                 36
Appendix A: Proofs
Before proving the propositions stated in the text, we provide two lemmas. The first lemma shows
how the type spaces change with an increase in the acquisition cost. The second lemma provides
expressions for the values and derivatives of the open-access effect. To streamline the proofs, we
employ the shorthand notation throughout:

                                          z  (1 + )(1 - q
                                                        ¯)s.                                   (A1)

Lemma 1. For all a , a > 0 such that a < a ,

                                       P(Bn (a ))  P(Bn (a ))                                  (A2)
                                       P(Bu (a ))  P(Bu (a ))                                  (A3)
                                       P(B f (a )) > P(B f (a )).                              (A4)

Proof. Assume 0 < a < a . The analysis can be divided into four cases, depending on the value
of z relative to a and a .
    First suppose z < a . This implies z < a since a > a . Then (i) is the relevant case from
Figure 1 whether the acquisition cost is a or a . We have

                                                                ¯)s
                                                           (1 - q
                                 Bn (a ) = Bn (a ) = 0,             ,                          (A5)
                                                              q¯

implying
                                       P(Bn (a )) = P(Bn (a )).                                (A6)
Further,
                                                          ¯)s a - (1 - q
                                                 a - (1 - q            ¯)s
                         B f (a ) \ B f (a ) =               ,             .                   (A7)
                                                      q¯          q ¯
This is a non-degenerate subinterval of (0, ). To see this, note the left endpoint is positive since
a > z, which implies a > (1 - q    ¯)s. The right endpoint exceeds the left since a < a . A non-
degenerate subinterval of (0, ) has positive measure since b has a continuous distribution on
(0, ). Therefore P(B f (a ) \ B f (a )) > 0, implying (A4). Since the sets in (3) partition the mea-
surable type space, P(Bn (a)) + P(Bu (a)) + P(B f (a)) = 1, implying

     P(Bu (a )) = 1 - P(Bn (a )) - P(B f (a )) < 1 - P(Bn (a )) - P(B f (a )) = P(Bu (a )),    (A8)

where the inequality follows from (A6) and (A4).
   Next, suppose z  a . This implies z > a since a < a . Then (ii) is the relevant case from
Figure 1 whether the acquisition cost is a or a . We have

                                    P(Bu (a ))) = P(Bu (a )) = 0.                              (A9)

Further,
                                                         a       a
                             B f (a ) \ B f (a ) =            ,       ,                       (A10)
                                                            ¯ (1 + )q
                                                      (1 + )q       ¯


                                                     37
which is obviously a non-degenerate subinterval of (0, ) since 0 < a < a . As argued in the
previous paragraph, (A4) follows. Similar to the argument behind (A8), we have

     P(Bn (a )) = 1 - P(Bu (a )) - P(B f (a )) < 1 - P(Bu (a )) - P(B f (a )) = P(Bn (a )).     (A11)

   Next, suppose z  (a , a ). Then (ii) is the relevant case from Figure 1 when the acquisition
cost is a , and (i) is the relevant case when the acquisition cost is a . We have

                                       P(Bu (a )) = 0 < P(Bu (a )).                             (A12)

Further,
                                                          a           ¯)s
                                                                 (1 - q
                              Bn (a ) \ Bn (a ) =              ,          .                     (A13)
                                                             ¯
                                                       (1 + )q      q¯
This is a non-degenerate subinterval of (0, ). The left endpoint is positive since a > 0, and the
right endpoint exceeds the left since z > a . Hence

                                         P(Bn (a )) < P(Bn (a )).                               (A14)

In addition,
                                                       a               ¯)s
                                                              a - (1 - q
                           B f (a ) \ B f (a ) =            ,              .                    (A15)
                                                          ¯
                                                    (1 + )q       q ¯
This is also a non-degenerate subinterval of (0, ). The left endpoint is positive since a > 0. To
see that the right endpoint exceeds the left, note

                                     a          ¯)s a - (1 - q
                                           (1 - q            ¯)s
                                                   <             ,                              (A16)
                                        ¯
                                  (1 + )q     q¯        q ¯

where the first inequality follows from z  a and the second from z < a . The argument above
that (A4) follows from the non-degeneracy of (A7) can be used to show (A4) also follows from the
non-degeneracy of (A15).
    Finally, suppose z = a . All the analysis from previous paragraph carries over except for the
comparison of P(Bn (a )) to P(Bn (a )). Now,

                                            a              ¯)s
                                                      (1 - q
                        Bn (a ) = 0,             = 0,                   = Bn (a ),              (A17)
                                               ¯
                                         (1 + )q         q¯

where the second equality follows from z = a . Equation (A17) implies that (A6) holds.
   We have thus verified that (A2), (A3), and (A4) hold across the cases analyzed, which were
exhaustive. Q.E.D.

Lemma 2. Assume (5) holds. Then

                                  P(Bu (ao )) + qP(B f (ao )) - [P(Bu (ac )) + qP(B f (ac ))]
                (q, ac , ao ) =                                                                 (A18)
                                                 P(Bu (ac )) + qP(B f (ac ))

                                       P(Bu (ac ))P(B f (ao )) - P(B f (ac ))P(Bu (ao ))
                   q (q, ac , ao ) =                                                            (A19)
                                                [P(Bu (ac )) + qP(B f (ac ))]2

                                                     38
                                                 -2P(B f (ac ))q (q, ac , ao )
                            qq (q, ac , ao ) =                                                  (A20)
                                                  P(Bu (ac )) + qP(B f (ac ))
                                                 P(Bu (ao )) - P(Bu (ac ))
                               (0, ac , ao ) =                                                  (A21)
                                                       P(Bu (ac ))
                                                 P(Bn (ac )) - P(Bn (ao ))
                               (1, ac , ao ) =                             .                    (A22)
                                                     1 - P(Bn (ac ))
Proof. Equation (A18) follows from substituting from (4) into (6), (A19) from differentiating
(A18) and rearranging, and (A20) from differentiating (A19) and rearranging. Equations (A21)
and (A22) follow from substituting q = 0 and q = 1, respectively, into (A18).
    It remains to check that the denominators of (A18)­(A22) are non-zero, ensuring the expres-
sions are well-defined. Given (5) holds, (i) is the relevant case from Figure 1 under closed access,
implying P(Bu (ac )) > 0, implying the denominators in (A18)­(A22) are positive for all q  [0, 1].
Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 1. Assume (5), implying ac > z. Then (i) is the relevant case from Figure 1
under closed access, implying Bu (ac ) and B f (ac ) are non-degenerate subintervals of (0, ). Non-
degenerate subintervals of (0, ) have positive measure since b has a continuous distribution on
(0, ). Hence,

                                            P(Bu (ac )) > 0                                     (A23)
                                            P(B f (ac )) > 0.                                   (A24)

Applying Lemma 1, substituting ao for a and ac for a , yields

                                       P(Bn (ao ))  P(Bn (ac ))                                 (A25)
                                       P(Bu (ao ))  P(Bu (ac ))                                 (A26)
                                       P(B f (ao )) > P(B f (ac )).                             (A27)

   Now

                          0 < P(Bu (ac ))[P(B f (ao )) - P(B f (ac ))]                          (A28)
                             P(Bu (ac ))P(B f (ao )) - P(Bu (ao ))P(B f (ac )),                 (A29)

where (A28) follows from (A23) and (A27) and (A29) follows from (A26). Conditions (A28)­
(A29) imply that the numerator of (A19) is positive. The denominator is positive by (A23)­
(A24). Hence q (q, ac , ao ) > 0. Substituting this inequality along with (A24) into (A20) yields
qq (q, ac , ao ) < 0.
    Having characterized the derivatives of (q, ac , ao ), we are left to determine its sign. The
analysis is divided into three cases, depending on the value of ao relative to z.
    First, suppose ao > z. The arguments in the proof of Lemma 1 leading up to (A6) can be
repeated, substituting ao for a and ac for a , yielding P(Bn (ao )) = P(Bn (ac )). Substituting into
(A22) yields (1, ac , ao ) = 0. Now q (q, ac , ao ) > 0 and (1, ac , ao ) = 0 implies (q, ac , ao ) < 0
for all q  (0, 1).


                                                    39
    Next, suppose ao = z. The arguments in the proof of Lemma 1 leading up to (A17) can be
repeated, substituting ao for a and ac for a , yielding P(Bn (ao )) = P(Bn (ac )). Using arguments
from the previous paragraph, the same result can be obtained, namely (q, ac , ao ) < 0 for all
q  (0, 1).
    Finally, suppose ao < z. The arguments in the proof of Lemma 1 leading up to (A12) can
be repeated, substituting ao for a and ac for a , yielding P(Bu (ao )) < P(Bu (ac )). Substituting
into (A21) yields (0, ac , ao ) < 0. Since (q, ac , ao ) is differentiable, it is continuous. By con-
tinuity, (q, ac , ao ) < 0 for a neighborhood above q = 0 as well. We can also repeat the argu-
ments in the proof of Lemma 1 leading up to (A14), again substituting ao for a and ac for a ,
to obtain P(Bn (ao )) < P(Bn (ac )). Substituting into (A22) yields (1, ac , ao ) > 0. By continuity,
(q, ac , ao ) > 0 for a neighborhood below q = 1 as well. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2. Assume (5), implying ac > z. The arguments in the proof of Proposi-
tion 1 showing that (A23) and (A24) hold also apply here. Applying Lemma 1, substituting aB
                                                                                          o for
         N
a and ao for a , yields

                                          P(Bn (aB            N
                                                 o ))  P(Bn (ao ))                                (A30)
                                          P(Bu (aB            N
                                                 o ))  P(Bu (ao ))                                (A31)
                                          P(B f (aB              N
                                                  o )) > P(B f (ao )).                            (A32)

   Substituting aB      N
                 o and ao for ao in (A19), differencing, and rearranging, yields

           q (q, ac , aB                 N
                       o ) - q (q, ac , ao )
           P(B f (ac )) P(Bu (aN             B                          B              N
                               o )) - P(Bu (ao )) + P(Bu (ac )) P(B f (ao )) - P(B f (ao ))
       =                                                             2
                                                                                              .   (A33)
                                       P(Bu (ac )) + qP(B f (ac ))

The first term in the numerator is non-negative by (A24) and (A31). The second term in the
numerator is positive by (A23) and (A32). The denominator is positive by (A23). Thus (A33) is
positive, implying q (q, ac , aB                 N
                               o ) > q (q, ac , ao ).
                  B      N
   Substituting ao and ao for ao in (A21), differencing, and rearranging, yields

                                                           P(Bu (aB             N
                                                                  o )) - P(Bu (ao ))
                         (0, ac , aB               N
                                   o ) - (0, ac , ao ) =                             .            (A34)
                                                                 P(B f (ac ))

The numerator is non-positive by (A31). The denominator is positive by (A24). Thus (A34) is
non-positive, implying (0, ac , aB              N
                                 o )  (q, ac , ao ).
                 B      N
   Substituting ao and ao for ao in (A22), differencing, and rearranging, yields

                                                           P(Bn (aN              B
                                                                  o )) - P(Bn (ao ))
                         (1, ac , aB               N
                                   o ) - (1, ac , ao ) =                              .           (A35)
                                                           P(Bu (ac )) + P(B f (ac ))

The numerator is non-negative by (A30). The denominator is positive by (A23) and (A24). Thus
(A35) is non-negative, implying (1, ac , aB              N
                                          o )  (1, ac , ao ). Q.E.D.




                                                      40
Proof of Proposition 4. Letting xS (q, a) and x(q, a) denote the number of cites from smart and
ordinary insiders, respectively, we have

                                     xI (q, a) =  xS (q, a) + (1 -  )x(q, a).                                 (A36)

Intuitively, no smart insider cites an article with q = 0, implying xS (0, a) = 0. This intuition can
be verified in Figure 1 by replacing q ¯ with q and setting q = 0. We then see from the figure that
Bn (a) occupies the whole measurable space. Substituting xS (0, a) = 0 into (A36) yields xI (0, a) =
(1 -  )x(0, a). Thus,

                               xI (0, ao ) - xI (0, ac ) (1 -  )[x(0, ao ) - x(0, ac )]
           I (0, ac , ao ) =                            =                               = (0, ac , ao ).
                                      xI (0, ac )             (1 -  )x(0, ac )

    We next examine the other extreme of article quality, q = 1. Intuitively, all smart insiders
cite an article with q = 1 since citing unseen provides a benefit with no risk of sanction, so the
reader prefers this to ignoring the article. Acquiring the full text instead always generates a cite.
This intuition can be verified in Figure 1 by replacing q     ¯ with q and setting q = 1. We then see
from the figure that (i) is the relevant case, and sets Bu (a) and B f (a) span the whole measurable
space. Hence xS (1, a) = PS (BS                S S               S S                      I
                                 u (a)) + 1 · P (B f (a)) = 1 - P (Bn (a)) = 1, implying x (1, a) =  +
(1 -  )x(1, a). Substituting,

                             + (1 -  )x(1, ao ) - [ + (1 -  )x(1, ac )   x(1, ao ) - x(1, ac )
        I (1, ac , ao ) =                                              =                       .              (A37)
                                       + (1 -  )x(1, ac )                 /(1 -  ) + x(1, ac )

Since  > 0 and (1, ac , ao ) = [x(1, ao ) - x(1, ac )]/x(1, ac ), the last claim of the proposition fol-
lows. Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 5. In the extended model in which both a and s differ across regimes, let
Bn (ac , sc ) and Bn (ao , so ) denote the set of types who do not cite under, respectively, closed and
open access. Denote the other type sets Bu and B f analogously.
     Consider open-access sanctions so , so > 0 with so > so . First, suppose (7) does not hold. Then
the relevant case from Figure 1 is (ii) when the sanction cost is so ; it is also the relevant case
when the sanction cost is the yet higher so . In case (ii), the sets do not depend on s. Hence,
Bu (ao , so ) = Bu (ao , so ) and B f (ao , so ) = B f (ao , so ), implying x(q, ao , so ) = x(q, ao , so ) by (4).
     Next, suppose (7) holds. Then (ii) is the relevant case from Figure 1 when the sanction cost is
so . Either case (i) or (ii) may be relevant when the sanction cost is so . Take the two subcases in
turn. First, suppose
                                                 ao > (1 + )(1 - q   ¯)so ,                                      (A38)
implying (i) is the relevant case when the sanction cost is so . We have

                                                 ¯)so
                                            (1 - q             ¯)so
                                                          (1 - q
                       Bn (ao , so ) = 0,              0,              = Bn (ao , so )                        (A39)
                                                ¯
                                                q             ¯
                                                              q
                                              ¯)so
                                    ao - (1 - q                  ¯)so
                                                       ao - (1 - q
                 B f (ao , so ) =                  ,                  ,  = B f (ao , so ),                    (A40)
                                          q¯                 q¯



                                                         41
implying

                                      P(Bn (ao , so )) < P(Bn (ao , so ))                        (A41)
                                      P(B f (ao , so )) < P(B f (ao , so ))                      (A42)

since b is continuously distributed on its support (0, ). Now,

                        x(q, ao , so ) = P(Bu (ao , so )) + qP(B f (ao , so ))                   (A43)
                                       = 1 - P(Bn (ao , so )) - (1 - q)P(B f (ao , so )),        (A44)

where (A43) follows from (4) and (A44) from P(Bu (ao , so )) = 1 - P(Bn (ao , so )) - P(B f (ao , so )).
Equations (A41)­(A44) imply x(q, ao , so ) > x(q, ao , so ).
   Finally, suppose (7) holds but (A38) is violated. Then

                                               ¯)so
                                          (1 - q           ao
                     Bn (ao , so ) = 0,              0,           = Bn (ao , so )                (A45)
                                              ¯
                                              q               ¯
                                                        (1 + )q
                                              ¯)so
                                    ao - (1 - q            ao
                 B f (ao , so ) =                  ,            ,  = B f (ao , so ).             (A46)
                                          q¯                  ¯
                                                        (1 + )q

In both (A45) and (A46), the first equality and strict inclusion follow from (7); the last equality
follows from the violation of (A38). Equations (A45)­(A46) imply (A41)­(A42), which together
with (A43)­(A44) imply x(q, ao , so ) > x(q, ao , so ). Q.E.D.




                                                      42
Appendix B: Supplementary Exhibits

                                                           Table B1: Journals in Sample
                   Ecology                                                    Botany                                    Multidisciplinary Science and Biology
  Rank                   Journal                          Rank                      Journal                           Rank                   Journal

  5        Annual Rev. Ecol. Systematics                    4         Plant Cell                                       1          Proc. National Acad. Sci.
  6        Advances Ecol. Res.                              9         Annual Rev. Phytopathology                       2          Nature
  7        Ecol. Monographs                                10         Plant Physiology                                 3          Science
  8        Trends Ecol. Evolution                          12         Plant Molecular Bio.                             16         Proc.: Bio. Sci.
  11       Amer. Naturalist                                15         Planta                                           17         Philosophical Trans.: Bio. Sci.
  13       Evolution                                       18         Molecular Plant-Microbe Interact.                49         Amer. Scientist
  14       Ecol.                                           19         Plant Cell Environ.                              55         Annals New York Acad. Sci.
  20       J. Animal Ecol.                                 21         Botanical Rev.                                   56         Naturwissenschaften
  22       Behavioral Ecol.                                24         Photosynthesis Res.                              58         Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci.
  23       J. Ecol.                                        28         Theoretical Applied Genetics                     60         Proc. Japan Acad. Series B
  25       Marine Ecol.                                    29         New Phytologist                                  67         Trans. Royal Soc. South Africa
  26       Paleobiology                                    32         Plant Cell Physiology                            73         J. Royal Soc. New Zealand
  27       Ecol. Applications                              33         Protoplasma                                      82         South African J. Sci.
  30       Oecologia                                       34         J. Experimental Botany                           90         Current Sci.
  31       Oikos                                           35         Physiologia Plantarum                            92         Interciencia
  37       Microbial Ecol.                                 36         J. Phycology                                     94         Archives Sci.
  38       J. Applied Ecol.                                39         Amer. J. Botany                                  96         Ohio J. Sci.
  42       J. North Amer. Benthological Soc.               40         Phytopathology
  43       Functional Ecol.                                41         Annals Missouri Botanical Garden
  44       Theoretical Population Bio.                     48         Physio. Molec. Plant Pathology
  45       J. Evolutionary Bio.                            51         Systematic Botany
  46       J. Experimental Marine Bio. Ecol.               62         Int. J. Plant Sci.
  47       Conservation Bio.                               75         Functional Plant Bio.
  50       J. Chemical Ecol.                               100        J. Torrey Botanical Soc.
  52       Evolutionary Ecol.
  53       J. Biogeography
  54       Polar Bio.
  57       J. Wildlife Manag.
  59       Bio. Conservation
  61       Biotropica
  63       Sarsia
  64       Environ. Bio. Fishes
  65       New Zealand J. Ecol.
  66       Ecol. Modelling
  68       Acta Oecologica
  69       J. Tropical Ecol.
  70       Agricultural Ecosystems Environ.
  71       Pedobiologia
  72       Biochemical Systematics Ecol.
  74       J. Soil Water Conservation
  76       Amer. Midland Naturalist
  77       Rangeland Ecol. Manag.
  78       J. Arid Environ.
  79       J. Natural Hist.
  80       Wildlife Soc. Bull.
  81       Proc. Acad. Natural Sci. Phila.
  83       Population Ecol.
  84       J. Freshwater Ecol.
  85       African J. Ecol.
  86       Rev. Ecol.-La Terre Et La Vie
  87       South African J. Wildlife Res.
  88       Revista Chilena Hist. Natural
  89       Northwest Sci.
  91       Canadian Field-Naturalist
  93       Western North Amer. Naturalist
  95       Bull. Amer. Museum Natural Hist.
  97       Biocycle
  98       Natural Hist.
  99       Russian J. Ecol.

Notes: Classification into ecology versus botony versus general science according to ISI primary subject. Journals ranked 1-100 within our sample using ISI impact
factor averaged over 1984-2004.




                                                                              43
                       Table B2: Results Binning by Citation for Alternative Citation Bins


                                                                    Cites in selection period
                                                  0 cites          1­2 cites         3-9 cites         10+ cites

 Partial open access                              0.000            -0.064            -0.009             0.033
                                                 (0.041)           (0.046)           (0.020)           (0.012)
 Full open access                               -0.046             -0.089            -0.022             0.077
                                                (0.060)            (0.034)           (0.025)           (0.015)

 Articles                                         31,008            35,212            32,986            19,589
 Panel observations                              162,735           177,150           160,561            95,108

 Article fixed effects                             Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects         Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Full online-access indicator                      Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                     Linear            Linear            Linear            Linear

Notes: Specification is identical to Table 4 except uses an alternative partition to for bins. Each column is a separate
regression including observations for articles having the specified number of cites in selection period. Observations
in selection period are omitted from the regressions, reducing the sample size relative to that reported in Table 1.
Additional notes from Table 4 apply.




                                                            44
                       Table B3: Results Binning by Publication-Year Citation Percentiles


                                                                     Publication-year percentiles
                                               0­50%        50­62.5%        62.5­75%        75­87.5%        87.5­100%

 Partial open access                         -0.025          -0.083          -0.038          -0.002            0.030
                                             (0.032)         (0.052)         (0.055)         (0.020)          (0.013)
 Full open access                            -0.059          -0.124          -0.062          -0.014            0.071
                                             (0.047)         (0.032)         (0.059)         (0.027)          (0.015)

 Articles                                      41,239         18,079          19,492          19,957           20,028
 Panel observations                           205,940         90,840          97,978         100,239          100,557

 Article fixed effects                          Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects      Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Full online-access indicator                   Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                  Linear         Linear          Linear          Linear           Linear

Notes: Each column is a separate regression including observations for articles whose cites in the selection period (first
two years after publication) fall into that percentile compared to other articles published in the same year. Observations
in selection period are omitted from the regressions, reducing the sample size relative to that reported in Table 1.
Additional notes from Table 4 apply.




                                                           45
                 Table B4: Insider/Outsider Results Forming Citation Bins Using All Citations


                                                                       Cites in selection period
 Variable                                      0 cites        1 cite        2­5 cites       6­10 cites     11+ cites

                                                   A. Insider cites

 Partial open access                         -0.151        -0.136           -0.007            0.025          0.105
                                             (0.062)       (0.045)          (0.025)          (0.035)        (0.059)
 Full open access                            -0.187        -0.150            0.013            0.064          0.087
                                             (0.047)       (0.027)          (0.028)          (0.041)        (0.056)

 Articles                                     15,715          12,695         20,027           4,522          1,756
 Panel observations                           83,146          64,871         98,972          21,287          8,168

                                                  B. Outsider cites

 Partial open access                         -0.021        -0.033           -0.099            0.021        -0.122
                                             (0.045)       (0.056)          (0.039)          (0.070)       (0.055)
 Full open access                            -0.045        -0.032            0.190           -0.121        -0.127
                                             (0.080)       (0.054)          (0.025)          (0.041)       (0.049)

 Articles                                     16,439          12,789         19,873           4,490          1,750
 Panel observations                           87,227          65,613         98,642          21,181          8,150

 Article fixed effects                          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
 Publication × citation year fixed effects      Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
 Partial online-access indicator                Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
 Full online-access indicator                   Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
 Journal-specific age profile                  Linear         Linear         Linear           Linear        Linear

Notes: Results are comparable to Table 7 except that, instead of using just insider cites during selection period to
form bins in panel A or just outsider cites in panel B, all citations during selection period are used in both panels.
Specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 7; see that table for applicable notes.




                                                         46
References
Anderson, Chris. (2004) "The Long Tail," Wired Issue 12:10, October.

Antelman, Kristin. (2004) "Do Open-Access Articles Have a Greater Research Impact?" College
    & Research Libraries 65: 372­382.

Armstrong, Mark. (2015) "Opening Access to Research," Economic Journal 125: F1­F30.

Atchison, Amy and Jonathan Bull. (2015) "Will Open Access Get Me Cited? An Analysis of the
    Efficacy of Open Access Publishing in Political Science," Political Science & Politics 48:
    219­137.

Besancenot, Damien and Radu Vranceanu. (2017) "A Model of Scholarly Publishing with Hybrid
    Academic Journals," Theory and Decision 82: 131­150.

Bergstrom, Theodore. (2001) "Free Labor for Costly Journals?" Journal of Economic Perspec-
    tives 15: 183­198.

Bergstrom, Theodore and Carl T. Bergstrom. (2004) "The Costs and Benefits of Library Site
    Licenses to Academic Journals," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101:
    897­902.

Blalock, Hubert M. (1966) "The Identification Problem and Theory Building: The Case of Status
     Inconsistency," American Sociological Review 31: 52­61.

Bryan, Kevin A. and Yasin Ozcan. (2020) "The Impact of Open Access Mandates on Invention,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu (Jeffrey) Hu, and Duncan Simester. (2011) "Goodbye Pareto Principle,
    Hello Long Tail: The Effect of Search Costs on the Concentration of Product Sales," Man-
    agement Science 57: 1373­1386.

Craig, Iain D., et al. (2007) "Do Open Access Articles Have Greater Citation Impact? A Critical
    Review of the Literature," Journal of Informetrics 1: 239­248.

Davis, Philip M., et al. (2008) "Open Access Publishing, Article Downloads, and Citations: Ran-
    domised Controlled Trial," British Medical Journal 337: 568­573.

Davis, Philip M. and Michael J. Fromerth. (2007) "Does the arXiv Lead to Higher Citations and
    Reduced Publisher Downloads for Mathematics Articles?" Scientometrics 71: 203-­215.

Dewatripont, Mathias, et al. (2006) Study on the Economic and Technical Evolution of the Sci-
   entific Publication Markets in Europe. Brussels: European Commission Directorate General
   for Research.

Eger, Thomas and Marc Scheufen. (2018) The Economics of Open Access: On the Future of
    Academic Publishing. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing.



                                             47
Elberse, Anita and Felix Oberholzer-Gee. (2008) "Superstars and Underdogs: An Examination
    of The Long Tail Phenomenon in Video Sales," Harvard Business School working paper no.
    07-015.

Evans, James. (2008) "Electronic Publication and the Narrowing of Science and Scholarship,"
    Science 321: 395­399.

Evans, James and Jacob Reimer (2009) "Open Access and Global Participation in Science," Sci-
    ence 323: 1025.

Eysenbach, Gunther. (2006) "Citation Advantage of Open Access Articles,"PLoS Biology 4: 692­
    698.

Feess, Eberhard and Marc Scheufen. (2016) "Academic Copyright in the Publishing Game: A
    Contest Perspective," European Journal of Law & Economics 42: 263­294.

Gaule, Patrick and Nicholas Maystre. (2011) "Getting Cited: Does Open Access Help?" Research
    Policy 40: 1332­1338.

Harnad, Steven and Tim Brody. (2004) "Comparing the Impact of Open Access (OA) vs. Non-OA
    Articles in the Same Journals," D-Lib Magazine, vol. 10 no. 6.

Jeon, Doh-Shin and Jean-Charles Rochet. (2010) "The Pricing of Academic Journals: A Two-
     Sided Market Perspective," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2: 222­255.

Lawrence, Steve. (2001) "Free Online Availability Substantially Increases a Paper's Impact," Na-
    ture 411: 521.

Li, Yan, Chaojiang Wu, Erjia Yan, and Kai Li. (2018) "Will Open Access Increase Journal
     CiteScores? An Empirical Investigation over Multiple Disciplines," PLOS One 13(e0201885):
     1­21.

Machado, José A. F. and J. M. C. Santos Silva. (2005) "Quantiles for Counts," Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 100: 1226­1237.

McCabe, Mark J. and Christopher M. Snyder. (2005) "Open Access and Academic Journal Qual-
   ity," American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 95: 453­458.

McCabe, Mark J. and Christopher M. Snyder. (2007) "Academic Journal Pricing in a Digital Age:
   A Two-Sided-Market Model," B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Contributions)
   7(issue 1, article 2): 1­37.

McCabe, Mark J. and Christopher M. Snyder. (2014) "Identifying the Effect of Open Access on
   Citations Using a Panel of Science Journals," Economic Inquiry 53: 1284­1300.

McCabe, Mark J. and Christopher M. Snyder. (2015) "Does Online Availability Increase Cita-
   tions? Theory and Evidence from a Panel of Economics and Business Journals," Review of
   Economics and Statistics 97: 144­165.



                                              48
McCabe, Mark J. and Christopher M. Snyder. (2018) "Open Access as a Crude Solution to a
   Hold-up Problem in the Two-Sided Market for Academic Journals," Journal of Industrial
   Economics 66: 301­349.
McCabe, Mark J., Christopher M. Snyder, and Anna Fagin. (2013) "Open Access versus Tradi-
   tional Journal Pricing: Using a Simple `Platform Market' Model to Understand Which Will
   Win (and Which Should)," Journal of Academic Librarianship 39: 11­19.
Mueller-Langer, Frank and Marc Scheufen. (2013) "Academic Publishing and Open Access,"
   chapter 23 in Ruth Towse and Christian Handke, eds., Handbook on the Digital Creative
   Economy. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.
Mueller-Langer, Frank and Richard Watt. (2010) "Copyright and Open Access for Academic
   Works," Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues 7: 45­65.
Mueller-Langer, Frank and Richard Watt. (2018) "How Many More Cites is a $3,000 Open Ac-
   cess Fee Buying You? Evidence from a Natural Experiment," Economic Inquiry 56: 931­
   954.
Piwowar, Heather, Jason Priem, Vincent Lariviére, Juan Pablo Alperin, Lisa Matthias, Bree Nor-
    lander, Ashley Farley, Jevin West, and Stefanie Haustein. (2018) "The State of OA: A Large-
    Scale Analysis of the Prevalence and Impact of Open Access Articles," PeerJ 6(e4375):
    1­23.
Scheufen, Marc. (2015) "On the Access Principle in Science: A Law and Economics Analy-
    sis," chapter 4 in Marc Scheufen, ed., Copyright Versus Open Access: On the Organization
    and International Political Economy of Access to Scientific Knowledge. Cheltenham, U.K.:
    Springer.
Shavell, Steven. (2010) "Should Copyright of Academic Works be Abolished?" Journal of Legal
    Analysis 2: 301­358.
Staudt, Joseph. (2020) "Mandating Access: Assessing the NIH's Public Access Policy," Economic
    Policy forthcoming.
Tang, Min, James D. Bever, and Fei-Hai Yu. (2017) "Open Access Increases Citations of Papers
    in Ecology," Ecosphere 8(e01887): 1­9.
Walker, Thomas. (2004) "Open Access by the Article: An Idea Whose Time Has Come?" Nature
    Web Focus Article 13, April 15.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (1999) "Distribution-Free Estimation of Some Nonlinear Panel Data
   Models," Journal of Econometrics 90: 77­97.
Yan, Erjia and Kai Li. (2018) "Which Domains Do Open-Access Journals Do Best in? A 5-Year
     Longitudinal Study," Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 69:
     844­856.
Young, Jeffrey R. (2004) "Google Tests Search Engine for Colleges' Scholarly Materials," Chron-
    icle of Higher Education, April 23, p. A36.


                                             49
