                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CONSUMER VULNERABILITY AND BEHAVIORAL BIASES

                                        Hanming Fang
                                         Zenan Wu

                                     Working Paper 28121
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28121


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




We thank Michael Grubb and John Quah for useful comments and discussions. We thank Zeyu
Xing, Hanyao Zhang, Yangfan Zhou, and Yuxuan Zhu for excellent research assistance. Fang
acknowledges the generous financial support from the National Science Foundation through
Grant SES-0844845. Wu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
71803003) and the seed fund of the School of Economics, Peking University, for financial
support. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hanming Fang and Zenan Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Vulnerability and Behavioral Biases
Hanming Fang and Zenan Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 28121
November 2020
JEL No. D60,D81,D86,D91

                                          ABSTRACT

A wealth of evidence shows that individuals are biased and firms can often exploit consumers'
behavioral biases in their contract designs. In this paper, we study how vulnerable biased
individuals are to their own behavioral biases in market equilibrium, and focus on the role of risk
aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). We measure consumer vulnerability by
the percentage loss in a consumer's equilibrium certainty equivalent from a market with non-
biased consumers to that with biased ones. We examine several important behavioral biases that
have been extensively studied in the literature, including the impact of biased beliefs (either over-
or under-confidence) in an insurance market, the impact of present bias and naïveté about present
bias in a dynamic model of credit contract design, the impact of projection bias about habit
formation, and the impact of expectation-based loss aversion on an investor's portfolio choice.
We show that consumer vulnerability to all four commonly studied behavioral biases has a non-
monotonic relationship with risk aversion or IES. This is in striking contrast to the deviations in
the equilibrium allocations from the rational benchmark, which are often monotonic to the risk
aversion or IES. We also consider a setting of biased agents with Epstein-Zin preferences to
isolate the effect of risk aversion from that of IES.


Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Zenan Wu
School of Economics
Peking University
Beijing, China
zenan@pku.edu.cn
1       Introduction
    Behavioral economics is by now a well-established strand of literature where economists
introduce a number of robust behavioral biases and heuristics first documented by psychol-
ogists into models of economic behavior. Numerous biases have been studied by economists,
including present-biased discounting (Strotz, 1956; Laibson, 1997; O'Donoghue and Ra-
bin, 1999; DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006; Fang and Wang, 2015), biased-beliefs (Fang
and Moscarini, 2005; Grubb, 2009, 2015), confirmatory bias (Rabin and Schrag, 1999), loss
aversion (Genesove and Mayer, 2001), mental accounting (Barberis and Huang, 2001), and
projection bias (Loewenstein, O'Donoghue, and Rabin, 2003), among others. In the theoret-
ical models in behavioral economics, researchers typically introduce one of the documented
biases and heuristics into stylized models with an aim of understanding how small, but
psychologically relevant, deviations from the standard economic framework can influence
decisions or behavior such as saving and consumption (Harris and Laibson, 2001; K         oszegi
and Rabin, 2009; Pagel, 2017), investment (Barberis and Huang, 2001; Barberis and Xiong,
2009), labor supply (Fang and Silverman, 2004, 2006; Farber, 2008; Crawford and Meng,
2011), wage policies (Santos-Pinto, 2010, 2012); pricing strategies (Eliaz and Spiegler, 2008;
Heidhues and K    oszegi, 2014; Martimort and Stole, 2020), advertising strategies (Karle and
Schumacher, 2017; Karle and M¨     oller, 2020); contracts (DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004;
Eliaz and Spiegler, 2006; Santos-Pinto, 2008; Grubb, 2009; Herweg, M¨   uller, and Weinschenk,
2010; De la Rosa, 2011), etc. The focus of the analysis is to show that behavioral biases
can lead to a departure from a "rational" benchmark in terms of allocations, whether it is
contracts, consumptions and savings, hours of work, portfolio choices, etc.
    The departures from the rational allocations due to behavioral biases typically lead to wel-
fare losses,1 and a burgeoning literature has been devoted to investigating how policy should
respond to market outcomes in order to alleviate market inefficiency (e.g., Sandroni and
Squintani, 2007; Bisin, Lizzeri, and Yariv, 2015; Fang and Wu, 2020; Heidhues and K      oszegi,
2010, 2017; Armstrong and Vickers, 2019). However, to the best of our knowledge, what
determines the size of the welfare loss caused by the deviation from the rational benchmark
allocations in the absence of market intervention remains largely unexplored. Our study
aims to close this gap. Answers to this question can help us better evaluate the effectiveness
of different policies that aim to protect consumers or improve efficiency. For instance, know-
ing that the welfare loss in a marketplace with biased consumers is insignificant without
regulation would render consumer education campaigns or market interventions--which are
often costly--less desirable.
    In this paper, we investigate how welfare losses due to consumers' behavioral biases de-
    1
     In Section 2.2, we provide an example in which a consumer benefits from his underestimation about his
risks in a monopolistic insurance market.


                                                    1
pend on their characteristics, or more precisely, on the curvatures of their utility functions.
We demonstrate that a large departure in terms of allocations from the rational benchmark
does not necessarily lead to substantial welfare consequences. A simple example can il-
lustrate the distinction between the magnitude of deviations in allocations and the size of
welfare losses. Consider a potential insuree with a biased belief regarding his probability
of loss. If the insuree is not very risk averse, a small bias in his subjective loss probability
assessment will result in large deviations in his insurance coverage from the rational bench-
mark. However, because he has a low level of risk aversion, such a deviation is not likely to
result in a large welfare loss. If the insuree is instead very risk averse, then a small bias in
his subjective loss probability assessment will only result in a small deviation in his coverage
from the rational benchmark. Again, the welfare loss from such a small deviation is likely to
be small. Indeed, we will formally show in Section 2 that consumers with a moderate level of
risk aversion are mostly likely to suffer the largest welfare loss from biased beliefs regarding
their loss probabilities.
    We systematically examine consumer vulnerability in models with behavioral biases. We
measure consumer vulnerability by the ratio of the difference in the equilibrium certainty
equivalent (CE) between the biased consumer and the non-biased consumer relative to that
of a non-biased consumer with the same underlying instantaneous utility function. We then
explore how consumer vulnerability is related to the curvatures of their utility functions. In
particular, we focus on the role of risk aversion in static models and the role of intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (IES) in dynamic models.
    We examine several important behavioral biases that have been extensively studied in
the literature. In Section 2, we consider a classical insurance market with overconfident or
underconfident consumers. Assuming constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences,
we show that in a perfectly competitive market, consumers' vulnerability has an inverted-
U relationship with their risk aversion. In contrast, in a monopolistic market, consumers
with overconfidence--i.e., those who underestimate their loss probability--may even benefit
from having biased beliefs, even though their insurance coverage deviates from the rational
benchmark.
    In Section 3, we study a dynamic model of competitive lenders' credit contract design--
similar to that of Heidhues and K     oszegi (2010)--when borrowers with CRRA preferences
have present bias in their intertemporal time preference and are naive about their present
bias. We show that the consumers' vulnerability to their na¨     ivet´
                                                                     e about present bias again
has an inverted-U relationship with their IES.
    Recognizing that under CRRA utility function, risk aversion and IES are by default
inverse of each other, we consider in Section 4 a two-period model with the Epstein-Zin
preference (Epstein and Zin, 1989, 1991) where risk aversion and IES are separately param-


                                               2
eterized. The analysis under this general framework largely confirms the previous results.
We show that when agents are naive about their time preference (or present bias), their
vulnerability indeed has an inverted-U relationship with IES; and when agents have misper-
ception on the second-period risks, their vulnerability has an inverted-U relationship with
risk aversion.
    In Section 5, we study another well-documented behavioral bias, the projection bias about
the evolutions of his "habit stock" in a model of habit formation, as proposed by Loewenstein,
O'Donoghue, and Rabin (2003). In contrast to the results obtained in the previous sections,
we show that the consumer vulnerability in this case has a U-shaped relationship with respect
to the IES. Thus, consumers with an intermediate degree of IES are less vulnerable than
those with extreme values of IES. In Section 6, we consider the portfolio choice problem of
investors who exhibit expectation-based reference-dependent preferences a      ´ la K oszegi and
Rabin (2006, 2007). We again show that consumers' vulnerability to their loss aversion has
an inverted-U relationship with risk aversion.
    Our systematic analysis shows that consumer vulnerability to the commonly studied be-
havioral biases in the literature in general has non-monotonic relationship with risk aversion
or IES. This is in striking contrast to the deviations in the allocations from the rational
benchmark, which are often monotonic to the risk aversion or the IES. Our paper comple-
ments the existing literature in behavioral economics that focused almost exclusively on how
behavioral bias leads to the deviations in allocations from the rational benchmark, summa-
rized in Spiegler (2011), K  oszegi (2014), Grubb (2015), and Heidhues and K       oszegi (2018).
As previously mentioned, most of these studies search for policy remedies that mitigate the
welfare losses due to market participants' behavioral biases under different economic contexts
and identify conditions for such policies to be welfare-enhancing.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we analyze a simple
insurance model with over- or under-confident consumers, and show that consumer vulnera-
bility is non-monotonic in their risk aversion; in Section 3, we consider a dynamic contracting
model with present-biased consumers; in Section 4, we provide a unified framework that in-
corporates both risk aversion and IES to show how they interact to affect consumer's vulner-
ability to biases; in Section 5, we analyze a model of habit formation with projection bias; in
Section 6, we study a model of portfolio choice with investors that exhibit expectation-based
reference-dependent preferences; and finally, in Section 7 we conclude. We collect all the
proofs in the Appendix.




                                               3
2         An Insurance Model with Over- or Under-confident
          Consumers
    Consider a parsimonious model of insurance market with risk averse agents and two
possible states. For simplicity, the agent's risk aversion is represented by a constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) utility function with risk aversion parameter   1/ > 0 :
                                                  1
                                               1- 
                                              c      -1
                                           
                                                  1- 1    if  > 0 and  = 1,
                                  u(c) =                                                                    (1)
                                            ln(c)         if  = 1.

In dynamic models, which we will analyze in Section 3, the parameter  also represents
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES).2 The agent has initial wealth y > 0 and is
subject to a possible loss   (0, y ) with objective probability µ  (0, 1). The agent, however,
                                                   ^  (0, 1). When µ
subjectively believes that the loss probability is µ               ^ = µ, the agent is rational.
When µ ^ < µ (^ µ > µ), the agent underestimates (overestimates) his loss probability and is
said to exhibit overconfidence (underconfidence ).
    In what follows, we analyze the equilibrium of the insurance market under perfect com-
petition and that under monopoly, respectively.


2.1         Competitive Insurance Market
    The consumer can purchase an insurance contract from a competitive insurance market
at premium p to cover a fraction x of the loss if the loss occurs. We interpret x as the degree
of coverage. Alternatively, the ratio p/x can be interpreted as the unit price of an insurance
policy that covers the potential loss of  , and x is the quantity of insurance that a consumer
purchases from the market.
    The equilibrium contract, which we denote by (x , p ), maximizes consumer's perceived
utility
                        max µ^ u y - (1 - x) - p + (1 - µ    ^ )u(y - p),                   (2)
                              {x,p}

subject to the zero-profit constraint
                                                      p = µx.                                               (3)

    Two remarks are in order. First, the objective function (2) in the above maximization
problem is the agents' expected perceived utility using the subjective belief µ  ^ about the
loss probability, instead of the utility based on the objective probability µ of incurring a
loss. Thus, the perceived expected utility in (2) is the decision utility in the terminology
    2
        In Section 4 we will analyze the case of Epstein-Zin preference which separates risk aversion and IES.



                                                          4
of Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1997). As we will explain later, agents' expected utility
according to the correct, or objective, probability of incurring a loss µ, is used when we eval-
uate the consumer welfare, corresponding to the notion of experienced utility in Kahneman
et al. (1997).
    Second, we impose no restrictions on the contract space in the subsequent analysis, i.e.,
price can be either positive or negative in the equilibrium contract. When p > 0, the risk-
averse agent is the consumer, and the risk-neutral agent is the insurance firm: the consumer
pays the insurance firm and transfers his risk to the insurance firm. When p < 0, the risk-
averse agent becomes a seller instead: he earns money through receiving more risks from the
market. When p = 0, there is no trade on the market and the economy degenerates to an
autarky.
    The following first-order condition must hold in equilibrium:

                             u y - (1 - x ) - µx    1-µ^    µ
                                                  =      ×     .
                                  u (y - µx  )       µ
                                                     ^     1-µ

Exploiting the CRRA form of u(·) as described in (1), we obtain:
                                                                            -
                       y - (1 - x ) - µx                1-µ^    µ
                                          =                  ×                  =: A(),                      (4)
                             y - µx                      µ
                                                         ^     1-µ

where A() is the ratio between the equilibrium consumption level when a loss occurs and
that when no loss occurs and depends on µ
                                        ^ , µ, and .
                                    3
   Solving for (x , p ) yields that:

                                  A() - 1 y + 
               x (; µ, µ
                       ^) =                      , and p (; µ, µ
                                                               ^ ) = µx (; µ, µ
                                                                              ^ ).                           (5)
                                 A()µ + (1 - µ) 

   The term A() captures the distortion caused by consumer's misperception regarding
the loss probability. To see this, note that when consumers have unbiased beliefs, i.e., when
^ = µ, we have A() = 1 and x (; µ, µ
µ                                         ^ ) = 1 for all  > 0. In other words, the market
provides full insurance independent of . This reaffirms the classical result in the insurance
theory. However, when µ  ^ < µ, we have A () < 1 and x (; µ, µ  ^ ) < 1; and when µ^ > µ, we
                       
have A () > 1 and x (; µ, µ   ^ ) > 1. That is, an overconfident consumer will purchase less
than full insurance; and an underconfident consumer is over insured in equilibrium.
   Following the literature, we use the consumer's experienced utility with the objective loss
   3
     Interestingly, the formula for the insurance coverage choice in equilibrium (5) also clarifies that there is
an identification problem between biased belief µ  ^ and the preference parameter  from just observing the
insurance coverage choice of the consumer.




                                                       5
probability µ to evaluate the consumer welfare.4 Specifically, consumer's welfare measured
by the equilibrium certainty equivalent, which we denote by CE  (; µ, µ
                                                                      ^ ), is the solution to

 u CE  (; µ, µ
             ^ ) = µu y - 1 - x (; µ, µ
                                      ^ )  - p (; µ, µ
                                                     ^ ) +(1 - µ)u y - p (; µ, µ
                                                                               ^ ) . (6)

Solving for CE  (; µ, µ
                      ^ ) yields that
                                                                                  
                   
                                                       1                          -1
                                                    1- 
                                                                              1
                                                                           1- 
                                        
                         µ y - (1 - x ) - p                + (1 - µ)(y - p )            if  > 0 and  = 1,
                   
CE  (; µ, µ
          ^) =
                    y - (1 - x ) - p           µ
                                                   · (y - p )1-µ
                   
                                                                                        if  = 1.
                                                                                                         (7)
      A close look at (5) and (7) leads to the following.

                      ^ = µ. Then (x , p ) = (1, µ ) and CE  (; µ, µ
Remark 1 Suppose that µ                                            ^ ) = y - µ .

   Recall that the shape of the concave utility function has no impact on the equilibrium
contract when consumers are rational (i.e., µ ^ = µ): They always receive full insurance in
                                      
equilibrium independent of  (i.e., x (; µ, µ) = 1). Because full insurance is obtained and
the insurance firms earn zero profits under the pressure of market competition, rational con-
sumers' welfare is maximized and the corresponding certainty equivalent is y - µ , which is
again independent of the utility function u(·). This desired independence property, however,
does not hold when consumers misperceive the loss probability.
   Given consumers' certainty equivalent described in (7), we can define a loss function
L(; µ, µ^ ) as follows:

                                               CE  (; µ, µ) - CE  (; µ, µ
                                                                        ^)
                               L(; µ, µ
                                      ^ ) :=              
                                                                           .
                                                      CE (; µ, µ)
In words, L(; µ, µ
                 ^ ) is the percentage loss in consumers' certainty equivalent relative to the
rational benchmark. We use it as the measure of the vulnerability of a biased consumer. The
following observation follows immediately.

Proposition 1 (Competitive insurance market with biased consumers) Suppose
that consumers have CRRA utility function (1) and µ
                                                  ^  µ. Then the following statements
hold:

  (i) The equilibrium coverage x (; µ, µ    ^ )  1, and the deviation from full insurance cover-
      age, i.e., x (; µ, µ
                         ^ ) - 1 , is strictly decreasing in the risk aversion parameter   1/
      for   (0, ).

 (ii) The loss function L(; µ, µ
                               ^ ) is an inverted U-shaped curve in   1/ for   (0, ).
  4
      See Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2014) for a welfare criterion for models with distorted beliefs.

                                                       6
    The first part of Proposition 1 is intuitive: Consumers' misperception messes up con-
sumption smoothing across states. When consumers underestimate their loss probability
(i.e., µ
       ^ < µ), they put more weight on the no-loss state than they should, and thus under-
estimate their demand for insurance. The competitive insurers then respond by providing
partial insurance. Similarly, when they overestimate their loss probability, they overestimate
their insurance demand, and thus will be over insured in equilibrium.
    Note that the deviation in insurance coverage from the unbiased belief benchmark is
decreasing in the agent's risk aversion parameter  . As we will show in the next sections, this
observation holds in general in different behavioral models. Intuitively, when a consumer's
risk aversion parameter is low, he has a weak propensity towards consumption smoothing.
As a result, he is more easily exploited by the insurance firms than a consumer with a higher
                                                                -1
level of risk aversion. Define  := 1-     µ
                                          ^
                                            µ
                                            ^    µ
                                              × 1- µ
                                                       > 0, and let 1 := ln(y-    w)-ln(y )
                                                                                 ln( )
                                                                                            > 0.
When the consumer exhibits overconfidence and  > 1 , he is even willing to increase his
consumption volatility across the loss and no loss states by absorbing more risks from the
market and become a seller.5
    One may then draw the conclusion that a consumer with a lower risk aversion is more
vulnerable because his equilibrium contract deviates from the first-best contract to a larger
extent. However, this intuition is not accurate. In fact, part (ii) of Proposition 1 indicates
that a consumer with a moderate IES is the most vulnerable. To explain the intuition most
cleanly, it is useful to consider a small risk and employ Taylor expansion. More formally,
we assume that the size of potential loss  is sufficiently small. The consumer's equilibrium
certainty equivalent can then be approximated by:6
                                                                                            2
                                       µ(1 - µ) 2    1 - x (; µ, µ
                                                                 ^)
                          ^ )  y - µ -
                 CE (; µ, µ                       ×
                                        2(y - µ )           
                                       1                           1
                              = y - µ - µ(1 - µ)(y - µ ) ×                                          2.
                                       2
                                                            µ + A(1)-1

Therefore, the loss function can be approximated by
                                                      2
                         1                                           1                                   2
              L(; µ, µ
                     ^ )  µ(1 - µ)                        ×                      × 1 - x (; µ, µ
                                                                                               ^) .          (8)
                         2         y - µ                             
                                                                                     volatility effect
                                                              curvature effect


Two important driving forces for the welfare analysis can be identified from the above ex-
   5
    It is useful to point out that this observation continues to hold even if both sides are risk-averse.
   6
    Suppose that a random variable X has finite mean E(X ) and a small variance Var(X ). The certainty
                                                                                      1 u (E(X ))
equivalent of this gamble under utility function u(·) can be approximated by E(X )+ 2   u (E(X )) Var(X ), which
                                       Var(X )
can be further simplified as E(X ) -   2E(X ) .



                                                       7
        (a) Equilibrium Coverage x(; µ, µ
                                        ^)                 (b) Loss Function L(; µ, µ
                                                                                    ^)

 Figure 1: Competitive Insurance Market with Biased Consumers: (y, , µ) = (1, 0.5, 0.5).

pression. By Equation (8), the size of the equilibrium welfare loss depends on (i) the shape
of consumer's utility function, i.e., ; and (ii) the degree of deviation from the equilibrium
                                                                       2
coverage level under the rational benchmark, i.e., 1 - x (; µ, µ   ^ ) . On the one hand, the
shape of the utility function affects consumer welfare, which we refer to as the curvature
effect. Note that the utility function becomes less concave as  increases. This in turn
implies that fixing a degree of deviation, the welfare loss is reduced with a utility function
of a higher  (or equivalently, a lower  ). On the other hand, when consumers are biased
(either over- or under-confident), the magnitude of deviation from the equilibrium insurance
coverage endogenously depends on the risk aversion of the utility function [see Equation (5)
and Figure 1(a)]. As  increases, the equilibrium coverage deviates more from the unbiased
benchmark, which increases the volatility of consumption across the two states, and thus
contributes to welfare loss (the volatility effect ). Because the welfare loss is decreasing in 
by the curvature effect, and is increasing in  by the volatility effect, the welfare loss caused
by the consumer's misperception (either overconfidence or underconfidence) is non-monotone
in  as Figure 1(b) depicts.


2.2    Monopolistic Insurance Market
    Next, we consider the monopolistic insurance market. Clearly, firms' market power would
further distort the market outcome and thus result in inefficiency. A monopolistic insurance
firm solves the following profit maximization problem:

                                             max p - µx,
                                             {x,p}



                                                     8
subject to the following individual rationality (IR) constraint:

            ^ u(y - (1 - x) - p) + (1 - µ
            µ                           ^ )u(y - p)  µ
                                                     ^ u(y -  ) + (1 - µ
                                                                       ^ )u(y ).          (9)

It is evident that the IR constraint always binds in the optimal contract. Otherwise, the
monopolistic insurance firm can increase premium without violating condition (9) and further
increase the expected profits. Note that the value of a consumer's outside option depends
on his utility function u(·) as well as his subjective belief µ
                                                              ^.
    Denote the profit-maximizing contract by (xm , pm ), where we use the superscript m to
indicate "monopoly." The first-order condition yields that
                                                                     -
                    y - (1 - xm ) - pm           1-µ^    µ
                                       =              ×                      A().
                           y - pm                 µ
                                                  ^     1-µ

As in the case of perfect competition, A() appears and again measures the distortion of
consumption across the two states caused by consumers' misperception. It is noteworthy
that the ratio between consumption in the two states under the profit-maximizing contract
(xm , pm ) coincides with that under the competitive equilibrium contract (x , p ).
   Solving for (xm , pm ), we obtain
                                                                               
                                                                               -
                                                      -1                 -1      1
                                1 - A µ
                                      ^ (y -  )   + (1 - µ
                                                         ^ )y            
                     xm = 1 -                  -1
                                                                                     ,
                                            ^ A  + (1 - µ
                                            µ           ^)

and                                                                       
                                                                          -
                                                 -1                 -1      1
                                     ^ (y -  )
                                     µ                + (1 - µ
                                                             ^ )y   
                        pm = y -               -1
                                                                                 .
                                          µ
                                          ^A          + (1 - µ
                                                             ^)
   A close look at the above equations lead to the following.

                      ^ = µ. Then xm = 1, pm = y - u-1 µu(y -  ) + (1 - µ)u(y ) .
Remark 2 Suppose that µ

    When consumers are unbiased, they will be offered full insurance in a monopolistic market
as in a competitive market; and the price will be higher than that under perfect competi-
tion and now depends on the utility function. The monopolistic insurance firm charges
the premium such that consumers are indifferent between buying insurance and remaining
uninsured. Note that when the risk aversion of u(·) becomes sufficiently small, the profit-
maximizing premium pm is approaching the competitive premium p . In other words, a lower
risk aversion limits the monopolistic insurance firm's market power.
    Similar to the analysis under perfect competition, we can denote consumer's equilibrium
certainty equivalent by CE m (; µ, µ^ ) and the monopolist's maximum profit by  m (; µ, µ ^ ),

                                                 9
                                                                                                         -1
                                                       ln(y -w)-ln(y )                  1-µ^        µ
respectively.7 Recall that 1 is defines as 1                 ln( )
                                                                         > 0, where      ^
                                                                                         µ
                                                                                               ×   1-µ
                                                                                                              .
The following results can then be obtained.

Proposition 2 (Monopolistic insurance market with biased consumers) The fol-
lowing statements hold under monopoly:

                                                            ^ > µ. Then CE m (; µ, µ
  (i) Suppose that consumers exhibit underconfidence, i.e., µ                      ^) <
         m              m             m
      CE (; µ, µ) and  (; µ, µ ^ ) >  (; µ, µ) for all  > 0.

                                                           ^ < µ. Then CE m (; µ, µ
 (ii) Suppose that consumers exhibit overconfidence, i.e., µ                      ^) 
      CE m (; µ, µ) if   1 . Moreover, there exists a threshold 2  (1 , ) such that
       m (; µ, µ
               ^ )   m (; µ, µ) if   2 .

    Proposition 2 provides a stark contrast to Proposition 1, which states that consumer
welfare is always reduced relative to the rational benchmark in a perfectly competitive market
regardless of the type of consumer bias. By Proposition 2, a biased consumer is always worse
off than an unbiased consumer if he exhibits underconfidence [see Figure 2(c)]. However, an
overconfident consumer with a high risk aversion, i.e.,   1/ > 1/1 , is better off than if
he were unbiased.
    The intuition is as follows. Consumer's biased belief has two effects under monopoly.
On the one hand, it creates a wedge between the marginal utility across the two states, and
leads the monopolistic insurance firm to design a contract that deviates from full insurance,
which we refer to as the distortion effect [see Figure 2(a)]. This effect is the same as in
the case of perfect competition, and reduces consumer welfare. On the other hand, it influ-
ences a consumer' demand for insurance--an effect that is not present in the case of perfect
competition--as his expected utility without insurance depends on his subjective belief µ   ^.
If a consumer exhibits underconfidence, he overestimates his demand for insurance, which
implies that fixing a coverage, the monopolist is able to extract more rents by charging the
consumer a higher premium than the unbiased counterpart. This effect again tends to lower
consumer welfare. Therefore, an underconfident consumer will always be worse off than a
rational consumer.
    In contrast, if a consumer exhibits overconfidence, on the one hand his incorrect belief
results in him losing full insurance, which we refer to as the distortion effect; on the other
hand, his incorrect belief also leads him to underestimate his demand for insurance. This
effect decreases an overconfident consumer's perceived value from insurance, which in turn
disciplines the monopolist in its pricing, and may thus protect the consumer. In particular,
  7
    We do not define the loss function under monopoly because a biased consumer's welfare can indeed be
higher than that of a rational consumer under monopoly as Proposition 2 points out.



                                                  10
                (a) Equilibrium Coverage                             (b) Equilibrium Premium




          (c) Equilibrium Certainty Equivalent                        (d) Equilibrium Profit

 Figure 2: Monopolistic Insurance Market with Biased Consumers: (y, , µ) = (1, 0.5, 0.5).

if the latter disciplinary effect outweighs the former distortion effect --which is the case for
 < 1 --then a consumer's welfare increases with the presence of the misperception.
    Next, we consider the firm's profit in the optimal contract. When consumers are unbi-
ased (i.e., µ
            ^ = µ), firm's profit strictly decreases with the IES  [see the middle curve in
Figure 2(d)]. A monopolistic insurance firm provides full insurance and earns profits equal
to consumers' risk premium. As  increases, consumers become less risk averse, and thus
firm's profit decreases.8 In contrast, when consumers exhibit overconfidence or underconfi-
dence, it can be shown that the firm's profit curve follows a U-shaped curve, as the upper
and the lower curves in Figure 2(d) depict.9 In addition to the aforementioned effect of 
  8
      See Pratt (1964, Theorem 1(b)) for a formal proof.
  9
      A formal proof is provided for the case µ
                                              ^ < µ in Lemma 3; the proof for the case µ
                                                                                       ^ > µ is similar.


                                                      11
on consumers' risk premiums,  now also influences the equilibrium coverage in the optimal
contract when consumers have biased beliefs. Intuitively, a consumer with a higher IES 
(or equivalently, a lower risk aversion   1/) can be exploited by the firm more easily.
This effect tends to increase firm's profit as  increases, and thus reshapes the monotonically
decreasing profit curve under the rational benchmark.
    Proposition 2 also sheds some useful insight on market participants' incentive to edu-
cate consumers. As K    oszegi (2014) points out: "...unshrouding [education] is often unprof-
itable because it turns profitable naive consumers into unprofitable sophisticated consumers.
Hence, deceptive products or contracts can often survive in market."10 Proposition 2 con-
firms K¨ oszegi's argument for underconfident consumers: A monopolistic insurance firm has
no incentive to debias underconfident consumers [see Figure 2(d)]. However, it can be prof-
itable for the monopolistic firm to educate overconfident consumers when their IES  falls
below the threshold 2 in our model.
    It is also worth noting that government intervention may not be necessary when con-
sumers are overconfident. To see this more clearly, suppose that   (1 , 2 ). In this case,
the insurance firm becomes a buyer and the agents are sellers. It follows immediately from
part (ii) of Proposition 2 that the monopolistic insurance firm has an incentive to educate
consumers to correct their biased belief. Furthermore, such a move leads to Pareto improve-
ments for both parties on the market [see Figures 2(c) and 2(d)].


3      Credit Market with Present-biased Borrowers
    In Section 2, we studied the effects of biased beliefs in a static insurance market. In this
section, we consider the effect of another common behavioral bias, namely, time-inconsistent
present-biased preference, in a dynamic model of a competitive credit market proposed by
Heidhues and K   oszegi (2010).
    In order to explore the impact of consumer's IES on the equilibrium contract, we slightly
modify Heidhues and K    oszegi (2010) and assume that borrower's utility function takes the
CRRA form as described by (1) in all periods.11 Consider a perfectly competitive credit
market with three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. The consumer does not have any income in period 0,
but receives an income of y in periods 1 and 2. The consumer's intertemporal preference is
subject to present-bias in the form of (,  )-hyperbolic discounting (Strotz, 1956; Laibson,
1997; O'Donoghue and Rabin, 1999), where   (0, 1) is the present-bias factor and   (0, 1]
is the standard exponential discounting factor. Without loss of generality, we assume that
  10
      See Gabaix and Laibson (2006), Spiegler (2006), and Heidhues, K    oszegi, and Murooka (2017) for more
details.
   11
      Heidhues and K oszegi (2010) postulate a preference in which the agent derives utility c from consumption
c, and suffers a cost of k (q ) from repayment of q .


                                                      12
 = 1, and focus on the role of the present-bias factor .
   Period-0 self's utility is u(c) + u(y - r1 ) + u(y - r2 ), where c  0 is the amount the
consumer borrows in period 0, and r1  0 and r2  0 are the amounts he repays in period
1 and 2, respectively.12 However, period-1 self maximizes u(y - r1 ) + u(y - r2 ), where 
captures a borrower's time inconsistency and taste for immediate gratification. To capture
borrower's na¨ivete, we assume that period-0 self believes that period-1 self will maximize
             ^ (y - r2 ), where 
u(y - r1 ) + u                   ^   is a measure of sophistication. In particular,    ^ =
implies that a borrower is perfectly sophisticated, while  ^ = 1 indicates that a borrower is
completely naive.

Sophisticated borrowers We first consider the case of a perfectly sophisticated borrower
(i.e.,  ^ =  ). Because the borrower correctly foresees his time inconsistency, it is without
loss of generality to suppose that the menu of contracts consists of only one installment plan
 cs , (r1s , r2s ) , where an amount cs is lent to the borrower in period 0, and repayments of r1s
and r2s are required in period 1 and 2 respectively.
     A competitive lender's optimization problem is then given by

                                          max             r1s + r2s - cs ,
                                      {cs ,(r1s ,r2s )}

                               s.t. u(cs ) + u(y - r1s ) + u(y - r2s )  u,

where u specifies the value of a borrower's outside option from alternative competitive firms
and is endogenously determined by the zero-profit condition. The equilibrium contract,
which we denote by c               
                       s , (r1s , r2s ) , is determined by the following first-order condition

                                                                       
                                    u (y - r1 s ) = u (y - r2s ) = u (cs ),


and the zero-profit condition
                                                   c           
                                                    s = r1s + r2s .

We can show with simple algebra that the equilibrium contract is given by

                                                                  2    1 1
                                     c            
                                      s , (r1s , r2s )      =       y, y, y   .                             (10)
                                                                  3    3 3
To evaluate the welfare of the equilibrium contract c               
                                                        s , (r1s , r2s ) , we follow the literature
(e.g., DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004; O'Donoghue and Rabin, 1999, 2001; Gottlieb and
Zhang, 2020) and use the long-run self's utility as the welfare measure. Due to the timing
  12
    We follow Heidhues and K    oszegi (2010) and assume that a borrower signs the contract before period 0
starts. Therefore, from self 0's perspective, c, r1 , r2 all occur in the future, and thus his expected utility is
 u(c) + u(y - r1 ) + u(y - r2 ) . It is evident that dropping the multiplier  will not influence our analysis.

                                                             13
assumption we adopted in this paper, the long-run self's utility is equivalent to period-0 self's
utility. From the above analysis, the time-inconsistency problem is solved by the competitive
credit market: Consumer welfare is maximized and consumption across all three periods is
perfectly smoothed; the per period certainty equivalent is 2  3
                                                                y , which is independent of the
curvature of the utility function u(·).

Naive borrowers Next, we consider the case of naive borrower (i.e.,                ^ >  ). By Heidhues
and K   oszegi (2010), the equilibrium contract is characterized by cn , (r1n , r2n ), (^     r1n , r
                                                                                                    ^2n ) ,
where cn is borrower's consumption in period 0, (^     r1n , r
                                                             ^2n ) is the installment plan that period-0
self thinks he will choose, and (r1n , r2n ) is the installment plan that period-1 self will actually
follow. The competitive lender's maximization problem is given by

                                     max                r1n + r2n - cn ,
                          {cn ,(r1n ,r2n ),(^    ^2n )}
                                            r1n ,r

                   s.t. u(cn ) + u(y - r^1n ) + u(y - r^2n )  u,                                      (11)
                        u(y - r        ^ (y - r
                               ^1n ) + u                             ^ (y - r2n ),
                                                ^2n )  u(y - r1n ) + u                                (12)
                         u(y - r1n ) + u(y - r2n )  u(y - r
                                                          ^1n ) + u(y - r
                                                                        ^2n ),                        (13)

where (11) is period-0 self's participation constraint when he signs the contracts in period
0; (12) is the perceived incentive constraint that period-0 self thinks his period-1 self will
be facing; and (13) is the period-1 self's actual incentive constraint in period 1. Note that
in condition (11), period-0 self, due to his na¨           ivete about his own present bias, believes
that (^r1n , r
             ^2n ) are the relevant repayment schedules when he signs the contract in period
0; he believes, according to his perceived present bias factor ,          ^ that his period-1 self will
choose repayment plan (^    r1n , r
                                  ^2n ) over (r1n , r2n ) as guaranteed by (12). However, his period-1
self, using the actual present bias , will choose repayment plan (r1n , r2n ) over (^        r1n , r
                                                                                                   ^2n ) ,
according to (13).
    Following the arguments in Heidhues and K               oszegi (2010), we can show that (11) and
(13) must bind in the equilibrium contract. To see this, if (11) were not binding, then the
firm can reduce cn to increase the objective function; if (13) were not binding, then the firm
can increase r1n to increase the objective. In addition, since (13) must bind in the optimal
contract, then the fact that       ^ >  implies that (12) will be satisfied as long as r    ^2n < r2n .
In what follows, we assume that (12) does not bind in the maximization problem. We will
confirm that it will indeed result in a solution that satisfies r      ^2n < r2n .




                                                        14
    With the above reasoning, we consider the following relaxed problem:

                                       max                r1n + r2n - cn ,
                            {cn ,(r1n ,r2n ),(^    ^2n )}
                                              r1n ,r

                    s.t. u(cn ) + u(y - r
                                        ^1n ) + u(y - r
                                                      ^2n ) = u,                                            (14)
                           u(y - r1n ) + u(y - r2n ) = u(y - r
                                                             ^1n ) + u(y - r
                                                                           ^2n ).                           (15)

Denote the optimal contract by c               
                                   n , (r1n , r2n ), (^
                                                      r1
                                                       
                                                         n, r
                                                            ^2
                                                               n ) . We can argue that r
                                                                                       ^2
                                                                                          n = 0 in the
solution to the above problem. To see this, if r      ^2n > 0, then the firm can decrease r   ^2n to 0
and increase r^1n appropriately to leave (14) unaffected. This will create slackness in (15),
which will allow the firm to increase profit through raising r1n . Therefore, the equilibrium
contract is governed by the following first-order condition

                                   u (cn ) = u (y - r1n ) = u (y - r2n ),                                   (16)

and the zero-profit condition
                                                   cn = r1n + r2n .

It follows immediately from Equation (16) that borrower's time inconsistency distorts the
trade-off of resource allocation between period 2 (the last period) and the other periods,
and thus generates inefficiency. When a borrower has time-inconsistent taste for immediate
gratification and is naive about his present bias, the competitive firms will exploit his na¨
                                                                                            ivete
by designing a deceptive contract to induce excessive borrowing by including a high period-2
repayment (penalty), r2n , which he thinks will never be triggered.
    Exploiting the constant IES functional form of u(·) as described in (1) and solving for
the actual installment plan c              
                               n , (r1n , r2n ) yields that:
                                                             13


                                                        2           2 - 
                           c            
                            n , (r1n , r2n )   =          y,     y,      y             .                    (17)
                                                     2 +     2 +  2 + 

Comparing (10) with (17), we can obtain

                                                cn      3
                                                   =      > 1,
                                                cs   2 + 

where the inequality follows from   (0, 1) and  > 0. In words, a naive consumer borrows
more than a sophisticated consumer would and over-consumes in period 0 relative to the first-
best benchmark. Furthermore, the ratio c     
                                         n /cs increases with , indicating that a consumer
  13         
    (^
     r1n , r
           ^2n ), the installment plan offered by the firm that period-0 self thinks he will choose, is not conse-
                                                                                   
quential for the subsequent analysis, but it can be characterized as follows: r  ^2 n = 0 as we already argued in
                                                                                     
the text; then r  ^1 n simply follows from (15) by substituting the solution (r1n 2n ) as characterized by (17).
                                                                                 , r


                                                          15
with a higher IES is more vulnerable from his na¨  ivete in terms of period-0 consumption.
    Again, using the long-run self's utility from the contract c               
                                                                   n , (r1n , r2n ) as the welfare
                                                                                       
criterion, the average certainty equivalent of the naive borrower, denoted by CEn       (), solves

                                              2           2 - 
                     3u CEn () = 2u             y + u y -      y .
                                           2 +            2 + 

Simple algebra using the assumed CRRA utility function form (1) shows that:
                                                 
                                         -1      -1
                                 2
                                   × 2+               × y if  > 0 and  = 1,
                            
                               2+       3
                CEn () =             1
                                2
                            
                               2+
                                   × 3 × y                if  = 1.

A loss function relative to the perfectly sophisticated benchmark, denoted by L() with slight
abuse of notation--which we use to measure the consumer vulnerability from na¨    ivete--can
thus be defined as
                                              2         
                                                y - CEn  ()
                                     L() := 3       2       .
                                                    3
                                                      y
A proposition under the context of the credit market and present-biased consumers, which
is similar to Proposition 1, can then be established as follows.

Proposition 3 (Credit market with present-biased borrowers with na¨               ivete) The
ratio of the first-period consumption between a naive borrower and a sophisticated borrower
(i.e., c    
        n /cs ) is greater than one, and is strictly increasing in  for   (0, ). However, the
loss function L() is an inverted U-shaped curve in .


4     Epstein-Zin Preferences: IES vs. Risk Aversion
    Thus far, we have discussed static/dynamic models of different behavioral biases and
market structures. The main insight is that the curvature of consumers' utility function is
important to predict the deviation of their equilibrium behavior from the rational benchmark,
and thus is a key determinant of welfare analysis. Note that consumer's utility is separable
and additive for the first two examples, and CRRA utility functional form is employed. This
implies instantly that the IES is the inverse of relative risk aversion, and thus it is impossible
to isolate the effect of IES from that of risk aversion. Indeed, it is more appropriate to
interpret our result using risk aversion in the first example (i.e., insurance market with biased
consumers) due to its static nature, while it is more appropriate to use the interpretation
of IES in the second example (i.e., credit market with present-biased borrowers) due to its
dynamic nature.


                                               16
    In this section, we employ the recursive preferences proposed by Epstein and Zin (1989,
1991) and introduce behavioral biases into the model. This class of preferences has been
applied broadly in asset pricing, portfolio choice, as well as macroeconomics, and allows us
to break the link between risk aversion and IES.

Epstein-Zin preferences Consider a simple setting with two periods, in which an agent
consumes c1 in the first period, and consumes ci 2 in state i  {1, 2} in the second period,
with Pr(c2 = ci      i
              2 ) = p  [0, 1]. We follow most of the literature on Epstein-Zin preferences
and assume that the agent's utility is given by:
                                                                                               1
                                                        1-                           1-       1-
           F c1 , z (c1    2 1 2
                      2 , c2 ; p , p ); , ,  := (1 -  )c1  +  z (c1    2 1 2
                                                                  2 , c2 ; p , p )                 ,   (18)

where c1 is agent's period-1 consumption and z (c1    2 1 2
                                                 2 , c2 ; p , p ) is the period-2 certainty equiv-
alent using the following function:
                                       G(c) = c1- ,                                           (19)

that is,
                                                                                      1
                                        -1                      1-          1-       1-
                z (c1    2 1 2
                    2 , c2 ; p , p ) = G   EG (c2 )    = p1 (c1
                                                              2)   + p2 (c2
                                                                          2)              .            (20)

In the above recursive formulation,   (0, 1] is agent's time preference or discount factor,
 > 0 is the inverse of the IES for deterministic variations, and  > 0 represents the relative
risk aversion coefficient for static gambles.
    Two important observations follow immediately. First, when consumption is determin-
istic, the preference degenerates to the usual standard time-separable expected discounted
utility with discount factor  , IES  = 1/ , and risk aversion  =  . Second, when agent
consumes c > 0 in all states and periods, we have that F c, z (c, c; p1 , p2 ); , ,  = c. This
implies instantly that F (·) is the average certainty equivalent of the agent.

                                                                                          i
Income and contracts The agent has income y1 in the first period, and income y2              in
                                                                                             1
state i  {1, 2} in the second period. For notational convenience, let us denote Pr(y2 = y2     )
                                                       1           2
by µ and agent's average income (1 -  )y1 +  µy2 + (1 - µ)y2 by y . Agent can go to a
perfectly competitive financial market to smooth his consumption across different periods
and states. A contract specifies the agent's consumption level in each period and state, and
is in the form of (c1 , c1    2
                         2 , c2 ).
    Before we proceed to the analysis, it is useful to point out that this simple model can be
easily reinterpreted under different contexts. For instance, the model degenerates to our first
static insurance example if  = 1. Similarly, the model shares exactly the same insight as
our second example of credit market if µ  {0, 1} and agent holds incorrect belief regarding
his time preference  .

                                                  17
Rational Benchmark We first consider the consumption allocation of a rational agent.
Clearly, the equilibrium contract will result in a consumption bundle, denoted by (c     1 2
                                                                                    1 , c2 , c2 ),
that solves the following maximization problem:

                                 max F c1 , z (c1    2 1 2
                                                2 , c2 ; p , p ); , ,  ,
                               {c1 ,c2 ,c2 }
                                     1   2



                         s.t. (1 -  )c1 +  µc1           2
                                             2 + (1 - µ)c2 = y,                              (21)

where Equation (21) is the zero-profit condition. Simple algebra would verify that

             c     1    2                           1 2
              1 = c2 = c2 = y , and thus F c1 , z (c2 , c2 ; µ, 1 - µ); , ,  = y.



Remark 3 A rational agent with Epstein-Zin preferences receives a contract that perfectly
smooths his consumption across all periods and states. In the competitive equilibrium, agent's
average certainty equivalent is equal to his average income y .

   Next, we introduce behavioral biases into the model by assuming that agent may mis-
perceive either the time preferences  or the probability µ.


4.1    Misperception on Time Preferences
   Suppose the agent believes that his time preference parameter is ~ =  . The equilibrium
competitive contract thus maximizes the agent's perceived utility

                             max F c1 , z (c1    2              ~
                                            2 , c2 ; µ, 1 - µ); , ,  ,
                           {c1 ,c2 ,c2 }
                                 1   2




subject to the zero-profit condition (21). Note that   ~ only enters into agent's perceived
utility function and has no impact on the zero-profit constraint.
    Solving for the equilibrium consumption bundle, which we denote by (c1 , c1    2
                                                                              2 , c2 ), yields
that
                                y                              T ( )y
                  c1 =                   , and c1    2
                                                2 = c2 =                  ,               (22)
                         (1 -  ) + T ( )                  (1 -  ) + T ( )
where T ( ) is a function of the IES parameter 1/ and is given by
                                                              1
                                                             -
                                                1- ~
                                T ( ) :=      ×                   .
                                           1-    ~
                                                 

   Two remarks are in order. First, the equilibrium consumption profile within the second
period is not distorted by the agent's misperception of time preferences: The agent still

                                               18
obtains full insurance in the second period because his belief regarding the period-2 risks
is correct. Second and importantly, the equilibrium consumption bundle (c1 , c1         2
                                                                                   2 , c2 ) is
independent of the risk aversion parameter ; the ratio between the period-1 and the period-
2 consumption depends only on the IES parameter 1/ .
    Given the equilibrium consumption bundle specified in (22), we can calculate the equi-
librium certainty equivalent of the agent using the true time preferences  , which we denote
by F (,  ), as the following:

                 F (,  ) := F c1 , z (c1    2
                                       2 , c2 ; µ, 1 - µ); , , 
                                                                          1
                                    y                               1-   1-
                           =                 (1 -  ) +  T ( )                 .           (23)
                             (1 -  ) + T ( )

Recall that a rational agent's equilibrium certainty equivalent in a competitive equilibrium
is y . A loss function relative to the rational benchmark, denoted by L (,  ), can be defined
as
                                                 y - F (,  )
                                     L (,  ) :=              .
                                                      y
The following result can then be obtained:

Proposition 4 (Epstein-Zin preferences and misperception on time preferences)
Suppose that agent has Epstein-Zin preferences as described in (18), and holds incorrect belief
regarding his time preferences (i.e., ~ =  ). Then the following statements hold:

  (i) The loss function L (,  ) is independent of the agent's risk aversion ;

 (ii) The loss function L (,  ) follows an inverted U-shaped curve in the agent's IES 1/ .

   For part (i) of Proposition 4, recall that agent receives full insurance in the second
period. This implies instantly that the period-2 consumption across states remain efficient.
Therefore, agent's period-2 certainty equivalent will not be influenced by his risk aversion
coefficient , and thus his average certainty equivalent F remains constant over .
   The intuition for part (ii) of Proposition 4 is exactly the same as that for Proposition 3.
Agent's biased belief about his time preference coefficient  distorts the dynamic trade-off
between the period-1 consumption and period-2 consumption, which in turn leads to welfare
inefficiency. In such a scenario, it is the IES 1/ , rather than the risk aversion , that
determines the agent's equilibrium certainty equivalent and the size of welfare losses.




                                              19
4.2    Misperception on Second-period Risks
                                                                     1
   Next, suppose the agent believes that the probability that state-y2 occurs in the second
period is µ
          ~ = µ. The equilibrium competitive contract maximizes agent's perceived utility

                            max F c1 , z (c1    2
                                                    ~, 1 - µ
                                           2 , c2 ; µ      ~ ); , ,  ,
                                2 ,c2 }
                          {c1 ,c1   2




subject to the zero-profit condition (21). Similar to the previous analysis, agent's belief
µ
~ only enters into his perceived objective function and has no impact on the zero-profit
constraint.
    Denote the equilibrium consumption profile by (c1µ , c1     2
                                                          2µ , c2µ ), where we use the subscript
µ to indicate that agent holds incorrect belief about distribution of the period-2 risks. The
first-order condition implies that
                                                       1
                                                      -
                              c1
                               2µ    µ    1-µ~
                               2
                                  =     ×                  =: R(),                         (24)
                              c2µ   1-µ    µ
                                           ~

and                                                                   1- 
                                                                 1     
                                                           1-   1-
             µc1            2
               2µ + (1 - µ)c2µ   1-µ
                                   ~+µ ~ R()                         
                               =                                            =: Q(,  ).     (25)
                    c1µ            1 - µ + µR()                      


    Equations (24) and (25) unveil two important sources of inefficiency. The term R()
defined in Equation (24) measures the impact of the agent's misperception of µ on the
period-2 consumption profile, and hence captures the period-2 distortion. Without loss of
                                                                               1
generality, suppose that µ~ > µ, i.e., agent assigns more weights on state-y2    . This implies
                                                                                           1
instantly that R() > 1, and thus the agent ends up with more consumption in state-y2         in
the competitive equilibrium and results in welfare loss.
    Equation (25) indicates that agent's biased belief regarding the period-2 risks also varies
the intertemporal tradeoff between the period-1 consumption (i.e., c1µ ) and the average
period-2 consumption (i.e., µc1              2
                                2µ + (1 - µ)c2µ ). This dynamic distortion is captured by the
term Q(,  ), which clearly depends on both  and  . Therefore, agent's welfare depends on
both the risk aversion coefficient  and the IES parameter 1/ when he incorrectly estimates
his period-2 risks.




                                              20
      Solving for the equilibrium consumption profile (c1µ , c1     2
                                                              2µ , c2µ ) yields that


                                           1
                             c1µ =                 y,
                                     1 -  + Q(,  )
                                         Q(,  )         R()
                             c1
                              2µ   =               ×            y,
                                     1 -  + Q(,  ) 1 - µ + µR()
                                         Q(,  )          1
                             c2
                              2µ   =               ×            y.
                                     1 -  + Q(,  ) 1 - µ + µR()

   Given the equilibrium consumption profile specified above, we can derive agent's experi-
enced welfare, which we denote by F (, ), as the following:

F (,  ):=F c1µ , z (c1     2
                     2µ , c2µ ; µ, 1 - µ); , , 

                            y
           :=
                1 -  + Q(, ) × 1 - µ + µR()
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                     1-   1-
                                              1-                 1-                           1-     1-
                × (1 -  ) 1 - µ + µR()             +  Q(,  )           1 - µ + µ R()                           .


Similar to the previous analysis, we can define a loss function, which we denote by L (,  ),
as the following:
                                              y - F (,  )
                                  L (,  ) :=               .
                                                    y
The following result can then be obtained:

Proposition 5 (Epstein-Zin preferences and misperception on period-2 risks)
Suppose that agent has Epstein-Zin preferences as described in (18), and holds incorrect
belief regarding the period-2 risks (i.e., µ
                                           ~ = µ). Then the following statements hold:

  (i) lim 0 L (,  ) > lim  L (,  ) = 0. As a result,  L       (, )
                                                              
                                                                   is negative as  becomes
      sufficiently large. Moreover, there exists a threshold   [0, 1) such that for  >  ,
       L (, )
         
               is positive as  becomes sufficiently small.14
                                                                                            L (, )
 (ii) lim  L (,  ) > lim 0 L (,  ) > lim1 L (, 1) > 0. Moreover,                             
                                                                                                     is positive
      as  becomes sufficiently small or sufficiently large.

    Part (i) of Proposition 5 indicates that the loss function L (,  ) follows an inverted
U-shaped curve in agent's relative risk aversion coefficient  as Figure 3(a) illustrates. The
intuition is similar to that in part (ii) of Proposition 4. Fixing the IES parameter  , although
a change in the risk aversion coefficient  distorts agent's intertemporal tradeoff Q(,  ) and
 14                                                                         1-µ
                                                                              ~ µ ~   1-
      It can be verified from the proof of Proposition 5 that  = 0 if max   1-µ , µ         1 - .

                                                    21
         (a) Loss Function L (,  ):  = 2                (b) Loss Function L (,  ):  = 2

Figure 3: Epstein-Zin Preferences with Biased Belief on Period-2 Risks: (y, µ, µ
                                                                               ~, ) =
(1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.5).

thus the welfare analysis is substantially complicated, the main insight as established in
Proposition 1 remains qualitatively unchanged.
    In contrast, by part (ii) of Proposition 5, the welfare analysis with respect to agent's
IES 1/ is less than explicit. It is somewhat surprising that Proposition 5 indicates that
agent's average certainty equivalent needs to change the its monotonicity at least twice as
Figure 3(b) depicts; and more importantly, that agents with extreme values of IES are now
more vulnerable. The reason why agents with a moderate degree of IES are less vulnerable
stems from the observation that a moderate IES limits the dynamic distortion caused by
the misperception on period-2 risks. To see this more clearly, it is useful to consider the
extreme case where 1/ approaches one. It is straightforward to verify that Equation (25)
                                                                                   
degenerates to [µc1             2
                  2µ + (1 - µ)c2µ ]/c1µ = 1, which in turn implies that c1µ = y = c1 . In other
words, the equilibrium period-1 consumption is equal to the average period-2 consumption,
and coincides with the first-best period-1 consumption level despite the fact that agent
is biased. In such a scenario, inefficiency is solely triggered by the unbalanced period-2
                             1            2
consumptions across state-y2   and state-y2 , and the dynamic distortion caused by the biased
belief about µ vanishes in the limit. As a result, the agent with a moderate level of IES 1/
has the maximum welfare.


5    Projection Bias and Habit Formation
   Next, we consider projection bias and investigate the impact of IES on consumer vul-
nerability in a simple decision-theoretic model. In particular, we consider a habit formation

                                              22
model with projection biased consumers proposed by Loewenstein, O'Donoghue, and Rabin
(2003).
    A consumer has total income of y and allocate consumption c1 and c2 between two periods.
Consumer's instantaneous utility in period t = 1, 2 is v (ct , st ) := u(ct - st ), where ct and st
are respectively his consumption and the habit stock in period t. We follow Loewenstein et
al. (2003) and assume that habit stock evolves according to

                              st = (1 - )st-1 + ct-1 ,   (0, 1],

with an initial habit stock normalized to zero (i.e., s1 = 0). For simplicity, we assume that
there is no discounting across periods.
   Now we introduce projection bias into the model. When a consumer exhibits simple
projection bias as in Loewenstein et al. (2003), his perceived utility is

                         u(c1 - s1 ) + (1 - )u(c2 - s2 ) + u(c2 - s1 ),

where   [0, 1] captures the degree of projection bias in an intuitive way. Note that  = 0
corresponds to case of "rational habits" wherein a consumer fully takes into consideration
the impact of his current assumption on his future well-being. Similarly,  = 1 corresponds
to the case of "myopic habits" wherein a consumer does not account at all for how his current
consumption influences his future habit stock.
    A consumer's decision on the first-period consumption, which we denote by c    1 (, ), is
the solution to the following first-order condition:

     u c                                                  
        1 (, ) - (1 - )(1 + )u y - (1 + )c1 (, ) - u y - c1 (, ) = 0.                         (26)

It can be shown that c             
                        1 (, ) > c1 (, 0) for all   (0, 1], implying that a consumer with
projection bias plans a consumption profile that consumes his income more quickly relative
to a rational consumer. This result is intuitive: projection bias leads a consumer to under-
appreciate how his current consumption will reduce his utility from future consumption, and
thus leads one to consume too much.
    Given the derived consumption profile c           
                                             1 (, ), c2 (, ) , we use the utility function u(·)
to calculate the average certainty equivalent, which we denote by CE  (, ), as follows:

                    2u CE  (, ) = u c                 
                                     1 (, ) - s1 + u c2 (, ) - s2 .                           (27)




                                                23
   A loss function, which is similar to that in Section 2.1, can be defined as

                                         CE  (, 0) - CE  (, )
                              L(, ) :=                        .                             (28)
                                              CE  (, 0)

   Note that a closed-form solution to Equation (26) cannot be obtained in general even
with the CRRA utility functional form. For ease of presentation, we consider the two afore-
mentioned polar cases  = 0 and  = 1. A discussion for the case of intermediate degree of
projection bias (i.e., 0 <  < 1) will be presented after Proposition 6.

Rational habits:  = 0. A rational consumer correctly anticipates his changes in habit
stock, and chooses a consumption profile (c1 , c2 ) to maximize his total utility across the two
periods
                                 u(c1 - s1 ) + u(c2 - s2 ),                                 (29)

subject to s2 = (1 - )s1 + c1 , s1 = 0, and c1 + c2 = y . The first-order condition (26) can
be simplified as

                                      u (c1 - s1 )
                                                   = 1 + .                                  (30)
                                      u (c2 - s2 )
When  = 0, the model degenerates to the one without habit formation and u (c1 ) = u (c2 ),
in which case the consumer perfectly smooths his consumption across the two periods. When
 > 0, an increase in the period-1 consumption influences the period-2 habit stock and thus
decreases the period-2 utility, holding fixed the period-2 consumption level, a fact that a
rational consumer would take into consideration when deciding his consumption.
    Solving for the optimal consumption profile yields that

                                             1            + (1 + )
               c          
                1 (, 0), c2 (, 0) =                  y,               y .
                                      (1 + ) + (1 + ) (1 + ) + (1 + )

It follows immediately from above expression that c         
                                                       1 < c2 . This confirms the increasing con-
sumption pattern typically emphasized in the literature on habit formation. As  increases,
or equivalent, as a consumer becomes more risk neutral, he cares more about his total net
consumption level [i.e., (c1 - s1 ) + (c2 - s2 )] and incurs less disutility from an unbalanced
consumption path. As a result, he optimally postpones his consumption to the second period
so as to avoid the welfare loss caused by the period-1 habit stock. In the extreme case that
 approaches infinity, his optimal plan is to consume nothing in the first period and all his
income in the second period.
    It is noteworthy that the rational benchmark now depends on the shape of the utility
function due to the presence of habit formation, and the per period certainty equivalent


                                               24
evaluated using the utility function u(·) is given by
                                                                       

                                     y        1 1                      -1
                   CE (, 0) =                
                                               + (1 + )-1                   ,
                              (1 + ) + (1 + ) 2 2

which is a function of the IES coefficient .

Myopic habits:  = 1. Next, we consider the consumption behavior of a completely
myopic consumer. Plugging  = 1 into the first-order condition (26) yields that

                                       u (c1 - s1 )
                                                    = 1;                                 (31)
                                       u (c2 - s1 )

together with c1 + c2 = y , the optimal consumption profile can be solved as
                                                        y
                                   c           
                                    1 (, 1) = c2 (, 1) = .
                                                        2
When a consumer is fully myopic, he perfectly smooths his consumption across the two
periods. Although the consumption path achieve the first-best under the standard expected
utility theory in the absence of habit formation (i.e.,  = 0), it is suboptimal in a model
of a habit formation because a consumer's period-1 consumption lowers his period-2 utility.
Given the above consumption profile and Equation (27), we can derive the consumer's average
certainty equivalent as follows:
                                                              

                                      y 1 1      -1           -1
                           CE (, 1) =    + (1 - )                  .
                                      2 2 2

    Comparing the first-order conditions (30) and (31), we can see that, similar to the previ-
ous examples in Sections 2 to 4, projection bias creates a wedge between the marginal utility
of consumption across the two periods and generates inefficiency. The following result can
be obtained:

Proposition 6 (Implications of projection bias over habit formation) Consider a
model of habit formation with projection bias. The following statements hold:

  (i) The ratio of the period-1 consumption between a myopic consumer and a rational
      consumer, i.e., c         
                       1 (, 1)/c1 (, 0), is greater than one, and strictly increases with  for
        (0, ).

 (ii) The loss function L(, 1), as defined by (28), of a consumer with myopic habits strictly
      decreases (increases, respectively) with  as  becomes sufficiently small (large, respec-
      tively).

                                               25
            (a) Period-1 Consumption                    (b) Average Certainty Equivalent




        (c) Loss Function L(, ):  = 0.7                 (d) Loss Function L(, ):  = 1

              Figure 4: Habit Formation with Project Bias: (y, ) = (1, 0.7).

    The first part of Proposition 6 confirms the intuition obtained in the previous two exam-
ples: When the consumer exhibits extreme projection bias (i.e.,  = 1), the curvature of the
utility function is closely related to the deviation of their consumption behavior from that of
a consumer with rational habits. Again, a utility function with a higher degree of IES leads
to more deviations from the first-best consumption path, as Figure 4(a) depicts.
    Interestingly, although the loss function L(, 1) is non-monotone in the IES coefficient ,
Proposition 6 indicates that it follows a U-shaped curve rather than an inverted U-shaped
curve [see Figure 4(d)]. This in turn implies that consumers with an intermediate degree
of IES are less vulnerable than those with extreme values of IES, and thus contrasts to the
welfare results stated in Propositions 1 and 3. To understand the result, recall that under
the context of habit formation, period-1 consumption causes a loss in total income of size

                                              26
s2 = c    1 from Equation (29), and decreases consumer welfare, which we refer to as the
income loss effect. The size of this income loss effect depends evidently on the period-1
consumption level c 1 (, ), and looms large when consumers' degree of projection bias (i.e.,
) increases [see Figure 4(a)]. In the extreme case that a consumer completely ignores the
evolution of his habit stock (i.e.,  = 1) and  approaches infinity, he consumes y/2 in the
first period, whereas a rational consumer consumes zero. This causes a huge welfare loss to
a myopic consumer, and thus the loss function exhibits an opposite pattern from those in
Propositions 1 and 3 due to such income loss effect.

Intermediate projection bias:   (0, 1). Next, we provide some numerical results
for intermediate degree of consumer projection bias. As Figure 4(a) illustrates, period-1
consumption level of a moderately biased consumer (the middle curve) approximates the
benchmark case of rational habits (the bottom curve) for extremes values of . Furthermore,
it can be verified that the ratio c         
                                   1 (, )/c1 (, 0) is strictly increasing in  for all   (0, 1),
indicating that the first part of Proposition 6 is robust to intermediate projection bias.
    However, the welfare analysis is different. Because c1 (, ) approaches c1 (, 0) as      
and        0, the income loss effect vanishes in the limit; this indicates that the average
certainty equivalent of a biased consumer coincides with that of a rational consumer [see
Figure 4(b)]. By Figure 4(c), the loss function instead follows an inverted U-shaped curve.
Under such a scenario, consumers with a moderate level of IES are the most vulnerable.


6      Reference-Dependent Preferences and Portfolio Choice
    Since the seminal contribution by Kahneman and Tversky (1979), prospect theory is
perhaps one of the most influential and well-cited framework in behavioral economics. A
central component of prospect theory is that outcomes are not evaluated on an absolute
scale, but rather are evaluated relative to some point of reference. In other words, agents'
preferences are reference-dependent. Moreover, economic agents are loss averse in the sense
that a loss relative to the reference point outweighs a gain of equal size.15
    A robust literature has applied prospect theory to different subfields of economics such
as finance, industrial organization, and public economics. For instance, Barberis and Xiong
(2009) develop a dynamic model with loss-averse investors to investigate whether prospect
theory preferences can predict a disposition effect, the tendency of retail investors to be
more prone to sell their winners than their losers.16 In this section, we present a simple
  15
    The other two components are diminishing sensitivity and probability weighting.
  16
    In Barberis and Xiong (2009), the reference point is exogenously given. Meng and Weng (2018) revisit
the question and assume that the reference point is endogenously determined.



                                                  27
static portfolio choice setting with expectation-based loss-averse investors. Because our fo-
cus is to analyze the welfare consequences of reference-dependent preferences rather than to
predict the disposition effect, we abstract from the dynamic structure and consider a simple
static setting. Although there exists a plethora of studies that take a positive approach
and focus on whether reference-dependent preferences can explain observed behavior, some-
what surprisingly, the welfare implications of reference-dependent preferences remain largely
unexplored (O'Donoghue and Sprenger, 2018).
    Consider a static model of asset allocation between a risk-free asset and a stock. There are
two assets: a risk-free asset, which earns a gross return of Rf = 1,17 and a risky asset/stock.
Specifically, the gross return of the asset is Ru > Rf with probability   (0, 1), and is
Rd < Rf with probability 1 - . To create a tradeoff between the risk-free asset and the stock,
we assume that the expected stock return exceeds the risk-free rate, i.e., Ru +(1-)Rd > Rf .
The price for each share of the stock is set to be unity.
    The investor has initial wealth y and must decide how to split his wealth between the risk-
free and risky assets. Denote the number of shares of the risky asset an investor purchases
by . For simplicity, we assume that that short-selling is forbidden (i.e.,   0), and the
investor can borrow to invest in the risky asset (i.e.,  may exceed y ). In addition, we assume
that a investor's realized wealth in any state must be nonnegative.18

Investor preferences Investors have reference-dependent preferences and are expectation-
based loss averse a
                  ´ la Koszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007). To put it formally, when an investor's
consumption is c and his reference point is r, her perceived utility is given by

                                          u(c) +  u(c) - u(r)          if c  r,
                           ~(c | r) =
                           u
                                          u(c) +  u(c) - u(r)          if c < r,

where u(c) is an investor's intrinsic utilities from consumption;   0 is the weight on gain-
loss psychological utility; and   1 captures the idea that a loss looms larger than a gain
of equal size and thus represents the degree of the agent's loss aversion.
    We follow K  oszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) and assume that investor's reference point is
set to equal to his rational expectations as defined by his full probabilistic beliefs. Further-
more, at the time the investor decides on his asset composition, the investor anticipates that
the lottery he faces regarding the terminal income depends on his investment decision. This
assumption is incorporated into the solution concept "choice-acclimating personal equilib-
rium" (CPE) (K    oszegi and Rabin, 2007). More formally, fixing   0, investor's reference
point is the following lottery: With probability , his wealth becomes y -  + Ru , with
 17
      Normalizing Rf to one is without loss of generality.
 18
      With CRRA specification, this constraint never binds due to Inada condition (i.e., limc   0   u (c) = ).


                                                      28
probability 1 - , he ends up with a wealth level of y -  + Rd . Therefore, the expected
perceived utility of an expectation-based loss-averse investor is given by

     U () := u(y -  + Ru ) + (1 - )u(y -  + Rd )
                           · 0 + (1 - )[u(y -  + Ru ) - u(y -  + Rd )]
             +                                                                             .
                    +(1 - )  · [u(y -  + Rd ) - u(y -  + Ru )] + (1 - ) · 0

The above expression can be further simplified as

U () = u(y -  + Ru ) + (1 - )u(y -  + Rd ) -(1 - ) u(y -  + Ru ) - u(y -  + Rd ) ,
                     intrinsic material utility                        gain-loss utility
                                                                                          (32)
where  :=  ( - 1). Our setup degenerates to a model with standard preferences if the
second term vanishes, i.e., if  = 1.
    Two remarks are in order. First, our model can be interpreted more broadly to incorpo-
rate alternative behavioral biases. To see this, note that the utility function U () coincides
with that of disappointment aversion of Bell (1985) and Loomes and Sugden (1986) in this
simple binary-lottery environment. Second, it follows from Equation (32) that the gain-loss
utility is always negative for risky outcomes, and its size depends on the spread of the re-
alized intrinsic utility. To maximize the psychological gain-loss utility, the investor would
minimize dispersion in his realized outcome, which can be done by choosing  = 0.

Optimal share holdings of risky assets The optimal investment level, which we denote
by  (), solves the following first-order condition:

             dU ()    u (y -  + Rd )      (Ru - 1)       1 - (1 - )
                   =0                =                 ×            .
              d       u (y -  + Ru )   (1 - )(1 - Rd )      1 + 

The term [1 - (1 - )]/(1 + ), which is less than one, captures the influence of an in-
vestor's loss aversion. Analogous to analyses for other behavioral biases in previous sections,
loss aversion again creates a wedge between the marginal utility of consumption across the
two states, which varies the investor's incentive.
    Exploiting the constant IES functional form of u(·) as described in (1), we obtain:
                                                                   -
               y -  + Rd      (Ru - 1)       1 - (1 - )
                         =                 ×                           =: T (),
               y -  + Ru   (1 - )(1 - Rd )      1 + 




                                                  29
from which the optimal investment level, denoted by  (; ), can be solved as

                                                    1 - T (; )
                               (; ) =                                   y.
                                             (Ru - 1)T (; ) + (1 - Rd )

Welfare with reference-dependent utility Next, we define investor's welfare. Wel-
fare implications of reference-dependent preferences is an open question in the literature. A
central issue to the question is that whether reference dependence and loss aversion are a
manifestation of real experienced utility, or are more of a mistake. Unfortunately, no con-
sensus has been reached on this question thus far. In the former scenario, gain-loss utility
represents true feeling of "pleasure" and "pain," and it seems natural that the psychological
gain-loss component should be given a normative weight when we calculate welfare. How-
ever, experimental evidence suggests that gains and losses can be recoded through relatively
innocuous changes in experimental procedures. In this case, incorporating gain-loss utility
into welfare analysis seems inappropriate.19
    In what follows, we take the second viewpoint and interpret the investors' tendency to
avoid losses as a "mistake." Consequently, consumer's welfare is measured by the certainty
equivalent of his intrinsic material utility in expression (32) under the optimal portfolio
choices. Given the optimal investment decision  (; ), an investor's certainty equivalent
of the intrinsic material utility, which we denote by CE  (; ), can be derived as
                                                                                   
                
                                             -1                               -1   -1
                                                                           
                       y + (Ru - 1)          
                                                  + (1 - ) y - (1 - Rd )      
                                                                                        if  > 0 and  = 1,
                
CE  (; ) =
                 y + (R - 1)                                 1-
                                          · y - (1 - Rd )
                
                       u                                                                if  = 1.
                                                                                                    (33)
A loss function can then be defined as
                                                  CE  (; 0) - CE  (; )
                                  L(; ) :=                             .
                                                       CE  (; 0)

Main Results We are now ready to present our main result. For notational convenience,
let us define
                               Ru + (1 - )Rd - 1
                           :=                       .
                                 (1 - )(Ru - Rd )
The following proposition can be established:

Proposition 7 (Impact of expectation-based loss aversion on investors' port-
folio choice and welfare) Suppose that investors are expectation-based loss averse and
 < .20 Then the following statements hold:
 19
      See O'Donoghue and Sprenger (2018, p.69) for more discussions.
 20
      When  exceeds , short-selling arises as the optimal trading strategy. Similar condition is commonly

                                                      30
   (a) Optimal Share Holdings of the Risky Assets               (b) Loss Function L(; ):  = 0.5

Figure 5: Portfolio Choice with Reference-dependent Preferences: (y, , Ru , Rd , Rf ) =
(1, 0.5, 2, 0.5, 1).

  (i) Fix  > 0, then  (; ) <  (; 0). Moreover, lim                      0    (; ) = lim       0    (; 0) = 0
      and lim   (; ) = lim   (; 0) = y/(1 - Rd ).

 (ii) lim 0 L(; ) = lim  L(; ) = 0, and hence the loss function L(; ) is strictly
      increasing (decreasing, respectively) in  for sufficiently small (large, respectively) .

    Part (i) of Proposition 7 states that an expectation-based loss-averse investor will buy
fewer shares than an investor with standard preferences. Recall from expression (32) that
the investor strongly dislikes uncertainty in the sense that dispersion in realized outcome
generates psychological disutility. As a result, in addition to the traditional consumption-
smoothing motive caused by the concave intrinsic utility material function u(·), an expectation-
based loss-averse investor has further incentive to reduce the spread in intrinsic material util-
ities through a more conservative investment strategy compared to an investor with standard
preferences.
    The strength of the aforementioned uncertainty-reducing effect vanishes as investors be-
come sufficiently risk averse (i.e.,    0), in which case the investor with standard preferences
would purchase no risky assets in the limit. Meanwhile, as investor becomes sufficiently risk
neutral (i.e.,       ), he greatly values the additional expected payoff from holding the
risky assets compared to risk-free assets; and thus both the consumption-smoothing and the
uncertainty-reducing incentives become negligible.21 Therefore, the investor would purchase
assumed in the literature (e.g., Herweg, M¨uller, and Weinschenk, 2010) to avoid violations of first-order
stochastic dominance.
  21
     In the extreme case that  = , the incentive to reduce the spread of intrinsic utility is sufficiently high
such that the investor would not buy any stock in the optimum and his consumption is perfectly smoothed.

                                                      31
the maximum amount of assets in the limit.22 To summarize, the optimal portfolio choice of
investors with reference-dependent preferences are the same as that of investors with stan-
dard preferences in these two extreme scenarios [see Figure 5(a)], and thus no welfare losses
will be triggered in the limit. This confirms the prediction in part (ii) of Proposition 7, which
in turn indicates that the most vulnerable investors are those with a moderate level of , as
depicted in Figure 5(b).


7     Concluding Remarks
    In this paper, we systematically examine consumer vulnerability in models with behav-
ioral biases. We measure consumer vulnerability by the percentage loss in a consumer's
equilibrium certainty equivalent from a market with non-biased consumers to that with bi-
ased ones with the same underlying instantaneous utility function. We consider several
important behavioral biases that have been extensively studied in the literature--including
the impact of biased beliefs (either over- or under-confidence) in an insurance market, the
impact of present bias and na¨  ivet´
                                    e about present bias in a dynamic model of credit con-
tract design, the impact of projection bias about habit formation, and reference-dependent
preferences with loss aversion--and investigate how consumer vulnerability is related to the
curvatures of their utility functions.
    We focus on the role of risk aversion in static models and the role of intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (IES) in dynamic models. Although insight or effect specific to
certain behavioral biases is identified, a robust pattern on welfare is observed: Consumer
vulnerability to the commonly studied behavioral biases in the literature, as measured by the
welfare loss relative to a rational benchmark, has in general a non-monotonic relationship
with risk aversion or IES. This is in stark contrast to the deviations in the allocations from
the rational benchmark, which are often monotonic to the risk aversion or IES. Our paper
complements the existing literature in behavioral economics that focused almost exclusively
on how behavioral bias leads to the deviations in allocations from the rational benchmark
and the potential solutions to the associated market inefficiency.
    Our study leaves large room for future extension. This paper assumes homogeneous
agents. In practice, consumers often possess valuable private information (e.g., risks, income,
risk preferences) to firms. It would be promising to introduce consumer heterogeneity and
private information into the stylized modeling frameworks we considered in this paper, and
investigate how the magnitude of externality rational consumers exert on biased consumers,
or vice versa, depends on risk aversion or IES. Another possible avenue for future research
 22
    Recall that the nonnegativity of wealth constraint requires that y -  + Rd  0, implying that  
y/(1 - Rd ).


                                               32
is to extend our analysis to allow for regulations and/or policies, and examine how their
effectiveness depends on risk aversion or IES under different economic contexts. We leave
the exploration of these possibilities to future research.


References
Armstrong, Mark and John Vickers, "Discriminating against captive customers," American
  Economic Review: Insights, 2019, 1 (3), 257­72.

Barberis, Nicholas and Ming Huang, "Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual stock
  returns," Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (4), 1247­1292.

   and Wei Xiong, "What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a long-standing
  preference-based explanation," Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (2), 751­784.

Bell, David E., "Disappointment in decision making under uncertainty," Operations Re-
  search, 1985, 33 (1), 1­27.

Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Leeat Yariv, "Government policy with time incon-
  sistent voters," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (6), 1711­37.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong, "A welfare criterion for models with
  distorted beliefs," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1753­1797.

Crawford, Vincent P. and Juanjuan Meng, "New York City cab drivers' labor supply re-
  visited: Reference-dependent preferences with rational-expectations targets for hours and
  income," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1912­32.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier, "Contract design and self-control: Theory and
  evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 353­402.

   and   , "Paying not to go to the gym," American Economic Review, 2006, 96, 694­719.

Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler, "Contracting with diversely naive agents," Review of Economic
  Studies, 2006, 73 (3), 689­714.

   and , "Consumer optimism and price discrimination," Theoretical Economics, 2008, 3
  (4), 459­497.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, "Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
  of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework," Econometrica, 1989, 57 (4),
  937­969.

                                             33
   and , "Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset
  returns: An empirical analysis," Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (2), 263­286.

Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman, "On the compassion of time-limited welfare programs,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88, 1445­1470.

   and , "Distinguishing between cognitive biases: Belief vs. time discounting in welfare
  program participation," in Behavioral Public Finance, edited by Edward McCaffery and
  Joel Slemrod, 2006, Russell Sage Foundation, 47­81.

   and Giuseppe Moscarini, "Morale hazard," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52,
  749­777.

  and Yang Wang, "Estimating dynamic discrete choice models with hyperbolic discounting,
  with an application to mammography decisions," International Economic Review, 2015,
  56 (2), 565­596.

   and Zenan Wu, "Life insurance and life settlement markets with overconfident policy-
  holders," Journal of Economic Theory, 2020, 189, 105­93.

Farber, Henry S., "Reference-dependent preferences and labor supply: The case of New York
  City taxi drivers," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 1069­82.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson, "Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information
 suppression in competitive markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 505­
 540.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, "Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from
 the housing market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1233­1260.

Gottlieb, Daniel and Xingtan Zhang, "Long-term contracting with time-inconsistent agents,"
 Econometrica, 2020, forthcoming.

Grubb, Michael D., "Selling to overconfident consumers," American Economic Review, 2009,
  99 (5), 1770­1807.

  , "Overconfident consumers in the marketplace," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2015,
  29 (4), 9­36.

Harris, Christopher and David Laibson, "Dynamic choices of hyperbolic consumers," Econo-
  metrica, 2001, 69 (3), 397­421.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi, "Exploiting na¨ivete about self-control in the credit
  market," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2279­2303.

                                           34
  and    , "Regular prices and sales," Theoretical Economics, 2014, 9 (1), 217­251.

   and , "Na¨ivet´
                 e-based discrimination," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2),
  1019­1054.

   and , "Behavioral industrial organization," in "Handbook of Behavioral Economics:
  Applications and Foundations 1," Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 517­612.

  , , and Takeshi Murooka, "Inferior products and profitable deception," Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2017, 84 (1), 323­356.

Herweg, Fabian, Daniel M¨ uller, and Philipp Weinschenk, "Binary payment schemes: Moral
  hazard and loss aversion," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2451­77.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
 risk," Econometrica, 1979, 47 (2), 263­291.

  , Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin, "Back to Bentham? Explorations of experienced
  utility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 375­405.

Karle, Heiko and Heiner Schumacher, "Advertising and attachment: Exploiting loss aversion
 through prepurchase information," RAND Journal of Economics, 2017, 48 (4), 927­948.

  and Marc M¨ oller, "Selling in advance to loss averse consumers," International Economic
  Review, 2020, 61 (1), 441­468.

Koszegi, Botond, "Behavioral contract theory," Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52
 (4), 1075­1118.

  and Matthew Rabin, "A model of reference-dependent preferences," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1133­1165.

   and , "Reference-dependent risk attitudes," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4),
  1047­1073.

   and , "Reference-dependent consumption plans," American Economic Review, 2009, 99
  (3), 909­36.

la Rosa, Leonidas Enrique De, "Overconfidence and moral hazard," Games and Economic
   Behavior, 2011, 73 (2), 429­451.

Laibson, David I., "Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1997, 112 (1), 443­477.


                                           35
Loewenstein, George, Ted O'Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin, "Projection bias in predicting
  future utility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1209­1248.

Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden, "Disappointment and dynamic consistency in choice
  under uncertainty," Review of Economic Studies, 1986, 53 (2), 271­282.

Martimort, David and Lars A. Stole, "Nonlinear pricing with average-price bias," American
 Economic Review: Insights, 2020, 2 (3), 375­96.

Meng, Juanjuan and Xi Weng, "Can prospect theory explain the disposition effect? A new
 perspective on reference points," Management Science, 2018, 64 (7), 3331­3351.

O'Donoghue, Ted and Charles Sprenger, "Reference-dependent preferences," Handbook of
  Behavioral Economics-Foundations and Applications 1, 2018, pp. 1­77.

   and Matthew Rabin, "Doing it now or later," American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (1),
  103­124.

   and , "Choice and procrastination," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1),
  121­160.

Pagel, Michaela, "Expectations-based reference-dependent life-cycle consumption," Review
  of Economic Studies, 2017, 84 (2), 885­934.

Pratt, John W., "Risk aversion in the small and in the large," Econometrica, 1964, 32 (1-2),
  122­136.

Rabin, Matthew and Joel L. Schrag, "First impressions matter: A model of confirmatory
  bias," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 37­82.

Sandroni, Alvaro and Francesco Squintani, "Overconfidence, insurance, and paternalism,"
  American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (5), 1994­2004.

Santos-Pinto, Lu´
                is, "Positive self-image and incentives in organisations," Economic Journal,
  2008, 118 (531), 1315­1332.

  , "Positive self-image in tournaments," International Economic Review, 2010, 51 (2), 475­
  496.

  , "Labor market signaling and self-confidence: Wage compression and the gender pay gap,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (4), 873­914.

Spiegler, Ran, "The market for quacks," Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (4), 1113­
  1131.

                                            36
  , Bounded Rationality and Industrial Organization, Oxford University Press, 2011.

Strotz, Robert H., "Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization," Review of
  Economic Studies, 1956, 23 (3), 165­180.




                                           37
Appendix: Proof of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Note that CE  (; µ, µ) is a constant. Therefore, it suffices to show that CE  (; µ, µ
                                                                                           ^)
                                                                                               -1
                                                                              1-µ^        µ
is U-shaped with respect to   (0, ) for µ
                                        ^ = µ. Recall that                     µ
                                                                               ^
                                                                                     ×   1-µ
                                                                                                    > 0. It
follows from Equation (7) that
                                                                                         
                                                       -1                        -1      -1
                                                                              
           CE (; µ, µ
                    ^) =      µ y - (1 - x ) - p       
                                                            + (1 - µ)(y - p )    


                                                                                       
                                                       y - (1 - x ) - p    
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                       -1
                         = (y - p ) ×      1-µ+µ
                                                             y - p                    
                               y - µ                              
                         =              × 1 - µ + µ -1            -1
                                                                       ,
                             1 - µ + µ 

where the last equality follows from (4) and (5). It is useful to prove the following interme-
diate result.

Lemma 1 Suppose that µ  (0, 1),  > 0, and  = 1. Then

                                            1                    
                                                             -1 -1
                        f (; µ,  ) =              (1 - µ + µ   )
                                       1 - µ + µ 

is U-shaped in  for  > 0.

Proof. Note that
                                                              1
                                f (; µ,  ) = f     ; 1 - µ,        .
                                                              
Therefore, it suffices to show that f (; µ,  ) is U-shaped only for the case  > 1. Let
                                       
           U () := ln f (; µ,  ) =        ln 1 - µ + µ -1 - ln (1 - µ + µ  ) .
                                       -1

It follows immediately that

                               f (; µ,  )
                                          = f (; µ,  ) × U (),
                                  

and

           µ -1 ln( )          ln µ -1 - µ + 1    ln µ -1 - µ + 1   µ  ln( )
U () =                       +                 -                  -          .
       ( - 1) (µ -1 - µ + 1)        -1                ( - 1)2      µ - µ + 1


                                              A1
It is straightforward to verify that

                                                            µ
                          lim U () = - ln 1 - µ +               + µ ln( ) < 0;
                             0                              

together with the fact that f () > 0 for all   (0, ), we must have that f () < 0 when
 is sufficiently small. Therefore, to prove the lemma, it suffices to show that there exists a
unique solution to U () = 0 for   (0, ).
                                   ln(z )
   Let z :=  -1 >    1
                       . Then  = ln(  )
                                          + 1. Moreover, U () > 0 is equivalent to

                         (1 - µ + µz )(1 - µ + µ z ) ln2 (z )       ln(z )
              (z ) :=                                         U            +1
                                       ln( )                        ln( )
                                                       2
                       = - µ(1 - µ)( - 1)z ln(z )          + µ(1 - µ + µ z ) ln( )z ln(z )
                         - ln( )(1 - µ + µz )(1 - µ + µ z ) ln(1 - µ + µz ) > 0.             (A1)

Clearly, z = 1 is one solution to (z ) = 0. In order to prove that there exists a unique
solution to U () = 0 for   (0, ), it suffices to show that (i) there exists exactly one
                                    1
more solution to (z ) = 0 for z  (    , ), and lim1 U () = 0; or (ii) z = 1 is the unique
solution to (z ) = 0 and lim1 U () = 0.
    Carrying out the algebra, we have that

 (z ) = µ - (1 - µ)( - 1) ln2 (z ) + -2(1 - µ)( - 1) + ln( ) + µ ln( )(2 z - 1) ln(z )

       + - + µ( - 2 z + 1) - 1 ln( ) ln(1 - µ + µz ) ,
                                                                          ln(z ) + 1
 (z ) = 2µ2  ln( ) ln(z ) - ln(1 - µ + µz ) - 2µ(1 - µ)( - 1)
                                                                              z
                     1     µ
       + µ ln( )       -                 (1 - µ + µ z ),
                     z 1 - µ + µz
                        2( - 1) ln(z ) ln( ) 3µ z (1 - µ + µz ) - (1 - µ + 2µz )(1 - µ + µ z )
 (z ) = µ(1 - µ)                      +                                                             .
                            z2                            z 2 (1 - µ + µz )2

We first start from the third derivative of (z ). It is straightforward to verify that  (z ) > 0
is equivalent to

                   2( - 1) ln(z ) (1 - µ + 2µz )(1 - µ + µ z ) - 3µ z (1 - µ + µz )
       G (z ) :=                 -                                                  > 0.
                      ln( )                         (1 - µ + µz )2

Note that
                                   2( - 1) 2µ(1 - µ) (1 - µ) + µz
                        G (z ) =            +                     > 0.
                                    z ln( )      (1 - µ + µz )3


                                                  A2
Therefore, G (z ) is strictly increasing in z , which in turn implies that there exists at most
                                       1
one solution to  (z ) = 0 for z >        . Note that limz  G (z ) = . Therefore,  (z ) must
fall into one of the following two possibilities:
                            1
  (i)  (z ) > 0 for all z >   .

 (ii) There exists z   ( 1
                           , ) such that  (z  ) = 0; moreover,  (z )  0 for z  z  .

    The above observation, together with the fact that limz   (z ) = -2µ2  ln(µ) ln( ) >
0, indicates that  (z ) must fall into one of the following three possibilities:
                           1
 (a)  (z ) > 0 for all z >   .

 (b) There exists z  >   1
                         
                             such that  (z  ) = 0; moreover,  (z )  0 for z  z  .
                                              1
 (c) There exist z1 and z2 , with z2 > z1 >     , such that  (z1 ) =  (z2 ) = 0; moreover,
                                                         1
      (z ) < 0 for z  (z1 , z2 ) and  (z ) > 0 for z  (    , z1 )  (z2 , ).

   The above observation implies instantly that there are three possibilities regarding the
convexity/concavity of (z ).

Case (a) We show that this case is impossible. Recall that (1) = 0. It is straightforward
    to verify that  (1) = 0. Moreover,

                                                       µ
                              lim  (z ) =       1-µ+       ln( )U (0) < 0,
                              z  1
                                  
                                                       

     and
                                            lim (z ) = .
                                            z   

     Therefore, z = 1 is the unique solution to (z ) = 0 and  (1) > 0 from the convexity
     of (·), which is a contradiction against  (1) = 0.

Case (b) First, it can be verified that

                                      (1) = 0  lim U () = 0.
                                                      1


     We consider the following three subcases:

        1. z  < 1. Recall that (1) = 0,  (1) = 0, limz 1 (z ) < 0, and limz  (z ) >
                                                           
           0. Therefore, in additional to z = 1, there exists exactly one more solution to
           (z ) = 0, which we denote by z  . Moreover, we must have that z   (  1
                                                                                  , z  ) and
           thus  (z  ) < 0, which in turn implies that lim1 U () = 0.

                                                 A3
        2. z  = 1. In this case, z = 1 is the unique solution to (z ) = 0. Moreover, we
           have that  (1) = 0.
        3. z  > 1. Similar to subcase 1, there exists exactly one more solution to (z ) = 0,
           which we denote by z^ . Moreover, we must have that z ^ > z  and thus  (^  z) >
           0, which in turn implies that lim1 U () = 0.

                                                    1
Case (c) In this case, (z ) is convex in z for z  (   , z1 ), concave for z  (z1 , z2 ), and then
    convex again for z  (z2 , ). The analysis is similar to Case b and is omitted for
    brevity.

                                                                               1
   To summarize, (z ) = 0 has one or two two solutions on the interval (         , ). When
there exists a unique solution, it must be z = 1 and lim1 U () = 0. When there exists
another solution in addition to z = 1, we must have lim1 U () = 0. This in turn implies
that there exists a unique solution to U () = 0 for  > 0, and thus f (; µ,  ) is U-shaped in
.
   Proposition 1 follows directly from Lemma 1. This completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. We first consider consumer's certainty equivalent, which can be written as
                                                                                      
                                                                               -1     -1
                      m
                  CE (; µ, µ
                           ^ ) = B ()      -1
                                                × (1 - µ) + µ A()              
                                                                                           ,

where                                                         -1                 -1

                                                ^ (y -  )
                                                µ                  + (1 - µ
                                                                          ^ )y   
                     A() =  , and B () :=                     -1                      .
                                                         µ
                                                         ^A        + (1 - µ
                                                                          ^)
Case I:  < 1. Carrying out the algebra, CE m (; µ, µ
                                                   ^ ) < CE m (; µ, µ) is equivalent to
                                                                     -1                   -1
                      (1 - µ)B () + µB () -1 > µ(y -  )                   + (1 - µ)y           ,

      which can be further simplified as
                                                                          
                                                          -1
                                                          
                                  µ - µ] ×  1 -
                                 [^                            -  -1  > 0.                         (A2)
                                                     y

      For µ  ^ > µ, condition (A2) always holds. For µ
                                                     ^ < µ, condition (A2) holds for  >
      ln(y -w)-ln(y )
            ln( )
                      .


                                                A4
Case II:  > 1. It can be verified that CE m (; µ, µ
                                                  ^ ) < CE m (; µ, µ) is equivalent to
                                                                        -1                       -1
                      (1 - µ)B () + µB () -1 < µ(y -  )                      + (1 - µ)y               ,

      which can be further simplified as
                                                                             
                                                           -1
                                                           
                                 µ - µ] ×  1 -
                                [^                              -  -1  < 0.                                           (A3)
                                                       y

      For µ  ^ > µ, condition (A3) always holds. For µ     ^ < µ, condition (A3) holds for  >
      ln(y -w)-ln(y )
            ln( )
                      . This completes the proof for certainty equivalent.

   Next, we consider firm's profit. Carrying out the algebra, the monopolistic firm's profit
can be written as
                                                                                        
                     m (; µ, µ
                             ^ ) = y - µ + µ(1 -   ) - 1 × B ()                         -1
                                                                                             .

    For µ^ > µ, it is straightforward to see that the optimal contract to rational consumers is
also a feasible contract to biased consumers without violating the IR constraint. Therefore,
we must have  m (; µ, µ   ^ ) >  m (; µ, µ) for all  > 0 in this case; and it remains to prove the
result for the case µ^ < µ.
    It is useful to prove several intermediate results.

                     ^ < µ. Then  m (; µ, µ
Lemma 2 Suppose that µ                    ^ ) <  m (; µ, µ) for all   1 .

Proof. Carrying out algebra,  m (; µ, µ
                                      ^ ) <  m (; µ, µ) is equivalent to
                                                                                              
                                                                                              -
                                                                        -1                      1
                                                                        
               1-µ                          1
                                          - -      µ 1 -            y
                                                                                 + 1 - µ
                   × 1-µ ^  -1
                       ^+µ                    1
                                                  >                     -1
                                                                                                          .           (A4)
               1-µ
                 ^                                 
                                                                        
                                                                                         
                                                    ^ 1-
                                                    µ               y
                                                                                 +1-µ  ^


It suffices to show that the above inequality holds for all   1  ln(y-  w)-ln(y )
                                                                       ln( )
                                                                                  . Note that the
left-hand side of the above inequality is independent of  . For notational convenience, let us
denote the left-hand side and the right-hand side of (A4) by L (; µ, µ   ^ ) and R (,  ; µ, µ  ^)
respectively. Simple algebra yields that
                                      1
                                                                                                                   
                                     -
                                 
    ln R (,  ; µ, µ
                  ^)    1-       y                         1                                 1                     
                     =-                   ×                         -1       -                                -1
                                                                                                                    < 0,
                          y                
                                              1-µ                                1-µ^                         
                                                                                                                   
                                               µ
                                                    + 1-        y                 µ
                                                                                  ^
                                                                                        + 1-          y


                                                  A5
where the strict inequality follows from µ
                                         ^ < µ. Therefore, R (,  ; µ, µ
                                                                      ^ ) is strictly decreasing
                                                                                             -1
                                                                            1-µ^        µ
in  for   (0, y ). Recall that  is defined as                                µ
                                                                             ^
                                                                                   ×   1-µ
                                                                                                  ; together with the
assumption µ
           ^ < µ, we have  < 1 and
                                                                 
                            1  1 -    1 -  1                        w  (1 -   )y.
                                                                 y

This in turn implies that
                                                                                                      
                                                                              -1                      -1
                                                                         µ      +1-µ
                           ^ )  R , (1 -   )y ; µ, µ
                R (,  ; µ, µ                       ^ =                      - 1
                                                                                                           .     (A5)
                                                                         µ
                                                                         ^      +1-µ
                                                                                   ^

Next, we show that
                                               
                            -1                 -1
                        µ      +1-µ                      1-µ                               1
                                                                                         - -
                           - 1
                                                     <       × 1-µ ^  -1
                                                                 ^+µ                         1
                                                                                                  .              (A6)
                        µ
                        ^      +1-µ
                                  ^                      1-µ
                                                           ^

                                                     -1
                                    1-µ^        µ
Exploiting the fact that             µ
                                     ^
                                           ×   1-µ
                                                          , the above inequality can be simplified as

                                                         1                         1
                                 µ -1 + 1 - µ            -1
                                                              < (µ  + 1 - µ)  ,

which holds due to the well-known result that the general mean (power mean) function
                                1
                    n          
M () =              i=1 f i x i    is strictly increasing in  for   (-, ), holding fixed x 
(x1 , . . . , xn ) > (0, . . . , 0) and f  (f1 , . . . , fn ) > (0, . . . , 0). Therefore, the strict inequal-
ity (A6) holds.
    Combining (A5) and (A6), we can obtain that

                                                           1-µ                                 1
                                                                                             - -
              ^ )  R , (1 -   )y ; µ, µ
   R (,  ; µ, µ                       ^ <                      × 1-µ ^  -1
                                                                   ^+µ                           1
                                                                                                       L (; µ, µ
                                                                                                               ^ ).
                                                           1-µ
                                                             ^

This completes the proof.

Lemma 3 Suppose that µ    ^ < µ. Then  m (; µ, µ
                                               ^ ) is strictly decreasing in  for  < 1 , and
is strictly increasing in  for  > 1 .

Proof. Note that

        ln y - µ -  m (; µ, µ
                            ^)
                                                                         
                                                                    -1
              1-µ                                                              1
      = ln        y +    ln 1 - µ ^ 1-
                                ^+µ                                      -        ln 1 - µ ^  -1 ,
                                                                                         ^+µ
              1-µ
                ^     -1               y                                       -1


                                                          A6
and thus
                                                                        
                                                                    1
                                    m
                    ln y - µ -  (; µ, µ
                                      ^)                            
                                         = G 1 -                         - G( ),
                                                 y

where G(x) is defined as

                            1                    -1   1   ^ x-1 ln x
                                                          µ
              G(x) := -           ln 1 - ^
                                         µ + µ
                                             ^ x    +   ×             .
                          ( - 1)2                     -1 1-µ^+µ ^ x-1

Therefore, we have that
                                                                 
                                                             1
                            m
                          (; µ, µ
                                ^)                           
                                    0  G 1 -                       G( ).
                                             y

                                                 1
                                                 
Note that   1 is equivalent to   1 -           y
                                                   . Therefore, to prove the lemma, it suffices
to show that G(x) is strictly decreasing in x for x  (0, 1). Carrying out the algebra, we can
obtain that
                                                  ^ )x-2 ln x
                                           ^ (1 - µ
                                           µ
                                 G (x) =                       ,
                                           (1 - µ^+µ  ^ x-1 )2
which is clearly strictly negative. This concludes the proof.

    We are now ready to prove the proposition. Lemma 2 states that  m (; µ, µ  ^ ) <  m (; µ, µ)
for all   (0, 1 ]. Lemma 3 states that  m (; µ, µ ^ ) is strictly increasing in . Moreover, it
                      m
can be verified that  (; µ, µ) is strictly decreasing in  for all   (0, +).
                                                          -µ
    Next, note that lim    = 0 and lim  B () = y1           ^
                                                           -µ^
                                                               . Therefore,
                                                                                
                                                        -1                 -1   -1
                 m
            lim  (; µ, µ) = y - µ - lim µ(y -  )             + (1 - µ)y              = 0,
                                            


and
                                                      1-µ
                      lim  m (; µ, µ
                                   ^ ) = (y - µ ) -       (y - µ
                                                               ^  ) > 0.
                                                      1-µ
                                                        ^
It follows immediately from the above equations that lim   m (; µ, µ ^ ) > lim   m (; µ, µ).
Moreover, we have that  m (1 ; µ, µ^ ) <  m (1 ; µ, µ) by Lemma 3. These facts, together with
the monotonicity of  m (; µ, µ^ ) and  m (; µ, µ), imply instantly the existence of a unique
threshold 2  (1 , ) such that  m (; µ, µ     ^ ) <  m (; µ, µ) for  < 2 and  m (; µ, µ  ^) >
  m
 (; µ, µ) for  > 2 . This completes the proof.




                                               A7
Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. It is straightforward to see that cn /cs = 3/(2 +   ) > 1 is strictly increasing in .
Note that
                                                   1
                                 L() = 1 - f ; ,  ,
                                                   3
                                                                1
where the function f (·) is defined in Lemma 1. Recall that f ; 3 ,  follows an U-shaped
curve in  from Lemma 1. Therefore, L() follows an inverted U-shaped curve in . This
completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. The first part of Proposition 4 is obvious, and the second part follows immediately
from Lemma 1. This completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. We first prove part (i) of the proposition. By the expression of the loss function
L (,  ), it suffices to show that lim 0 F (,  ) < lim  F (,  ) = y and F                (, )
                                                                                        
                                                                                             is
negative (positive, respectively) as  becomes sufficiently small (large, respectively).
   For notational convenience, let us define Q0 ( ) as
                                                                    1-
                                                                     
                                                   1-µ
                                                     ~ µ ~
                              Q0 ( ) :=     max        ,                 .
                                                   1-µ µ

Carrying out the algebra, it can be verified that

                                     1-                        0 if µ
                                                                    ~ < µ,
                       lim R()            = lim R() =
                          0                   0                 if µ~ > µ,

which in turn implies that
                                                   1
                                                        1-
                                                         
                                                           

                                            1-    1-                                   1-
                    1-µ
                      ~+µ ~ R()                                              1-µ
                                                                               ~ µ ~
                                                                                        

  lim Q(,  ) = lim                                             =    max          ,           Q0 ( ),
   0            0     1 - µ + µR()                                           1-µ µ


and                                                             1
                                                          1-   1-
                                     1 - µ + µ R()
                              lim                                   = 1.
                                 0        1 - µ + µR()


                                                  A8
Therefore, we have that

                             y
   lim F (,  ) =
      0            1 -  +  lim   0   Q(,  )
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                        1
                                                                                            1-  1- 
                                                                                 1-    1-
                      
                                                   1-        1 - µ + µ R()                   
                    × (1 -  ) +  lim Q(,  )              lim
                                                                                             
                                  0                      0       1 - µ + µR()                  

                                                                  1
                         y                                  1-   1-
              =                  × (1 -  ) +  Q0 ( )                  < y.
                   1 -  + Q0 ( )

Next, note that
                                                                  1
                                                                 -
                                                  µ    1-µ~
                           lim R() = lim             ×                = 1.
                                                 1-µ    µ
                                                        ~
It follows immediately that
                                                                    1
                                                                         1-
                                                                          
                                                                            

                                                              1-   1-
                                     1-µ
                                       ~+µ ~ R()                        
                    lim Q(, ) = lim                                            = 1.
                                       1 - µ + µR()                     


Therefore, we have that

                             y
lim F (,  ) =
                   1 -  +  lim       Q(, )
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                             1
                                                                                                 1-  1- 
                                                                                      1-    1-
                     
                                                   1-          1 - µ + µ R()                      
                   × (1 -  ) +  lim Q(, )               × lim 
                                                                                                  
                                                                   1 - µ + µR()                     

                     y                         1
              =        × (1 -  ) +            1-
                                                   = y.
                   1-+

     Note that F (,  ) < y for all  > 0 when µ   ~ = µ, we must have that F     (, )
                                                                                
                                                                                     is positive
                                                                         F (, )
as  becomes sufficiently large. Therefore, it remains to show that  is negative as
 becomes sufficiently small; it suffices to show that  ln F   
                                                                (, )
                                                                     is negative as  becomes
sufficiently small.
     With slight abuse of notation, we follow the notation in Section 2.1 and denote 1-µ
                                                                                         µ    µ
                                                                                              ~
                                                                                           × 1- µ
                                                                                                ~




                                                   A9
by  . Define q () and () as follows:
                                                                 1                                   1
                                                          1-    1-                          1-      1-
                               1-µ
                                 ~+µ
                                   ~ R()                                   1-µ
                                                                             ~+µ
                                                                               ~             

                 q () :=                                             =                          1        ,                (A7)
                                      1 - µ + µR()                             1 - µ + µ 
                                                                 1                                   1
                                                          1-    1-                          1-      1-
                               1 - µ + µ R()                               1 - µ + µ         

                  () :=                                              =                          1        .                (A8)
                                      1 - µ + µR()                             1 - µ + µ 

It follows immediately from the previous analysis that

                                                 1-µ
                                                   ~ µ ~
                   lim q () = max                    ,          =: q0 , and lim () = 1,
                        0                        1-µ µ                              0


which in turn implies that

    q ()                   ln q ()
lim      = lim q () × lim
   0        0          0    
                                                                                            1                             1
                      1                  1
                                           -1      1      ~   -1 ln 
                                                          µ             1 µ  ln 
            =q0 lim      2
                           ln 1 - µ
                                  ~ + ~
                                      µ       - 2                   1 +            1 ,
                 0 (1 - )                        (1 - ) 1 - µ
                                                            ~+µ ~   -1 2 1 - µ + µ 
                                                                              (A9)

and
     ()                 ln ()
lim     = lim () × lim
   0       0        0    
                                                                                        1                             1
                    1                 1
                                        -1      1      µ  -1 ln     1 µ  ln 
            = lim      2
                         ln 1 - µ + µ      -                    1 +            1 .
               0 (1 - )                       (1 - ) 1 - µ + µ  -1 2 1 - µ + µ 
                                             2

                                                                           (A10)

The partial derivative of ln F (,  ) with respect to  can be rewritten as

        ln F (,  )
           
                                                 (1- )2                                                (1- )2
                                 -                         ()                  1- (1- )2                      -1   q ()
         1     (1 -  ) ()                 q ()      
                                                          
                                                                +         ()        
                                                                                                q ()      
                                                                                                                   
      =                                                                          (1- )2
        1-                                                           1-
                                           1-+                 ()         q ()      

                        1
                          -2
             1-
              
                
                 q ()          q ()
                               
        -                       1-    .
            1 -  +  q ()         




We consider the following two cases depending on  relative to one.



                                                          A10
Case I:  < 1. Note that                                     1
                                   
                                      = o(1), for    0.
                                   2
    The above equation, together with (A9) and (A10), implies that

                                                            q ()
                                                      lim        = q0 ln(1 - µ
                                                                             ~ ),
                                                           0 


    and
                                                              ()
                                                        lim      = ln(1 - µ).
                                                            0 

                                                                                   -µ
                                             ~ < µ, which implies that q0 = max{ 1
    Further, note that  < 1 is equivalent to µ                                      ~ µ
                                                                                 1-µ µ
                                                                                      , ~} =
    1-µ
      ~
    1-µ
        . Therefore, we have that

          ln F (,  )
        lim
       0     
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                     (1- )2                                                      (1- )2
                                                 -                             ()                     1- (1- )2                         -1   q ()
                (1 -  ) ()                              q ()                           +         ()                       q ()
                                                                                                                                    
       1                                                                                                                                      
    =     lim                                                                                               (1- )2
      1-  0
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                            1-
                                                            1-+                    ()             q ()         


                                         1
                                                     
                                           -2
                      1-
                       
                         
                          q ()                  q ()
                                                 
        - lim                                   1-
              0
                     1 -  +  q ()                


                                (1- )2                                        (1- )2                                  1-
                                                                      )2
       1  (1 -  )q0
                                   
                                          ln(1 - µ) +            (1-
                                                                   
                                                                         q0      
                                                                                       ln(1 - µ
                                                                                              ~)             1-
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                 q0  ln(1 - µ
                                                                                                                            ~)
    =                                                            (1- )2
                                                                                                        -                        1-
      1-
                                            1 -  + q0               
                                                                                                                1 -  + q0 
                                                                                                                         
                  (1- )2                                                               (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                          
              q0                             1-                                 q0                               q0 
    =                            ln(1 - µ) +   ×                                                      -                           ln(1 - µ
                                                                                                                                         ~)
                                                                                                                                 
                       (1- )2                                                                (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                                                             
        1 -  + q0         
                                                                          1 -  + q0             
                                                                                                            1 -  + q0
                                                                                                                                 
                  (1- )2                                                               (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                                                       
              q0                                      1-                        q0                               q0
    =                            ln(1 - µ) +            ×                                             -                           ln(1 - µ) + ln q0
                                                                                                                                 
                       (1- )2                                                                (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                                                             
        1 -  + q0         
                                                                          1 -  + q0             
                                                                                                            1 -  + q0
                            (1- )2                                        1-                                         1-
                               
      1                    q0                        1 -  + q0                                                q0 
    =   ×                            (1- )2
                                                ×                1-            -(1 -  ) ×                                 1-   × ln(1 - µ)
                                                                                                                           
                     1 -  + q0          
                                                                q0                                    1 -  + q0                       <0
        >0
                                            M( )                                                                >0

                                           (1- )2                             1-
                                              
          1-                         q0                                   q0 
        +    ×                                   (1- )2
                                                            -                          1-       × ln q0 .
                                                                                        
                            1 -  + q0               
                                                                  1 -  + q0                        >0
           0 if   1
                                                      0 if   1




                                                                     A11
    Evidently, M( ) > 1 -  for   1. For  < 1, it is straightforward to verify that

                                                    1-                             (1- )2
                   d log M( )                    q0  
                                                           -1                    q0   
                                                                                            -1
                              =                                    1-   -                   (1- )2
                        d                                           
                                             1 -  + q0                      1 -  + q0          


                                                                    1-           (1- )2
                                                                                    
                                                                   q0     - q0
                                         =                           1-                      (1- )2
                                                                                                       > 0.
                                                                                                
                                              1 -  + q0                         1 -  + q0

                                                                                                      -(1- )
    Therefore, M( ) is strictly increasing in  . Note that M(0) = q0                                           and M(1) =
    1 > 1 -  . Define  as

                                                                                             -(1- )
                         0,                                  if q0     1 - ,
              :=
                         the unique solution to M( ) = 1 - , otherwise.

                                                                                                                ln F (, )
    It follows immediately that M( )-(1- ) > 0 for  >  , and thus lim                                     0        
                                                                                                                            < 0.

Case II:  > 1. Note that
                     1                       1                              1
                 ~   -1
                 µ                       µ  -1                          µ 
                           1
                             -1
                                  ,                     1
                                                          -1
                                                               ,                   1   = 1 + o(2 ), for           0,
            1-µ ~
              ~+µ                     1 - µ + µ                    1 - µ + µ       


                                                    1
    where the equality follows from  -  = o(2 ) for                                    0.
    Moreover,

                              1                1      ln 
                  lim            2
                                   ln 1 - µ ~   -1 =
                                          ~+µ               + ln µ
                                                                 ~ + o(1).
                         0 (1 - )                    (1 - )

    The above equation, together with (A9) and (A10), implies that

                                                        q ()
                                                 lim         = q0 ln µ
                                                                     ~,
                                                       0 


    and
                                                           ()
                                                    lim       = ln µ.
                                                         0 

                                                                                   -µ
                                             ~ > µ, which implies that q0 = max{ 1
    Further, note that  > 1 is equivalent to µ                                      ~ µ
                                                                                 1-µ µ
                                                                                      , ~} =




                                                          A12
      µ
      ~
      µ
        .   Therefore, we have that

           ln F (,  )
            lim
        0     
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                   (1- )2                                                    (1- )2
                                                     -                       ()                     1- (1- )2                       -1   q ()
                 (1 -  ) ()                                 q ()                     +         ()                     q ()
                                                                                                                                
        1                                                                                                                                 
     =     lim                                                                                          (1- )2
       1-  0
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                          1-
                                                              1-+                 ()           q ()        


                                             1
                                                         
                                               -2
                        1-
                         
                           
                                q ()                q ()
                                                     
            - lim                                   1-
                  0
                         1 -  +  q ()                


                                    (1- )2                         (1- )2                       1-
                                                              )2
        1  (1 -  )q0
                                       
                                              ln µ +     (1-
                                                           
                                                                 q0   
                                                                            ln µ
                                                                               ~           1-
                                                                                            
                                                                                              
                                                                                               q0  ln µ
                                                                                                      ~
     =                                                   (1- )2
                                                                                     -                   1-
       1-
                                      1 -  + q0             
                                                                                         1 -  + q0 
                                                                                                                      
                      (1- )2                                                (1- )2                          1-
                                                                                                             
                  q0                                1-                 q0                            q0
     =                               ln µ +           ×                                    -                           ln µ
                                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                                      
                           (1- )2                                                 (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                                                  
         1 -  + q0            
                                                                  1 -  + q0          
                                                                                               1 -  + q0
                                                                                                                      
                      (1- )2                                                (1- )2                          1-
                                                                                                             
                  q0                                1-                 q0                            q0
     =                               ln µ +           ×                                    -                           × ln µ + ln q0
                                                                                                                      
                           (1- )2                                                 (1- )2                         1-
                                                                                                                  
         1 -  + q0            
                                                                  1 -  + q0          
                                                                                               1 -  + q0
                                (1- )2                                 1-                                        1-
                                   
       1                       q0                        1 -  + q0                                          q0 
     =   ×                               (1- )2
                                                    ×             1-          -(1 -  ) ×                              1-   × ln µ
                                                                                                                       
                         1 -  + q0          
                                                              q0                                    1 -  + q0                  <0
            >0
                                                M( )                                                          >0

                                               (1- )2                        1-
                                                  
              1-                         q0                            q0 
            +    ×                                   (1- )2
                                                              -                      1-     × ln q0 .
                                                                                      
                                1 -  + q0               
                                                                   1 -  + q0                    >0
               0 if   1
                                                          0 if   1


                                                                                                             ln F (, )
     By the same argument as in Case I, we can show that lim                                            0       
                                                                                                                           < 0 for  >  .
     This concludes the proof of part (i) of the proposition.


     Next, we prove part (ii). Again, by the expression of L( ,  ), it suffices to show that
lim  F (,  ) < lim 0 F (,  ) < lim1 F (, 1) < y and F            (, )
                                                                      is negative as  becomes
sufficiently small or sufficiently large. A closer look at the expression of q () and () in
Equations (A7) and (A8) yields that

                                                     q () > 1, and () < 1.



                                                                     A13
Therefore, we have that
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                  1-
                                           y                                                            (1- )2
                                                                                        1-
         lim F (,  ) = lim                      1-   × (1 -  ) +                  ()             q ()      
           0              0
                              1 -  +  q ()       

                                                                                        1
                                                                                       1-
                                   y                                     (1- )2
                                                           1-
                     = lim              1-     ×     ()          q ()       
                          0
                               q ()      



                     = ()y,

and
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                  1-
                                           y                                                             (1- )2
                                                                                            1-
      lim F (,  ) = lim                  1- ×   (1 -  ) +                          ()            q ()       
                          
                           1 -  +  q () 
                              y            ()
                     =              -1 ×      .
                       1 -  +  q ()      q ()

Because q () > 1 and 0 <  < 1, we have that

                                                       -1                -1
                                       1 -  +  q ()          > q ()           ,

which in turn implies that
                                        lim F (,  ) < lim F (,  ).
                                                             0

Next, note that
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                  1-
                                           y                                                            (1- )2
                                                                                        1-
         lim F (,  ) = lim                      1-   × (1 -  ) +                  ()             q ()      
       1                1
                              1 -  +  q ()       

                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1-
                                                                    (1- )2
                                                     1-
                     = y lim (1 -  ) +          ()           q ()      
                           1

                               
                     = ()         y.

Therefore, we have that

                                                                         
               lim F (,  ) < lim F (, 1) =          () y <          ()       y = lim F (,  ) < y.
                                   0                                                1


Next, we show that F     (, )
                              is negative as  becomes sufficiently small or sufficiently large.
It is equivalent to show that ln F (,  ) is strictly increasing in  when  is sufficiently small


                                                     A14
or sufficiently large. Carrying out the algebra, we have that

      ln F (,  )      1                                                          (1- )2
                                                                 1-
                 =          ln 1 -  +                     ()              q ()      

                   (1 -  )2
                                                            (1- )2
                                               1-                                                 1
                                       ()            q ()      
                                                                          - ln () + 1 -           2
                                                                                                       ln q ()
                           1
                        +                                                                    (1- )2
                          1-                                                     1-
                                                     1-+                  ()          q ()      

                                    1-
                                           1
                             q ()    
                                           2
                                               ln q ()
                        +                            1-     .                                                    (A11)
                             1 -  +  q ()             




We consider the following two cases.

Case I:       0. In this case, we have that

                                                                 (1- )2
                                                1-
                                         ()           q ()          

                                                                       (1- )2
                                                                                 = 1 + o( 2 ),                   (A12)
                                                      1-
                               1-+              ()              q ()      




     and                                                  1-
                                             q ()          

                                                                 1-    = 1 + o( 2 ).                             (A13)
                                       1 -  +  q ()               



     Moreover, when            0, we have that

                               1-
                                            (1- )2              (1 -  )2
      ln 1 -  +          ()         q ()       
                                                       = ln  +(1- ) ln () +
                                                                         ln q () +o(1).
                                                                   
                                                                                 (A14)
     Combining (A11), (A12), (A13), and (A14), we can obtain that

       ln F (,  )      1                             (1 -  )2
                  =          ln  + (1 -  ) ln (  ) +          ln q () + o(1)
                    (1 -  )2                            
                             1               1                                                        1
                        +      - ln () + 1 - 2                            ln q () + o(1) +              ln q () + o(1)
                            1-                                                                        2
                           1
                    =            ln  + o(1).
                        (1 -  )2

                   ln F (, )
     Therefore,       
                               < 0 when  is sufficiently small.




                                                       A15
Case II:     . In this case, we have that

                                                          (1- )2
                                            1-
                                      ()           q ()      

                                                               (1- )2
                                                                        = 1 + o( -5 ).               (A15)
                                                   1-
                              1-+           ()          q ()      




    Because q () > 1 and lim  1-
                               
                                 
                                  = -1, we have that

                                          1-
                                                                         -1
                                 q ()      
                                                                q ()
                                               1-   =                         -1   + o(1).           (A16)
                         1 -  +  q ()                     1 -  +  q ()

    Similarly, we can obtain that

                              1-
                                          (1- )2                                    (1 -  )2
    ln 1 -  +          ()          q ()      
                                                    = ln  +(1- ) ln () +                     ln q () +o(1).
                                                                                       
                                                                                                     (A17)
    Combining (A11), (A15), (A16), and (A17), we have that

         ln F (,  )      1                               (1 -  )2
                    =          × ln  + (1 -  ) ln (  ) +          ln q () + o(1)
                      (1 -  )2                              
                               1                       1
                           +        × - ln () + 1 - 2 ln q () + o  -5
                             1-                        
                                                                
                                                    -1
                             ln q ()           q ()
                           +      2
                                      ×                -1 + o(1)
                                                                
                                          1 -  +  q ()
                           ln  ln q ()        1-
                       =      -        ×                                 -1   + o  -2 .
                            2     2      1 -  +  q ()

                  ln F (, )
    Therefore,       
                              < 0 when  is sufficiently large. This concludes the proof.




                                                    A16
Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. The monotonicity of c            
                               1 (, 1)/c1 (, 0) is obvious, and it remains to prove the mono-
tonicity of L(, 1) for extreme values of . Define D() as

           D() : = ln CE  (, 1) - ln CE  (, 0)
                    = - ln 2 + ln (1 + ) + (1 + )
                                              1 1      -1     1 1
                     +      ×        ln        + (1 - )  - ln  + (1 + )-1                 .
                         -1                   2 2             2 2

It is equivalent to show that D () > 0 as  becomes sufficiently small, and D () < 0 as 
becomes sufficiently large. Carrying out the algebra, we have that

                (1 + ) ln(1 + )
       D () =
                (1 + ) + (1 + )
                      1                      1 1      -1     1 1
                -           ×       ln        + (1 - )  - ln  + (1 + )-1
                    ( - 1)2                  2 2             2 2
                                             -1
                   1    1
                        2
                          (1 - )  ln(1 - )    12
                                                 (1 + )-1 ln(1 + )
                +                          -                       .                           (A18)
                  ( - 1) 1 + 1 (1 - ) -
                                        1
                                             -1 1  2
                                                      1
                                                     +2 (1 + )-1
                                2        2

Case I:       0. It can be verified that the following equations hold as             0:

                                (1 + ) ln(1 + )   ln(1 + )
                                               
                                                =          + o(1),                             (A19)
                                (1 + ) + (1 + )     2+

           1 1      -1     1 1           -1                                          2+
      ln    + (1 - )  - ln  + (1 + )-1 =    ln(1 - ) - ln                                     + o(1),
           2 2             2 2                                                       1+
                                                                                               (A20)
                                              -1
                             1
                             2
                               (1 - )  ln(1 -          )
                                            -1             = ln(1 - ) + o(),                   (A21)
                                 1  1
                                 2
                                   +2 (1 - ) 
     and
                           1
                           2
                             (1 + )-1 ln(1 +       )        1
                               1                       =      ln(1 + ) + o(1).                 (A22)
                               2
                                 +1
                                  2
                                    (1 + )-1               2+
     Combining (A18), (A19), (A20), (A21), and (A22), we obtain that

                                 1 ln(1 + )     1                   2+
                       D () =               +         ln                   + o(1).
                                1- 2+         ( - 1)2               1+

     Clearly, D () > 0 as  becomes sufficiently small.



                                                   A17
Case II:       . Similarly, we can obtain the following equations as                  :

                            (1 + ) ln(1 + )
                                            = ln(1 + ) + o -2 ,                           (A23)
                            (1 + ) + (1 + )

           1 1      -1          1 1
      ln    + (1 - )  - ln         + (1 + )-1 = ln(2 - ) - ( - 1) ln(1 + ) + o(1),
           2 2                  2 2
                                                                            (A24)
                                -1
                     1
                     2
                       (1 - )  ln(1 - )     1-
                                     -1   =      ln(1 - ) + o(1),           (A25)
                         1
                           + 1 (1 - )       2-
                            2   2

     and
                          1
                            (1 + )-1 ln(1 +      )
                          2
                              1                       = ln(1 + ) + o -2 .                 (A26)
                              2
                                +1
                                 2
                                   (1 + )-1
     Combining (A18), (A23), (A24), (A25), and (A26), we obtain that

                            1                  1     1-
               D () = -           ln(2 -  ) +             ln(1 - ) + o -2 .
                          ( - 1)2             ( - 1) 2 - 

     Clearly, D () < 0 as  becomes sufficiently large. This concludes the proof.




Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. The first part of the proposition is obvious:  (; ) <  (; 0) follows immediately
from the facts that  T /  > 0 and  / T < 0; and the optimal investment decision in the
limit follows from lim 0 T () = 1 and lim  T () = 0.
   Now we prove the second part. For notational convenience, define

                                   (Ru - 1)       1 - (1 - )
                           :=                   ×            .
                                (1 - )(1 - Rd )      1 + 

Note that  <  implies instantly that  > 1. Moreover, the investor's certainty equivalent
can be rewritten as:
                                 (Ru - Rd )y                                 
               CE  (; ) =                         ×  -1 + (1 - )             -1
                                                                                  .
                            (Ru - 1) + (1 - Rd ) 

Carrying out the algebra, we have that

                                                                  1
                                                                       
                 lim CE  (; ) = y × lim           -1 + (1 - )     -1
                                                                          = y,
                    0                       0




                                                A18
and
                                                                
                                         -1 + (1 - ) -1       Ru - Rd
       lim CE  (; ) = (Ru - Rd )y × lim                    
                                                            =         y.
                                      (Ru - 1) + (1 - Rd )    1 - Rd

Therefore, lim   0   L(; ) = lim      L(; ) = 0. This completes the proof.




                                             A19
