                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           HOW DO MASS SHOOTINGS AFFECT COMMUNITY WELLBEING?

                                          Aparna Soni
                                          Erdal Tekin

                                      Working Paper 28122
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28122


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




The authors thank Analisa Packham and seminar participants at the Provost's Distinguished
Lecture Series at American University for comments and suggestions. Kathryn Johnson, Colleen
Mattingly, and Alexandra Rakus provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Aparna Soni and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Do Mass Shootings Affect Community Wellbeing?
Aparna Soni and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 28122
November 2020
JEL No. I1,I12,I18,I31,K4

                                         ABSTRACT

Over the past four decades, more than 2,300 people have been the victims of mass shootings
involving a firearm in the United States. Research shows that mass shootings have significant
detrimental effects on the direct victims and their families. However, relatively little is known
about the extent to which the impacts of these tragedies are transmitted into communities where
they occur, and how they influence people beyond those directly affected. This study uses
nationally representative data from the Gallup-Healthways survey to assess the spillover effects
of mass shootings on community wellbeing and emotional health outcomes that capture
community satisfaction, sense of safety, and levels of stress and worry. We leverage differences
in the timing of mass shooting events across counties between 2008 and 2017. We find that mass
shootings reduce both community wellbeing and emotional health. According to our results, a
mass shooting is associated with a 27 percentage point decline in the likelihood of having
excellent community wellbeing and a 13 percentage point decline in the likelihood of having
excellent emotional health four weeks following the incident. The effects are stronger and longer
lasting among individuals exposed to deadlier mass shootings. Furthermore, the reductions in
wellbeing are greater for parents with children below age 18. Our findings suggest that mass
shootings have significant societal costs and create negative spillover effects that extend beyond
those immediately exposed.


Aparna Soni
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Ave NW
Washington, DC 20016
asoni@american.edu

Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu
1. Introduction

        The United States is experiencing a gun violence epidemic. A particularly tragic aspect of

this epidemic is the incidents of mass shootings occurring in communities throughout the

country. Although there is no universally accepted or official definition of mass shooting, the

general criteria used to categorize an event as a mass shooting incident is the murder of four or

more people (not including the shooter) with a firearm in a single incident that is not related to

more conventionally motivated crimes such as armed robbery, gang shootings, or drug violence. 1

Despite the lack of an official definition, the general perception is that the frequency of high-

fatality indiscriminate killings in public has risen significantly in recent years (Agnich, 2014;

Lowe & Galea, 2015, 2017; Webster, 2017; Lin et al., 2018). 2 Moreover, the coverage of mass

shootings in the media has increased substantially over time, which has then led to a greater

public awareness of these tragic events (Roeder, 2016; Jetter & Walker, 2018).3 Recent evidence

shows that mass shootings also evoke high policy interest, despite the fact that they account for

less than one percent of firearm deaths annually in the United States (Luca et al., 2020). 4



1
  This definition is consistent with those in two recent reports produced by the Congressional Research Services
(Bagalman et al., 2013; Krouse & Richardson, 2015) and a classification report commissioned by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (Morton & Hilts, 2008).
2
  Given the differing opinions on what constitutes a mass shooting and the period over which to observe trends,
there is a disagreement about whether the frequency of mass shootings has risen or remained steady. For example,
focusing on a period between 2006 and 2019 and relying a database compiled by USA Today, Ferguson (2019)
argues that the frequency of mass shooting incidents has not increased. Similarly, Fox & DeLateur (2014) conduct a
visual inspection of the mass murders between 1976 and 2011 compiled from the FBI's Supplementary Homicide
Reporting (SHR) and conclude that the number remained stable over that period. However, it is important to note
that both these studies rely on a more comprehensive definition of mass shooting that does not distinguish between
public and non-public venues and includes mass shootings related to gang activity, domestic violence, and drug
deals. Some argue that mass shootings that stem from domestic violence, gang activity, organized crime, or drug
deals are contextually distinct from indiscriminate killings in public venues, and therefore should be classified
separately (e.g., Duwe et al., 2002; Gius, 2015). More restrictive definitions (e.g., Mother Jones) that focus on
higher-profile events motivated by mass murder in public venues point to a clear upward trend in recent years.
3
  According to LexisNexis, the number of news stories mentioning "mass murder" has increased from a little over
1,000 to almost 38,000 annually between 2010 and 2019.
4
  Luca et al. (2020) show that a single mass shooting leads to a 15 percent increase in the number of firearm bills
introduced within a state in the year after a mass shooting. Furthermore, the political party controlling the state
legislature appears to matter. Republican-controlled legislatures pass significantly more laws loosening gun

                                                             3
         Despite the attention that mass shootings galvanize in the public, the media, and among

policymakers, rigorous investigations of their health effects on survivors and their communities

have been limited. 5 There is particularly little research on whether mass shootings have an

impact on the mental health of indirectly exposed individuals, such as those who are not direct

witnesses, but live within the communities where these shootings occur. While the direct victims

and their families arguably suffer the most serious consequences of mass shootings, and

accordingly receive the most attention, the overall effects may be more pervasive and extend far

beyond those directly exposed, resulting in adverse consequences on community wellbeing.

Given the enormous societal costs associated with poor mental and emotional health, it is

therefore critical to understand the effects of mass shootings on emotional wellbeing of

populations in order to assess the overall welfare consequences. 6 Evidence that these incidents

indeed have negative spillovers that extend beyond those immediately exposed could influence

the costs and benefits of policies to prevent or reduce the harmful consequences of mass

shootings. Relatedly, asking which groups of populations would suffer the worst repercussions

in terms of community and emotional wellbeing could have important implications for the

optimal targeting of public resources following incidents of mass shootings.

         In this paper, we examine the effects of mass shootings on the community and emotional

wellbeing of American adults, using data from the restricted-access Gallup-Healthways survey




restrictions, while Democrat-controlled legislature do the opposite, but the effect for Democrat-controlled
legislatures is insignificant.
5
  The urgent need for additional research on the health effects of mass shootings has also been articulated in recent
studies across disciplines (e.g. Iancu et al., 2019; Rowhani-Rahbar, Bellenger, & Rivara, 2019; Travers, McDonagh,
& Elkit, 2018).
6
  Mental disorders top the list of the most costly health conditions by a substantial margin, with spending at
$201 billion annually (Roehrig, 2016).


                                                              4
between 2008 and 2017. To our knowledge, our analysis represents the first nationwide

investigation of the impact of mass shootings on emotional health of people living in

communities where these tragedies occur. Our primary source of data on mass shootings is

Mother Jones, an investigative news organization that maintains an open-source database

documenting high-profile, indiscriminate rampages in public places resulting in four or more

victims killed by the attacker. 7

        We identify the causal effects of mass shootings by exploiting the county-specific

variation in exposure to such events over time using a difference-in-differences research design.

Our identification strategy is based on the premise that, conditional on residing in a county that

experiences a mass shooting, whether the incident of the shooting occurs during the weeks

before or after an individual is interviewed by Gallup is as good as random. Specifically, we

compare the community and emotional wellbeing of individuals who are interviewed by Gallup

right after a mass shooting with those who are interviewed right before in counties where

shootings occur relative to other counties. We control for month-by-year and county fixed effects

in all specifications, thereby separating out the impacts of the mass shootings from other existing

trends in wellbeing.

        Our paper contributes to a growing literature on the effects of mass shootings on

individual and community health. Two notable and recent examples are Rossin-Slater et al.

(2019) and Dursun (2019) who study the impact of mass fatal shootings on health outcomes.

Rossin-Slater et al. (2020) examine the impact of fatal school shootings on the mental health of

local youth, as measured by the use of prescription antidepressants. They find that local exposure




7
 The Mother Jones database excludes shootings stemming from more conventionally motivated crimes such as
armed robbery or gang violence.

                                                          5
to school shootings increases youth antidepressant use by about 21 percent in the following two

years. Dursun (2019) studies the impact of in utero exposure to mass shootings on infant health

and shows that women who experienced a mass shooting in their county during pregnancy are

more likely to have very low birthweight and very premature babies. These studies are relevant

for our analysis not only because they consider health impacts of mass gun violence, but also

because they use an identification strategy similar to ours.

        In addition to the economic studies mentioned above, there is a sizeable literature in

epidemiology, psychiatry, and psychology that studies the mental health impacts of mass

shootings. Many studies in this literature suggest a negative association between exposure to

mass shootings and psychological health, as measured by posttraumatic stress symptoms,

depression, anxiety, fear, and decline in perceived safety. 8 However, these are typically case

studies that consider single events and suffer from several methodological limitations, such as

reliance on small samples, lack of control groups or pre-shooting data, and challenges to

generalizability from decades-old single events. Selective response bias is another important

problem in some of these studies, as individuals who come forward to share their feelings in the

aftermath of shootings are unlikely to reflect the sentiments of the entire community.

        Our results provide consistent evidence that mass shootings have adverse effects on the

emotional and community wellbeing of American adults. Specifically, we find that a mass

shooting reduces the probability of having excellent community wellbeing by 27 percentage

points and the probability of having excellent emotional health by 13 percentage points four




8
  For example, one widely cited study interviewed 135 survivors after a mass shooting and found that 20 percent of
the men and 36 percent of the women met criteria for PTSD (North et al., 1994). However, this study suffers from
limitations such as small sample size and the lack of a control group. See Shultz et al. (2014) and Lowe & Galea
(2017) for reviews of this literature.

                                                             6
weeks following the incident. Furthermore, the effects are stronger and longer lasting for those

exposed to mass shootings with more victims (e.g. for those exposed to shootings with 10 or

more victims). Our results are robust to alternative definitions of mass shootings and are not

driven by any particular subset of shootings.

        The rest of this paper is laid out as follows. We discuss the data in Section 2 and describe

the estimation strategy in Section 3. The results are presented in Section 4, and Section 5

concludes the paper with a summary of the overall findings and a discussion of the implications.



2. Data

Mass Shooting Data

        Our list of mass shooting events comes from Mother Jones, an investigative news

organization that maintains an open-source database of mass shootings (Follman et al., 2020). 9

According to the criteria used by Mother Jones, an incident is defined as a mass shooting if the

perpetrator took the lives of at least four people, excluding himself or herself, the shooting

occurred using a firearm in a public place, and it was not related to gang activity, armed robbery,

or domestic violence. 10 Based on these criteria, Mother Jones identified 47 mass shootings that

had occurred between 2008 and 2017, in which a total of 426 individuals were killed and 898

individuals were wounded. 11 The Mother Jones's definition is consistent with the FBI's

classification of mass murder (Morton & Hilts, 2008) and two recent reports produced by the



9
  Mother Jones (https://www.motherjones.com) provides news, commentary, and investigative reporting on topics
including politics, the environment, human rights, health, and culture and has a readership of more than 10 million
people each month.
10
   Since January 2013, Mother Jones included mass shootings that took the lives of at least three people, excluding
the perpetrator. Four of the 47 mass shootings used in our analysis have only three victims, but our results do not
change when we restrict the list of shootings to those with at least four victims.
11
   There are four counties that had multiple mass shootings over our study period between 2008 and 2017. Treatment
assignment for these counties was made based on the first shooting.

                                                             7
Congressional Research Services (Bagalman et al., 2013; Krouse & Richardson, 2015). The

Mother Jones database is commonly used by researchers studying questions related to mass

shootings (e.g., DiMaggio et al., 2019; Gius, 2015; Lin et al., 2018; Pappa et al., 2019; Porfiri et

al., 2019; Wallace, 2015).

       Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of mass shootings across counties in the U.S. As

shown in the figure, mass shootings are fairly sporadically distributed, with 26 states having at

least one mass shooting between 2008 and 2017. Figure 2 shows the number of mass shootings

over time along with a list of states where the incidents occur in each year. It is clear from the

figure that the number of mass shootings has trended upward over time, increasing from three

mass shootings in 2008 to eleven incidents in 2017. Furthermore, California has the highest

number of mass shootings with nine incidents during the analysis period, followed by four

incidents in Washington, and three shootings each in Colorado, Florida, and Texas.

       It is important to note that there are databases compiled by other news and research

organizations tracking mass shootings (e.g., USA Today, Gun Violence Archive, and Stanford

University's Mass Shootings in America database). These databases have larger counts of mass

shooting as they are based on different criteria, such as inclusion of incidents with non-firearm

weapons, victim counts including those either killed or wounded, shootings that occur in non-

public venues, and inclusion of more conventionally motivated crimes. While these larger

listings are useful for investigating the broader problem of violence, we believe our definition of

random, nonsensical, and indiscriminate shootings captured by Mother Jones is best suited for




                                                      8
the purposes of our study, since it is exactly these characteristics that we argue are the source of

community-wide mental health repercussions. 12

         In sensitivity analyses, we estimate our models using the USA Today database. Our

results are robust to using this alternative measure. We did not perform sensitivity analyses with

the Gun Violence Archive (GVA) and Stanford's Mass Shootings in America (MSA) databases

because the data collection started in 2014 for GVA and in 2012 for the MSA database.

Furthermore, GVA differs from other datasets in that gang- and drug-related incidents are

included. The MSA database relies solely on online media sources to identify mass shooting

events, The records in the MSA span a time period that includes the transition from traditional

media to digital media in reporting, and therefore, the numbers of incidents per year partially

reflect the collection methodology and not just changes in incident frequency. For example, the

more than threefold rise in mass shooting incidents from 2014 to 2015 shown in the Stanford

data likely reflects increased online reporting and not necessarily a true increase in the frequency

of mass shootings (Smart, 2018).



Data on Community and Emotional Wellbeing

         The data on community and emotional wellbeing come from the restricted-access Gallup-

Healthways survey (Gallup hereafter). The daily poll covers all 50 states and Washington D.C.

and surveys more than 500 American adults on their perceptions of their own physical and

mental health (e.g. health conditions, self-assessed health, and experiences of stress, worry, and

joy), financial wellbeing, social relationships (e.g. having supportive relationships), and




12
   Taking a conservative approach also ensures that, if anything, our results would be a lower bound of the true
effect of mass shootings on community and emotional wellbeing.

                                                              9
community wellbeing (e.g. liking where they live, feeling safe, and having pride in the

community). Gallup data have been used in past research to study the effects of public policies

on social, mental, and physical wellbeing (e.g., Flavin, 2018; Sommers et al., 2015). 13

Importantly for our analysis, the restricted-access micro data provide the exact date of the

interview and respondents' county of residence, which allows us to identify respondents who

were exposed to a mass shooting in their community. The data also contain rich demographic

information, including respondents' age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, and

educational attainment. Gallup weights the data daily to mitigate potential selection and

nonresponse bias. With the use of sampling weights, the data are nationally representative.

         We use the Gallup data to construct eight main outcome variables of interest ­ three

measures of community wellbeing (community wellbeing index, an indicator for excellent

community wellbeing, and an indicator for poor community wellbeing), three measures of

emotional wellbeing (emotional wellbeing index, an indicator for excellent emotional health, and

an indicator for poor emotional health), an indicator for overall excellent community and

emotional wellbeing, and an indicator for overall poor community and emotional wellbeing.

         We identify four questions in the Gallup related to community wellbeing. Specifically,

respondents are asked to report on a scale from 1 to 5 how strongly they agree with the following

statements: 1) I am proud of my community or the area where I live; 2) I always feel safe and

secure; 3) The city or area where I live is a perfect place for me; and 4) I am satisfied with the




13
   Although the data in Gallup are self-reported, studies have shown that self-reported measures of wellbeing are
strongly suggestive of actual wellbeing. For example, those who report higher levels of satisfaction are also more
likely to laugh, smile, and demonstrate other behavioral characteristics indicative of happiness (Watson & Clark,
1991; Myers, 1993; Myers & Diener, 1995). Self-reported measures of wellbeing also correlate strongly with
assessments from peers, friends, family, and professional clinicians (Myers & Diener, 1995).

                                                             10
city or area where I live. 14 For each of these four questions, we create indicator variables equal to

1 for those who responded "agree" (4 on the 1 to 5 scale) or "strongly agree" (5) and equal to 0

for those who responded "neither agree nor disagree" (3), "disagree" (2), or "strongly disagree"

(1). We then construct an index measure ("Community Wellbeing Index") equal to the sum of

the four indicator variables. For ease of interpretation, we standardize the index by subtracting

the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. A higher "Community Wellbeing Index" value

suggests that the respondent has a greater level of community wellbeing. We also create an

indicator of "Excellent Community Wellbeing," which takes on the value of 1 if the respondent

answered "agree" or "strongly agree" to all four of the above statements relating to community

wellbeing, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, a measure of "Poor Community Wellbeing" is

constructed as binary indicator, which is equal to 1 if the respondent did not answer "agree" or

"strongly agree" to any of the four statements, and 0 otherwise.

           To measure emotional wellbeing, we use a series of questions in which the respondents

are asked to report whether they experienced certain emotions yesterday: 1) Did you smile or

laugh a lot yesterday?; 2) Did you experience a lot of enjoyment yesterday?; 3) Did you

experience a lot of happiness yesterday?; 4) Did you experience a lot of worry yesterday?; 5) Did

you experience a lot of sadness yesterday?; 6) Did you experience a lot of stress yesterday? 15 For

the first three questions, we create indicator variables equal to 1 if the respondent replied "Yes"

to the question and equal to 0 if the respondent replied "No." The next three questions inquire

about negative emotions, so we create indicator variables equal to 1 if the response was "No"

and equal to 0 if the response was "Yes." We then construct an index measure ("Emotional




14
     These variables are consistently available for the years 2014 through 2016.
15
     These variables are consistently available for the years 2008 through 2016.

                                                                11
Wellbeing Index") equal to the sum of the six indicator variables. We standardize the Emotional

Wellbeing Index for ease of interpretation. A higher "Emotional Wellbeing Index" suggests that

the respondent has a greater level of current emotional health. We also create a measure of

"Excellent Emotional Health," an indicator variable equal to 1 if all six of the above indicator

variables equal 1, and a measure of "Poor Emotional Health," an indicator variable equal to one

if three or more of the above indicator variables equal zero.

       Finally, we construct two measures of overall community and emotional wellbeing.

"Excellent Community and Emotional Health" is a binary indicator that takes on the value of 1 if

both the "Excellent Community Wellbeing" and "Excellent Emotional Health" variables are

equal to 1, and 0 if either indicator is 0. Similarly, "Poor Community and Emotional Health" is

an indicator that takes on the value of 1 if both the "Poor Community Wellbeing" and "Poor

Emotional Health" variables are equal to one, and 0 otherwise.

       We control for a number of individual characteristics in our models, including age, sex,

marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment. Table 1 presents

summary statistics for these variables separately for the treatment and control groups. As shown

in the table, there are no statistically significant differences between respondents interviewed

within a period 28 days prior to and after a shooting. The only exception to this pattern is age,

where those interviewed post-shooting are on average one year older (p<0.05) than those

interviewed pre-shooting. We control for all these demographic variables in our regression

models. In supplementary analysis, we examine whether the impact of exposure to a mass

shooting is affected by several observable characteristics of the individuals by estimating our

models separately by sex, parental status, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment. In Table 2,

we present the non-regression adjusted means of each outcome separately for the pre-shooting



                                                     12
and post-shooting periods; all but one of the differences are not statistically significant between

the treatment and the control groups.



3. Estimation Strategy

        Our goal is to estimate the causal impact of mass shootings on the measures of

community and emotional wellbeing among persons living in communities where these incidents

occur. We restrict our Gallup sample to respondents who lived in a county that ever experienced

a mass shooting and who were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the

shooting. 16 We exclude those who were interviewed on the exact day of the shooting because we

cannot identify whether the interview occurred prior to or after the shooting on that day.

        We use a difference-in-differences (DD) research design to compare measures of

community and emotional wellbeing after mass shootings occurred for individuals living in the

counties where these tragedies occurred, relative to individuals living in counties where mass

shootings had not yet occurred. Formally, the DD research design can be specified as follows:


                 = 0 + 1  +  2 +  +  +  ,                                                       (1)


where  is an outcome variable of interest for respondent i in county c at time t;

PostShootingict is an indicator that is equal to 1 if the respondent was interviewed after the

shooting in his/her county, and 0 otherwise;  is a vector of demographic variables including

age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment. We also




16
  This approach is similar to the one used by Dursun (2019), who studies the impact of intrauterine exposure to
mass shootings on birth outcomes using monthly data at the county level.



                                                            13
include a vector of county fixed effects,  , to control for all time-invariant differences across

counties, and month-by-year fixed effects,  , to account for common time trends. Furthermore,

all regressions are weighted by sampling weights provided by Gallup, and the standard errors are

clustered at the county level using the wild cluster bootstrap method. The parameter of interest in

equation (1) is 1 , which captures the impact of the county-level exposure to a mass shooting on

adults' emotional and community wellbeing.

         The specification in equation (1) is restrictive in that it imposes the relationship between

a mass shooting and the outcomes of emotional and community wellbeing to be constant over

time. This may especially be unlikely in our context if, following incidents of mass shootings,

people go through multiple phases of coping, during which they exhibit particular emotions,

behaviors, and other reactions (Alexander & Klein, 2005; Freedy & Simpon, 2007; Goldmann &

Galea, 2014). 17 Standard DD estimates may be biased if the treatment effect is not constant over

time (Goodman-Bacon, 2018). Therefore, we next specify a more flexible, non-parametric

model, in which the  indicator is replaced with a vector of variables indicating

the number of weeks after the shooting:



          =  + 4
               =1  1(__ =  ) +  +  +  +  . (2)




17
   A report by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA) characterizes these
stages of healing as an acute phase immediately after the event, an intermediate phase several days to weeks
afterward, and the long-term phase. The acute phase is typically characterized by denial, shock, and disbelief. The
intermediate phase is manifested by fear, anger, anxiety, transient panic, retaliatory attacks, difficulty paying
attention at work or school, depressed feelings, and disturbed sleep. Finally, the long-term phase is characterized by
coming to terms with realities with alternate periods of adjustment and relapse (SAMHSA, 2017). Most survivors
develop resilience or an ability to successfully adopt to stresses in the long-term phase (Goldmann & Galea, 2014;
Haglund et al., 2007). Some individuals may even feel greater self-worth and sense of life purpose, expressing
feelings of gratitude for having survived the mass shooting (Novotney, 2018).

                                                              14
        In equation (2), 1(__ = ) is a binary variable taking on the

value of 1 if the respondent was interviewed j weeks after a mass shooting where j=[1,4]. The 

terms capture the impact of the shooting on the outcome Y in week j, relative to the entire pre-

shooting period. All other terms in Equation (2) are defined as in Equation (1). Equation (2)

represents our preferred model.

        The reliability of estimates in the difference-in-differences design hinges upon the

assumption that the outcome variables would have trended similarly across counties in the

absence of a mass shooting. To assess the validity of this parallel trends assumption, we perform

an event study analysis that enables us to trace out the differences in the outcomes of wellbeing

in the weeks leading up to and following a mass shooting. The event study analysis is

implemented by estimating an augmented version of equation (2), which includes binary

indicators of exposure to a mass shooting both in the weeks prior to or following an incident. If

the parallel trends assumption is valid, then we would expect the estimated coefficients for the

weeks prior to the shooting to be statistically indistinguishable from zero.

        The estimates from the event-study analysis, along with the 95 percent confidence

intervals, are presented in Figure 3. 18 As shown in the figure, for each of the nine outcome

variables, not a single pre-shooting coefficient is statistically significant. Moreover, for the

majority of cases, the coefficients pertaining to weeks prior to a shooting are close to zero in

magnitude and do not exhibit visible trends in a specific direction. Taken together, the evidence



18
  In the event study analysis, the week immediately preceding the shooting is omitted as the base category.
However, in a recent paper, Borusyak & Jaravel (2017) show that the event-study specification suffers from an
under-identification problem in contexts where all units are eventually treated. To overcome this problem, they
recommend excluding two pre-treatment periods as omitted categories in a linear event-study. Following their
suggestion, we re-estimate the event-study models omitting two periods prior to a mass shooting. As shown in
Appendix Figure 1, the pre-shooting indicator variables are all statistically insignificant.


                                                             15
presented in Figure 3 supports the validity of the parallel trends assumption. Accordingly, our

estimates from the DD model likely represent the causal effect of exposure to mass shooting

incidents and are not due to pre-existing differential trends between county residents who were

interviewed before versus after the shooting.



4. Results

       Table 3 presents results from the model specified in equation (1). The estimates from the

models pertaining to community wellbeing are presented in the first three columns, while the

estimates from the models capturing emotional wellbeing are shown in columns 4-6. The last

two columns display the estimates obtained from the models that combine the two domains of

outcomes. We find that exposure to a mass shooting in past 28 days leads to a 13.6 percentage

point (p<0.10) decline in the probability of having excellent community wellbeing. To put this

estimate into context, about 50 percent of respondents had excellent community wellbeing in the

pre-shooting period. Thus, our estimated treatment effect is equivalent to a 27 percent decline in

excellent community wellbeing. We find no statistically significant impact of mass shootings on

the intensive measure of the community wellbeing index or the probability of having poor

community wellbeing. According to the point estimate shown in column (1), a mass shooting

causes a 0.09 standard deviation decline in the overall community wellbeing captured by our

composite index, though the estimate is not statistically significant.

       Turning to the estimates for emotional wellbeing presented in columns 4-6 of Table 3, we

find a 6.5 percentage point (p<0.10) decline in the probability of having excellent emotional

health caused by exposure to a mass shooting. This estimate translates into a 15 percent drop in

the likelihood of having excellent emotional health compared to pre-shooting levels. The



                                                     16
estimate for the intensive measure of emotional wellbeing (emotional wellbeing index) is

negative, and the estimate for poor emotional health is positive ­ though these estimates are not

statistically significant at conventional levels. Finally, the last two columns reveal that mass

shootings reduce the probability of having excellent overall social and emotional health by 13.3

percentage points (p<0.05) or 47 percent. The estimate on the likelihood of reporting poor

community and emotional wellbeing is positive, though again, the estimate is statistically

insignificant at conventional levels.

       Table 4 presents our estimates from equation (2). In this specification, we disaggregate

the post-shooting indicator and assess the impact of exposure to a mass shooting separately

week-by-week following the incident. These results are quite revealing of the dynamic impact of

mass shootings on emotional and community wellbeing. For example, living in a community

where a mass shooting had occurred appears to have a gradually increasing negative effect on the

composite index of community wellbeing in the four weeks following the event. By the fourth

week, the effect is statistically significant (p<0.10) and substantial in magnitude (0.7 standard

deviation). With respect to the likelihood of reporting excellent community wellbeing, there is a

noticeable drop in the week immediately after the shooting, and this effect seems to persist until

four weeks post-shooting. The treatment effect grows over time from -12.9 percentage points

(p<0.10) one week post-shooting to -27.4 percentage points (p<0.05) four weeks post-shooting.

The estimates on the likelihood of reporting poor community wellbeing are statistically

insignificant.

       Similarly, the negative effect on the composite index of emotional wellbeing grows

during the weeks following a mass shooting from 0.04 standard deviation in the first week, to

0.09 standard deviation in week two, to 0.17 standard deviation in week three, and 0.21 standard



                                                     17
deviation in the fourth week. However, only the estimate on the third week indicator is

statistically significant (p<0.05). Furthermore, declines in the probability of having excellent

emotional health grow over time from an imprecisely estimated 6.1 percentage point drop one

week post-shooting to a statistically significant 12.6 percentage point (p<0.05) decline four

weeks post-shooting. Finally, the estimates shown in column 6 pertaining to the likelihood of

being in poor emotional health follow a pattern consistent with the results presented in columns 4

and 5, though the estimate is only significant for the indicator of three weeks post-shooting.

Finally, the estimates on the indicators of combined wellbeing in community and emotional

dimensions shown in columns 7 and 8 are consistent with the pattern obtained in the earlier

columns of Table 4. The probability of reporting excellent community and emotional health

declines consistently from week 1, a 14.7 percentage point decrease (p<0.05), to week 4, a 22.8

percentage point decrease (p<0.01). However, the indicators in column 8 are not statistically

significant.

        As mentioned earlier, there is evidence to suggest that mass shootings are not only

becoming more frequent, but also getting deadlier (Berkowitz et al., 2019; Lankfort & Silver,

2020). This could be an especially alarming development if the community and emotional toll of

mass shootings were increasing with the severity of the incident. To shed light on this possibility,

we estimate our models separately for mass shootings with 10+ victims. There are 24 mass

shootings with 10+ victims in our data that occurred between 2008 and 2017. The results from

this analysis are presented in Table 5. In the top panel, we present results from our baseline

model specified in equation (1). A comparison between the estimates shown in Table 3 and the

upper panel of Table 5 suggest that the estimates based on mass shootings involving 10+ victims

are stronger, both economically and statistically, than the estimates obtained from mass



                                                    18
shootings with 4+ victims. This suggests that more severe mass shootings have also more severe

consequences for community and emotional wellbeing.

       The bottom panel of Table 5 displays the results obtained from the estimation of equation

(2), which splits the post-shooting period into four separate weeks are shown in the bottom

panel. Again, these estimates point to large declines in excellent emotional wellbeing and

excellent community wellbeing, as well as increases in poor emotional wellbeing. Furthermore,

not only the estimates reflecting the effects of mass shootings with 10+ victims are larger in size

than those of shootings with 4+ victims shown in Table 4, but they are also estimated with more

precision, despite the reduced variation due to a smaller number of counties with events with 10+

victims. Taken together, these results suggest that the impacts of mass shootings on community

and emotional wellbeing become worse as the incidents become more violent as measured by the

number of victims.

       In our baseline analysis, we include respondents interviewed up to 28 days before and up

to 28 days after the shooting. A relevant question to consider is whether the effects of mass

shootings on community and emotional wellbeing discussed above are short-lived or persist in

the long run. Identifying whether the effects of these events are transient or long-lasting can help

inform calculations of the costs and benefits of interventions to prevent mass shootings. To

address this question, we next present results from a set of regressions, in which we gradually

expand our sample to include respondents interviewed up to 365 days before and 365 days after

the shooting. In light of our finding that more severe mass shootings, i.e., those with 10+ victims,

have a disproportionately stronger effect on community wellbeing than relatively less deadly

shootings, we perform this analysis for mass shootings with both 4+ and 10+ victims.




                                                    19
        As shown in Table 6, the declines in community and emotional wellbeing appear to

persist up to 35 days post-shooting when focused on mass shootings with 4+ victims. In a sample

that includes respondents interviewed up to 35 days pre- and 35 days post-shooting, there is a 6.6

percentage point (p<0.10) decrease in the probability of excellent emotional health and a 9.9

percentage point (p<0.10) decline in the probability of having excellent community and

emotional health. These effects gradually dissipate over time, both in terms of magnitude and

statistical significance.

        When we consider more severe mass shootings, i.e., those with 10+ victims, the impacts

on community wellbeing appear to persist for much longer, especially for the outcomes of

emotional wellbeing. As illustrated in Table 7, the probability of reporting excellent community

wellbeing is lower among individuals living in a community where a mass shooting with 10+

had occurred than other communities, though the estimates are statistically significant only up to

35 days post-shooting. In contrast, the impacts on emotional health shown in columns 4-6 are

much stronger and more persistent. Similar to community wellbeing, the effects on emotional

wellbeing reach a maximum at around one month after the shooting and begin to decline

gradually afterwards. Furthermore, all three measures point to a reduction in emotional wellbeing

and remain statistically significant until at least 365 days post-shooting.

        The results discussed so far are obtained from a sample that only includes counties that

experienced a mass shooting during the estimation period. Next, we incorporate into our analysis

the set of border counties that never experienced a mass shooting as a control group. Note that in

our baseline analysis, we implement a wild cluster bootstrap to correct for error correlation

within clusters (Cameron & Miller, 2015). However, after including border counties as a control

group in this robustness analysis, we have a sufficient number of counties to cluster our standard



                                                     20
errors without bootstrapping. We perform this analysis for both the mass shootings with 4+

victims and those with 10+ victims. 19

         The results from the estimation of equations (1) and (2) for a sample incorporating never-

treated border counties are shown in Appendix Table 1 for mass shootings with 4+ victims and

in Appendix Table 2 for those with 10+ shootings. In both tables, the upper panel presents the

estimates from the standard difference-in-differences specification, and the bottom panel shows

the results from the specification that splits the post-shooting into four separate weeks. As shown

in the tables, a mass shooting still has a negative and statistically significant effect on the

composite community wellbeing index as well as the likelihood of having excellent community

wellbeing. These negative effects are lasting and statistically significant through 4 weeks post

shooting in both models. The treatment effects for excellent emotional health are similar in

magnitude to our preferred model, but they are imprecisely measured.



Analysis with USA Today Database

         The results presented above provide support for the notion that mass shootings take a toll

on the community and emotional wellbeing of people living in the communities where they

occur. In our main analysis, we used the Mother Jones database to identify mass shootings for

several reasons. First, it uses a set of criteria consistent with the FBI's classification of mass

murder as well as recent reports of Congressional Research Services. Second, the list compiled

by Mother Jones focuses on incidents which occurred using a firearm in a public place and



19
  The event study estimates with 4+ mass shootings including never-treated border counties are illustrated in
Appendix Figure 2. As shown in the figure, there is no evidence of any significant pre-trends. The pattern is very
similar, and again shows no evidence of pre-trends when we perform the event-study analysis with the 10+ mass
shootings. To economize on space, we do not show these estimates in the paper, but they are available from the
authors upon request.

                                                              21
excludes shootings related to gang activity, armed robbery, or domestic violence. These criteria

leave us with mass shootings that are random, nonsensical, indiscriminate, which, we argue, may

trigger the kind of community and emotional reactions by people that we focus on in our study.

Third, given its inclusion criteria, the Mother Jones database is less comprehensive than the other

available sources. Therefore, the results obtained from the analysis of the Mother Jones database

would likely constitute a lower bound for actual effects.

           However, given the lack of an official definition of a mass shooting, we assessed the

sensitivity of our results to the use of another mass shootings database published by USA

Today. 20 USA Today includes mass "killings" where four or more individuals are killed in a

single incident. It also covers a broad range of incidents including public killings, family-related

killings, and those involving a robbery or a burglary. Furthermore, it makes a distinction among

the weapons used in the killing (e.g., shooting, stabbing, blunt force, etc.). Focusing on the USA

Today database, we complied the incidents which took place in public and were committed by a

firearm and excluded any robbery or burglary related killings. This gave us a list of 59 shootings

during our study period.

           Figure 4 shows event study estimates for the USA Today regressions. As illustrated in the

figure, there is no evidence of any systematic changes in the outcome measures at the county

level in the period prior to a mass shooting. The regression results obtained from the analysis of

the USA Today database are presented in Table 8. At first glance, the effect patterns shown in

Table 8 appear to be similar to those obtained from the analysis using the Mother Jones data. In

fact, the USA Today results are, if anything, stronger, which is consistent with the notion that the




20
     The USA Today database is available at http://www.gannett-cdn.com/GDContent/mass-killings/index.html#title

                                                            22
results from the Mother Jones analysis would constitute a lower bound. As shown in the upper

panel of the table, the exposure to a mass killing results in a 0.29 standard deviation decrease

(p<0.10) in the composite community wellbeing index. Furthermore, the likelihood of reporting

excellent community wellbeing goes down by 17.1 percentage points (p<0.01). For outcomes

related to emotional wellbeing, all three estimates are statistically significant and point in the

same direction. Specifically, a mass killing causes the composite emotional wellbeing to

decrease by 0.16 standard deviation (p<0.05), the likelihood of reporting excellent emotional

wellbeing to decrease by 5.4 percentage points (p<0.05), and the likelihood of reporting poor

emotional wellbeing to increase by 6.6 percentage points (p<0.05). Furthermore, the likelihood

of having excellent emotional and community wellbeing decreases by 10.5 percentage points

(p<0.05) in response to a mass killing. Overall, these results lend further support to the results

obtained from the analysis with the Mother Jones database.



Placebo Analysis

       The validity of our findings hinges on the assumption that there are no changes in the

counties occurring simultaneously with mass shootings. We conduct a placebo analysis to

explore whether our results are driven by potential confounding factors. To do this, we identify

several outcome measures in Gallup that should theoretically be unaffected by mass shootings

including diagnosis of chronic health conditions such as diabetes and asthma, and measures of

access to health care such as insurance coverage and dental visits. Any effects on any of these

outcomes would suggest that other unobserved changes may be biasing our main set of results.




                                                      23
As shown in Table 9, these estimates are small and statistically insignificant, which increases our

confidence in the causal interpretation of our main results.

       Next, we test whether our results are driven by any particular shooting. To perform this

test, we estimate regressions for each outcome, omitting a different shooting each time. As

shown in Figure 5, the treatment effect exhibits a stable pattern, where the vast majority of the

estimates are either equal or very close to the coefficient estimate obtained from the model with

no shootings omitted. Taken together, the evidence emerging from this analysis lends further

support to the notion that the reductions in emotional and community wellbeing obtained in our

analysis are driven by mass shootings, and not by some other confounding factor.



Heterogeneity

       The results from our heterogeneity tests are presented in Appendix Table 3. The first

panel of the table shows that the reductions in social wellbeing are larger both in magnitude and

in terms of statistical significance for parents than for childless adults. For example, parents

experience a 25.4 percentage point (p<0.05) or 51 percent reduction in the probability of having

excellent community wellbeing, versus a statistically insignificant 6.9 percentage point or 14

percent reduction for childless adults. This pattern is consistent with the notion that declines in

community and emotional wellbeing in the aftermath of a shooting by adults reflect, at least

partially, their concern over the safety and wellbeing of not only themselves, but also their

children.

       The second panel of Appendix Table 3 shows that after mass shooting events, men

experience larger reductions in the probability of having excellent community and emotional




                                                     24
health than women. Men experience a 23.5 percentage point (p<0.05) decline, compared to

women's 10.9 percentage point decline which is statistically insignificant.

         When the estimates are stratified by race and ethnicity in the third panel, a clear negative

effect appears to exist for Hispanics for both the social and emotional wellbeing domains, and

the estimates are more precisely estimated for this group of adults than for Whites or Blacks. The

pattern is less clear for Whites and Blacks. However, we note that the sample sizes become

smaller as we break down the analysis by race and ethnicity, and the majority of the estimates are

not statistically different from each other.21

         Finally, the fourth panel of Appendix Table 3 describes the breakdown by education

status. Individuals with education less than high school are more likely to have a decline in

overall community wellbeing than the other educational categories; however, indicators of this

outcome are not statistically significant. Those with a high school education experience a 28

percentage point (p<0.05) decrease in the probability of having excellent community and

emotional health, while those with a college degree or more experience an 18.4 percentage point

(p<0.10) decrease.



5. Discussion

         This paper provides evidence on the harmful spillover effects of mass shootings on

community wellbeing. Our analysis of individuals living in 47 counties that experienced mass

shootings from 2008 through 2017 shows that a mass shooting reduces the probability of having

excellent community wellbeing by 27 percentage points and decreases the probability of having



21
   Of the four race and ethnicity categories, all results for Black, non-Hispanic and Other, non-Hispanic were not
statistically significant. All but two emotional health outcomes for White, non-Hispanic were not statistically
significant.

                                                              25
excellent emotional health by 13 percentage points four weeks after the incident occurs. These

effects are larger and they last longer for more violent shootings. For instance, for mass

shootings with 10 or more victims, the ramifications on community and emotional wellbeing in

the community last up to 365 days after the shooting occurred.

       While a large body of medical studies has already demonstrated the psychological

damage that shootings and other violent events inflict on survivors, our study shows that this

damage extends to other adults in the community, even those who may not have been present at

the shooting location. The declines in community wellbeing are of concern, given that it is

considered to represent an important indicator of people's quality of life (e.g., Helliwell &

Putnam, 2004; Flavin, 2018). For example, Helliwell & Putnam (2004) argue that a case can be

made that, "...the ultimate dependent variable in social science should be human wellbeing, and

in particular, wellbeing as defined by the individual herself." Since promoting greater human

wellbeing is one of the primary aims of government policymaking, it follows that policy efforts

to scale back the incidence of random shooting events would be one way to achieve this goal.

       We also observe that mass shootings reduce the emotional wellbeing of adults in the

community. Several studies have established strong links between emotional distress and health

(Stewart-Brown, 1998). For example, research has shown that stress ­ one of the components of

our emotional wellbeing index ­ can lead to depression and hypertension (van Praag, 2004;

Sparrenberger et al., 2009). By reducing emotional wellbeing, mass shooting events thus have

deleterious consequences for overall health of people in the community. For example, some

people may turn to smoking as a means to cope with the emotional stress in the aftermath of

mass shootings (Cameron & Jones, 1985; Choi et al., 2015). Indeed, an analysis for the smoking

behavior using the Gallup data indicates that residing in a county with a mass shooting in the



                                                    26
past 28 days is associated with a 4.2 percentage points (p<0.10) or 28 percent increased

likelihood of current smoking. Furthermore, the probability of smoking increases over the course

of four weeks following a shooting. 22 Our finding of increased smoking in the weeks after a

mass shooting may reflect a behavioral response to the stress and worry produced from the

shootings. The high medical and social costs associated with cigarette smoking (CDC, 2019; US

Department of Health and Human Services, 2014; Levine et al., 1997; Zafeiridou et al., 2018)

represent additional economic and health damage inflicted by mass shootings.

        Our findings are consistent with two recent economic studies evaluating the health effects

of mass shootings. Rossin-Slater et al. (2020) find that local exposure to school shootings

increases antidepressant use among youth by 21 percent in the following two years, implying

that shootings reduce mental health among youth in the communities where these tragedies

occur. Dursun (2019) studies the effects of mass shootings on infant health outcomes and finds

that those infants who were exposed to shootings in-utero are more likely to be born very

premature and with a very low birth weight. The analysis presented in this current paper

supplements these two existing studies by studying how mass shootings affect a different

demographic group ­ US adults ­ and a different set of health outcomes ­ community and

emotional wellbeing.




22
   For brevity, we exclude our analysis of the effects of mass shootings on smoking behavior from the main paper.
The complete results of this analysis are available upon request.

                                                            27
                                          References

Agnich L.E. (2015). A Comparative Analysis of Attempted and Completed School-Based Mass
Murder Attacks. American Journal of Criminal Justice, 40(1), 1-22.

Alexander, D. A., & Klein, S. (2005). The Psychological Aspects of Terrorism: From Denial to
Hyperbole. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 98(12), 557­562.

Bagalman, E., Caldwell, S.W., Finklea, K.M. & McCallion, G. (2013). Public Mass Shootings in
the United States: Selected Implications for Federal Public Health and Safety
Policy. Congressional Research Service. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43004.pdf.

Berkowitz, B., et al. (2019). "More and deadlier: Mass shooting trends in
America." Washington Post. Retrieved August 26, 2019
from https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/08/05/more-deadlier-mass-shooting-trends-
america/.

Borusyak, K., & Jaravel, X. (2017). Revisiting Event Study Designs.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2826228.

Cameron, D., & Jones, I. G. (1985). An Epidemiological and Sociological Analysis of the Use of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drugs of Solace. Journal of Public Health, 7(1), 18-29.

Cameron, A.C, & Miller, D.L. (2015). A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference.
Journal of Human Resources, 50(2), 317­372.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Smoking & Tobacco Use - Fast Facts.
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/index.htm.

Choi, D., Ota, S., & Watanuki, S. (2015). Does cigarette smoking relieve stress? Evidence from
the event-related potential (ERP). International Journal of Psychophysiology, 98(3), 470-476.

DiMaggio, C., Avraham, J., Berry, C., Bukur, M., Feldman, J., Klein, M., Shah, N., Tandon, M.
& Frangos, S. (2019). Changes in US Mass Shooting Deaths Associated with the 1994­2004
Federal Assault Weapons Ban: Analysis of Open-Source Data. Journal of Trauma and Acute
Care Surgery, 86(1), 11-19.

Dursun, B. (2019). The Intergenerational Effects of Mass Shootings. SSRN Working Paper.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3474544.

Duwe, G., Kovandzic, T., & Moody, C. (2002). The Impact of RighttoCarry Concealed
Firearms Laws on Mass Public Shootings. Homicide Studies, 6(4), 271­296.

Ferguson, C.J. (2019). Mass Shootings Aren't Growing More Common ­ and Evidence
Contradicts Common Stereotypes About the Killers. The Conversation.



                                                  28
https://theconversation.com/mass-shootings-arent-growing-more-common-and-evidence-
contradicts-common-stereotypes-about-the-killers-121471.

Flavin, P. (2018). State Medicaid Expansion and Citizens' Quality of Life. Social Science
Quarterly, 99(2), 616­625.

Follman, M., Aronsen, G., & Pan, D. (2020). US Mass Shootings, 1982-2020: Data From
Mother Jones' Investigation. https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/12/mass-shootings-
mother-jones-full-data.

Fox, J.A. & DeLateur, M.J. (2014). Mass Shootings in America: Moving Beyond
Newtown. Homicide Studies, 18(1), 125-145.

Freedy, J. R., & Simpson, W. M., Jr. (2007). Disaster-Related Physical and Mental Health: A
Role for the Family Physician. American Family Physician, 75(6), 841­846.

Gius, M. (2015). The Impact of State and Federal Assault Weapons Bans On Public Mass
Shootings. Applied Economics Letters, 22(4), 281-284.

Goldmann, E., & Galea, S. (2014). Mental Health Consequences of Disasters. Annual Review of
Public Health, 35, 169­183.

Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing (No.
w25018). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haglund, M. E., Nestadt, P. S., Cooper, N. S., Southwick, S. M., & Charney, D. S. (2007).
Psychobiological Mechanisms of Resilience: Relevance to Prevention and Treatment of Stress-
Related Psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 19(3), 889­920. doi:
10.1017/s0954579407000430.

Helliwell, J.F., & Putnam, R.D. (2004). The Social Context of Wellbeing. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Studies, 359(1449), 1435-46.

Iancu, A., Jaycox, L., Acosta, J. D., Straub, F. G., Iovan, S., Nelson, C., & Abir, M. (2019). After
School Shootings, Children and Communities Struggle to Heal. Health Affairs Blog.
https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20190717.855810/full.

Jetter, M. & Walker, J. (2018). The Effect of Media Coverage on Mass Shootings. IZA
Discussion Paper Series No. 11900. http://ftp.iza.org/dp11900.pdf.

Krouse, W. & Richardson, D.J. (2015). Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and Victims,
1999-2013. Congressional Research Service. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44126.pdf.

Lankford, A., & Silver, J. (2020). Why have public mass shootings become more deadly?
Assessing how perpetrators' motives and methods have changed over time. Criminology &
Public Policy.

                                                    29
Levine, P. B., Gustafson, T. A., & Velenchik, A. D. (1997). More Bad News for Smokers? The
Effects of Cigarette Smoking on Wages. ILR Review, 50(3), 493­509.

Lin, P.I., Fei, L., Barzman, D. & Hossain, M. (2018). What Have we Learned from the Time
Trend of Mass Shootings in the US? PloS one, 13(10), e0204722.

Lowe, S.R., & Galea, S. (2015). Posttraumatic Stress in the Aftermath of Mass Shootings.
In Traumatic Stress and Long-Term Recovery (pp. 91-111). Springer, Cham.

Lowe, S.R, & Galea, S. (2017). The Mental Health Consequences of Mass Shootings. Trauma,
Violence, & Abuse, 18(1), 62-82.

Luca, M., Malhotra, D., & Poliquin, C. (2020). The Impact of Mass Shootings on Gun
Policy. Journal of Public Economics, 181, 104083.

Morton, R.J., & Hilts, M.A., eds. (2008). Serial Murder: Multi-Disciplinary Perspectives for
Investigators. National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime, Federal Bureau of
Investigation. https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/AbstractDB/AbstractDBDetails.aspx?id=245787.

Myers, D. (1993). The Pursuit of Happiness. New York: Avon Books.

Myers, D., & Diener, E. (1995). Who is Happy? Psychological Science, 6(1), 10-19.

North, C. S., Smith, E. M., & Spitznagel, E. L. (1994). Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in
Survivors of a Mass Shooting. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 151(1), 82-88.

Novotney, A. (2018). What Happens to the Survivors. Monitor on Psychology, 49(8), 36-44.

Pappa, E., Lagerborg, A. & Ravn, M.O. (2019). Does Economic Insecurity Really Impact on
Gun Violence at US Schools?. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(3), 198-199.

Porfiri, M., Sattanapalle, R.R., Nakayama, S., Macinko, J. & Sipahi, R. (2019). Media Coverage
and Firearm Acquisition in the Aftermath of a Mass Shooting. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(9),
913-921.

Roeder, O. (2016). The Phrase `Mass Shooting' Belongs to the 21st Century. FiveThirtyEight.
http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/we-didnt-call-them-mass-shootings-until-the-21st-century.

Roehrig, C. (2016). Mental Disorders Top the List of the Most Costly Conditions in the United
States: $201 Billion. Health Affairs, 35(6), 1130-1135.

Rossin-Slater, M., Schnell, M., Schwandt, H., Trejo, S., & Uniat, L. (2020). Local exposure to
school shootings and youth antidepressant use. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 117(38), 23484-23489.



                                                   30
Rowhani-Rahbar, A., Bellenger, M. A., & Rivara, F. P. (2019). Firearm Violence Research.
JAMA, 322(19), 1857-1858.

Shultz, J.M., Thoresen, S., Flynn, B.W., Muschert, G.W., Shaw, J.A., Espinel, Z., Walter, F.G.,
Gaither, J.B., Garcia-Barcena, Y., O'Keefe, K. & Cohen, A.M. (2014). Multiple Vantage Points
on the Mental Health Effects of Mass Shootings. Current Psychiatry Reports, 16(9), 469.

Smart, R. (2018). Mass shootings: definitions and trends. RAND Corporation.

Sommers, B. D., Gunja, M. Z., Finegold, K., & Musco, T. (2015). Changes in Self-reported
Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health Under the Affordable Care Act. JAMA, 314(4),
366­374.

Sparrenberger, F., Cichelero, F. T., Ascoli, A. M., Fonseca, F. P., Weiss, G., Berwanger, O., ... &
Fuchs, F. D. (2009). Does Psychosocial Stress Cause Hypertension? A Systematic Review of
Observational Studies. Journal of Human Hypertension, 23(1), 12-19.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2017). Disaster Technical
Assistance Center Supplemental Research Bulletin: Mass Violence and Behavioral Health.
September 2017. https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/dtac/srb-mass-violence-behavioral-
health.pdf.

Travers, Á., McDonagh, T., & Elklit, A. (2018). Youth Responses to School Shootings: a
Review. Current Psychiatry Reports, 20(6), 47.

US Department of Health and Human Services. (2014). The Health Consequences of Smoking--
50 Years of Progress. https://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/50-
years-of-progress-by-section.html.

Van Praag, H. M. (2004). Can Stress Cause Depression?. Progress in Neuro-
Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 28(5), 891-907.

Wallace, L.N. (2015). Responding to Violence with Guns: Mass Shootings and Gun
Acquisition. The Social Science Journal, 52(2), 156-167.

Watson, D., & Clark, L.A. (1991). Self vs Peer Ratings of Specific Emotional Traits. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 60(6), 927-940.

Webster, D.W. (2017). The True Effect of Mass Shootings on Americans. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 166(10), 749-750.

Zafeiridou, M., Hopkinson, N. S., & Voulvoulis, N. (2018). Cigarette Smoking: An Assessment
of Tobacco's Global Environmental Footprint Across Its Entire Supply Chain. Environmental
Science & Technology, 52(15), 8087­8094.




                                                    31
Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of Mass Shootings in the United States between 2008
and 2017




Notes: The 47 areas highlighted in red are counties that experienced a mass shooting between 2008 and 2017,
according to the Mother Jones database of mass shootings.




                                                           32
Figure 2: Mass Shootings in the United States between 2008 and 2017




Source: The Mother Jones database of mass shootings. Figure displays the number of mass shootings each year and
the states in which these shootings occurred.




                                                           33
Figure 3: Event Study Results Using the Mother Jones Database of Mass Shootings




                                             34
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include
respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28
days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during the study period.
Figure displays coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for a vector of variables indicating the number of
weeks since the shooting; the week immediately preceding the shooting is omitted as the base. All regressions
control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and
month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method, and estimates
include Gallup sampling weights.




                                                               35
Figure 4: Event Study Results Using the USA Today Database of Mass Shootings




                                             36
Notes: Authors' analysis based on USA Today's mass shootings database and Gallup 2008 to 2016. Sample is
restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days
before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 59 mass shootings occurred during
the study period. Figure displays coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for a vector of variables
indicating the number of weeks since the shooting; the week immediately preceding the shooting is omitted as the
base. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment,
county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered using the wild cluster bootstrap
method, and estimates include Gallup sampling weights.




                                                             37
Figure 5: Estimates from Regressions Omitting One Shooting at a Time




                                             38
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include
respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28
days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. We estimated 47 regression models omitting one
shooting at a time from analysis. Figure displays histogram of coefficient estimates for "post-shooting" from the 47
regression models. The vertical line (red) represents the coefficient estimate for the baseline model in which no
shootings are omitted. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational
attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered using the wild cluster
bootstrap method, and estimates include Gallup sampling weights.




                                                                39
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics of Analytical Sample

                                     Pre-Shooting      Post-Shooting         Difference
                                          (1)                (2)                 (3)
 Age                                     44.47             45.45               0.98**
 Male                                    0.49               0.48               -0.01
 Married                                 0.46               0.48                0.01
 Any children                            0.38               0.37               <0.01
 Race/ethnicity
 White, non-Hispanic                     0.57               0.55               -0.02
 Black, non-Hispanic                     0.12               0.12               <0.01
 Other race, non-Hispanic                0.06               0.06               <0.01
 Hispanic                                0.25               0.27                0.02
 Educational attainment
 Less than high school                   0.13               0.13               <0.01
 High school                             0.25               0.24               -0.01
 Some college                            0.27               0.28                0.01
 College or more                         0.36               0.36               <0.01
 Sample size                             3,232             3,084
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include
respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28
days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during the study period.
Table displays means for respondents interviewed before the shooting in their county (pre-shooting) and respondents
interviewed after the shooting in their county (post-shooting). Estimates include Gallup sampling weights. Asterisks
denote statistically significant difference between the two groups with * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                            40
Table 2: Means of Outcome Variables

                                   Years of
                                                 Number of                                          Unadjusted
                                     Data                      Pre-Shooting     Post-Shooting
                                                 Shootings                                          Difference
                                   Available
                                      (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)                (5)
 Community Wellbeing
                                   2014-16           16            -0.11             -0.23             -0.12
 Index
 Excellent Community
                                   2014-16           16             0.50             0.44              -0.07*
 Wellbeing [0/1]
 Poor Community Wellbeing
                                   2014-16           16             0.09             0.11               0.02
 [0/1]
 Emotional Wellbeing Index         2008-16           37            -0.06             -0.05              0.01
 Excellent Emotional Health
                                   2008-16           37             0.43             0.43              <0.01
 [0/1]
 Poor Emotional Health [0/1]       2008-16           37             0.20             0.21              <0.01
 Excellent Community &
                                   2014-16           16             0.28             0.27              -0.01
 Emotional Health [0/1]
 Poor Community &
                                   2014-16           16             0.03             0.03              <0.01
 Emotional Health [0/1]
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include
respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28
days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during the study period.
Table displays means for respondents interviewed before the shooting in their county (pre-shooting) and respondents
interviewed after the shooting in their county (post-shooting). Estimates include Gallup sampling weights. Asterisks
denote statistically significant difference between the two groups with * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                             41
Table 3: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - Baseline Results

                                      Excellent         Poor                                                             Excellent          Poor
                    Community                                          Emotional        Excellent          Poor
                                     Community        Community                                                         Community        Community
                    Wellbeing                                          Wellbeing       Emotional        Emotional
                                     Wellbeing        Wellbeing                                                         & Emotional      & Emotional
                      Index                                             Index          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                                        [0/1]           [0/1]                                                           Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                         (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                *                                                  *                                **
                        -0.093         -0.136            -0.050           -0.091           -0.065          0.038           -0.133            0.023
 Post-Shooting
                       (0.703)         (0.059)          (0.606)          (0.436)           (0.072)        (0.166)           (0.012)         (0.545)
 Sample Size             735             735              735             3,781            3,781           3,781             726              726
 Pre-Shooting
                        -0.11            0.50             0.09            -0.06             0.43            0.20             0.28            0.03
 Mean
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during
the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                      42
Table 4: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - Split Post Period

                                     Excellent          Poor                                                            Excellent          Poor
                   Community                                          Emotional        Excellent          Poor
                                    Community        Community                                                         Community        Community
                   Wellbeing                                          Wellbeing       Emotional        Emotional
                                    Wellbeing        Wellbeing                                                         & Emotional      & Emotional
                     Index                                             Index          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                                       [0/1]            [0/1]                                                          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                        (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)
 1 Week Post-          0.010          -0.129*          -0.085            -0.043           -0.061          0.034          -0.147**          0.020
 Shooting             (0.962)         (0.051)         (0.250)           (0.762)          (0.270)         (0.113)          (0.011)         (0.615)

 2 Weeks
                       -0.260         -0.195*           -0.015           -0.087           -0.037          0.029           -0.162*           0.014
 Post-
                      (0.268)         (0.095)          (0.895)          (0.553)          (0.305)         (0.581)          (0.075)          (0.680)
 Shooting

 3 Weeks
                       -0.083          -0.048           -0.015         -0.171**         -0.111***        0.059*            -0.046           0.053
 Post-
                      (0.750)         (0.437)          (0.863)          (0.035)          (0.002)         (0.090)          (0.642)          (0.381)
 Shooting

 4 Weeks
                      -0.700*         -0.274**          0.112            -0.211         -0.126**          0.045          -0.228***          0.048
 Post-
                      (0.073)         (0.016)          (0.473)          (0.192)          (0.049)         (0.345)          (0.001)          (0.413)
 Shooting

  Sample Size            735             735             735              3,781             3,781            3,781            726              726
  Pre-Shooting
                        -0.11           0.50             0.09             -0.06              0.43            0.20            0.28             0.03
  Mean
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during
the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                      43
Table 5: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - Mass Shootings with 10+ Victims

                                     Excellent          Poor                                                            Excellent         Poor
                   Community                                          Emotional        Excellent          Poor
                                    Community        Community                                                         Community       Community
                   Wellbeing                                          Wellbeing       Emotional        Emotional
                                    Wellbeing        Wellbeing                                                         & Emotional     & Emotional
                     Index                                             Index          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                                       [0/1]            [0/1]                                                          Health [0/1]    Health [0/1]
                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)            (7)             (8)
 Post-                -0.269          -0.167*          -0.017          -0.348***       -0.202***          0.101*         -0.136*          0.027
 Shooting            (0.403)          (0.099)         (0.855)           (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.062)         (0.058)         (0.627)

 Sample Size           541              541              541            1,603            1,603            1,603             534             534

 1 Week Post-         -0.185         -0.180***          -0.048         -0.234**        -0.199***          0.061          -0.182**          0.037
 Shooting            (0.555)          (0.008)          (0.640)          (0.014)         (0.006)          (0.229)          (0.022)         (0.637)

 2 Weeks             -0.411**          -0.201           0.020          -0.410***       -0.173***         0.139**           -0.160          0.008
 Post-               (0.040)          (0.299)          (0.808)          (0.004)         (0.001)          (0.016)          (0.205)         (0.804)
 Shooting

 3 Weeks              -0.228           -0.078           -0.011         -0.400***       -0.239***          0.095*           0.008           0.049
 Post-               (0.534)          (0.306)          (0.909)          (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.099)          (0.943)         (0.425)
 Shooting

 4 Weeks             -0.759**         -0.249*           0.115          -0.615***       -0.305***         0.187***        -0.193**          0.038
 Post-               (0.035)          (0.054)          (0.689)          (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.006)          (0.030)         (0.659)
 Shooting

  Sample Size            541            541              541            1,603            1,603            1,603              534             534
  Pre-Shooting
                        -0.03           0.54            0.07            -0.03            0.44              0.19             0.31             0.02
  Mean
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting with 10 or more victims and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 24 mass
shootings occurred during the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed
effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include
Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.



                                                                                      44
Table 6: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - Alternate Time Horizons

                          Excellent     Poor                                                 Excellent        Poor
             Community                            Emotional    Excellent        Poor
                         Community    Community                                             Community      Community
             Wellbeing                            Wellbeing   Emotional      Emotional
                         Wellbeing    Wellbeing                                             & Emotional    & Emotional
               Index                               Index      Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]
                             [0/1]      [0/1]                                               Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]
                 (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)
                0.271       -0.017     -0.129*      -0.057       -0.064         0.045          -0.077         0.020
 7 days
               (0.364)     (0.873)     (0.099)     (0.661)      (0.308)        (0.134)        (0.153)        (0.634)
               N=163          163        163         881          881            881            160            160

                0.034       -0.124      -0.105      -0.047       -0.046         0.022         -0.151**        -0.011
 14 days
               (0.899)     (0.161)     (0.200)     (0.794)      (0.280)        (0.532)         (0.011)       (0.751)
               N=362         362         362        1,823         1,823         1,823            357           357

                -0.046     -0.135*      -0.072      -0.091      -0.060*         0.040         -0.116**        0.027
 21 days
               (0.814)     (0.057)     (0.394)     (0.408)      (0.090)        (0.119)         (0.011)       (0.568)
               N=547         547         547        2,819        2,819          2,819            541           541

                -0.093     -0.136*      -0.050      -0.091      -0.065*         0.038         -0.133**        0.023
 28 days
               (0.703)     (0.059)     (0.606)     (0.436)      (0.072)        (0.166)         (0.012)       (0.545)
               N=735         735         735        3,781        3,781          3,781            726           726

                -0.110      -0.112      -0.027      -0.096      -0.066*         0.036         -0.099*         0.019
 35 days
               (0.650)     (0.126)     (0.762)     (0.404)      (0.062)        (0.175)        (0.092)        (0.624)
               N=913         913         913        4,761        4,761          4,761           904            904

               -0.035       -0.087      -0.030      -0.071       -0.048         0.034          -0.053         0.011
 42 days
              (0.847)      (0.217)     (0.678)     (0.472)      (0.124)        (0.167)        (0.318)        (0.713)
              N=1,082        1,082       1,082      5,653         5,653         5,653          1,070          1,070

               -0.074       -0.087      -0.010      -0.012       -0.016         0.012          -0.069         0.007
 90 days
              (0.673)      (0.220)     (0.847)     (0.874)      (0.603)        (0.519)        (0.280)        (0.827)
              N=2,340        2,340       2,340     12,028       12,028         12,028          2,316          2,316

               -0.077       -0.044      0.004       -0.031       -0.026         0.021          -0.043         -0.006
 180 days
              (0.417)      (0.390)     (0.913)     (0.580)      (0.336)        (0.220)        (0.409)        (0.761)
              N=4,723        4,723      4,723      23,651       23,651         23,651          4,676           4,676



                                                              45
                     -0.030            -0.032          0.001           -0.031           -0.016          0.019            -0.010          -0.013
 270 days
                    (0.646)           (0.203)         (0.985)         (0.406)          (0.409)         (0.111)          (0.714)         (0.332)
                    N=7,550             7,550          7,550          35,564           35,564          35,564            7,475            7,475

                       -0.012          -0.023         -0.000           -0.023           -0.016           0.013            -0.000           -0.012*
 365 days
                      (0.730)         (0.311)        (0.986)          (0.236)          (0.142)          (0.119)          (0.987)           (0.093)
                    N=10,800          10,800          10,800          47,759            47,759          47,759           10,691            10,691
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting and were interviewed up to x days before or up to x days after the shooting (where the value of x is indicated in the row header); the day of the shooting
is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational
attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses.
Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                     46
Table 7: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing ­ Mass Shootings with 10+ Victims and Alternate Time
Horizons

                          Excellent      Poor                                                Excellent        Poor
             Community                            Emotional    Excellent        Poor
                         Community    Community                                             Community      Community
             Wellbeing                            Wellbeing   Emotional      Emotional
                         Wellbeing    Wellbeing                                             & Emotional    & Emotional
               Index                               Index      Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]
                             [0/1]       [0/1]                                              Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]
                 (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
                0.078       -0.018      -0.061    -0.242**     -0.222**         0.046          -0.071         0.004
 7 days
               (0.759)     (0.924)     (0.673)     (0.036)      (0.029)        (0.428)        (0.524)        (0.881)
               N=107          107         107        372          372            372            105            105

                -0.119      -0.137      -0.061    -0.331***    -0.188***        0.098*         -0.106         -0.004
 14 days
               (0.821)     (0.308)     (0.487)     (0.003)      (0.008)        (0.066)        (0.144)        (0.861)
               N=251         251         251         743          743            743            248            248

                -0.208     -0.156*      -0.034    -0.337***    -0.194***        0.098*        -0.113**        0.023
 21 days
               (0.532)     (0.097)     (0.701)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.066)         (0.036)       (0.677)
               N=396         396         396        1,197        1,197          1,197            392           392

                -0.269     -0.167*      -0.017    -0.348***    -0.202***        0.101*        -0.136*         0.027
 28 days
               (0.403)     (0.099)     (0.855)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.062)        (0.058)        (0.627)
               N=541         541         541        1,603        1,603          1,603           534            534

                -0.310     -0.167*      -0.002    -0.342***    -0.199***        0.104*        -0.149*         0.031
 35 days
               (0.245)     (0.099)     (0.970)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.065)        (0.051)        (0.634)
               N=687         687         687        2,029        2,029          2,029           680            680

                -0.255      -0.146      0.004     -0.292***    -0.174***        0.090*        -0.115*         0.032
 42 days
               (0.238)     (0.102)     (0.963)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.078)        (0.056)        (0.520)
               N=823         823         823        2,453        2,453          2,453           815            815

               -0.239       -0.116      0.035     -0.274***    -0.162***        0.073*        -0.125*         0.036
 90 days
              (0.247)      (0.240)     (0.611)     (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.099)        (0.076)        (0.417)
              N=1,802        1,802      1,802       5,373        5,373          5,373          1,790          1,790

               -0.179       -0.076      -0.005    -0.210***    -0.127***       0.078***        -0.087         -0.005
 180 days
              (0.424)      (0.462)     (0.918)     (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.300)        (0.895)
              N=3,602        3,602       3,602     10,605       10,605         10,605          3,573           3,573

                                                              47
                     -0.053           -0.030           0.023         -0.119***       -0.069***        0.041***          0.006           -0.009
 270 days
                    (0.437)          (0.192)          (0.489)         (0.003)         (0.008)         (0.002)          (0.833)         (0.493)
                    N=5,124            5,124           5,124          15,344          15,344          15,344            5,080            5,080

                       -0.038          -0.032           0.012         -0.082*          -0.045**          0.033*           0.001          -0.016*
 365 days
                      (0.340)         (0.201)          (0.579)        (0.057)           (0.040)         (0.074)          (0.970)         (0.094)
                     N=6,899            6,899           6,899          20,403           20,403          20,403            6,834           6,834
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting with 10 or more victims and were interviewed up to x days before or up to x days after the shooting (where the value of x is indicated in the row header);
the day of the shooting is excluded. 24 mass shootings occurred during the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status,
race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method;
p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                    48
Table 8: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - USA Today Database of Mass Shootings

                                     Excellent         Poor                                                             Excellent         Poor
                   Community                                          Emotional        Excellent          Poor
                                    Community        Community                                                         Community       Community
                   Wellbeing                                          Wellbeing       Emotional        Emotional
                                    Wellbeing        Wellbeing                                                         & Emotional     & Emotional
                     Index                                             Index          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                                       [0/1]           [0/1]                                                           Health [0/1]    Health [0/1]
                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
                               *              ***                               **                **             **               **
 Post-               -0.285          -0.171             -0.002         -0.164           -0.054           0.066           -0.105            0.017
 Shooting            (0.091)          (0.001)          (0.962)          (0.015)          (0.039)         (0.013)          (0.026)         (0.526)
 Sample Size           906              906              906            5,769            5,769            5,769             895             895
 1 Week Post-         -0.224         -0.182***          -0.024         -0.170***        -0.076**         0.068***        -0.131**          0.018
 Shooting            (0.185)          (0.003)          (0.567)          (0.007)          (0.016)         (0.008)          (0.022)         (0.536)
 2 Weeks
                     -0.343**         -0.185**          0.003            -0.125          -0.023          0.061*            -0.096          0.001
 Post-
                     (0.025)           (0.030)         (0.940)          (0.129)         (0.477)          (0.086)          (0.163)         (0.979)
 Shooting
 3 Weeks
                      -0.292           -0.107           0.033          -0.218**         -0.063*          0.077**           -0.061          0.054
 Post-
                     (0.167)          (0.119)          (0.597)          (0.018)         (0.077)          (0.050)          (0.488)         (0.298)
 Shooting
 4 Weeks
                     -0.661***       -0.183***         0.153*            -0.156          -0.055           0.047            -0.099          0.043
 Post-
                      (0.002)         (0.007)          (0.074)          (0.229)         (0.150)          (0.351)          (0.188)         (0.330)
 Shooting
 Sample Size           906              906              906            5,769            5,769            5,769             895             895
 Pre-Shooting
                       -0.03            0.52            0.06             -0.07             0.42           0.21             0.29             0.02
 Mean
Notes: Authors' analysis based on USA Today's mass shootings database and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a
county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 59 mass
shootings occurred during the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed
effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include
Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                      49
Table 9: Placebo Analysis

                    Diabetes          Asthma         Dentist visit       Insurance
                    diagnosis        diagnosis        in past 12         coverage
                    ever [0/1]       ever [0/1]      months [0/1]          [0/1]
                       (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
 Post-               -0.015             0.019            0.047            -0.017
 Shooting            (0.300)           (0.434)          (0.169)           (0.498)
 Sample Size          4,175            3,822             3,867             4,211
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during
the study period. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses. Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                      50
Appendix Figure 1: Event Study Regression Results Omitting Two Pre-Shooting Periods




                                             51
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include
respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28
days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during the study period.
Figure displays coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals for a vector of variables indicating the number of
weeks since the shooting; the periods indicating the week immediately preceding the shooting and 4 weeks before
the shooting are both omitted. All regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity,
educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the
wild cluster bootstrap method, and estimates include Gallup sampling weights.




                                                             52
Appendix Figure 2: Event Study Regressions Including Never-Treated Border Counties




                                            53
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to respondents who
lived in a county that had a mass shooting (Treatment = 1) and those who lived in counties that bordered counties
that had mass shootings (Treatment = 0). Sample is further restricted to those who were interviewed up to 28 days
before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. Figure displays coefficient estimates
and 95% confidence intervals for a vector of variables interacting the Treatment indicator with indicator variables
for the number of weeks since the shooting; the week immediately preceding the shooting is omitted as the base. All
regressions control for the Treatment indicator, Post-Shooting indicator, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by county, and estimates include Gallup sampling weights.




                                                              54
Appendix Table 1: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - "Never-Treated" Border Counties Included
(4+ Victims)

                                           Excellent         Poor                                                             Excellent         Poor
                          Community                                         Emotional         Excellent         Poor
                                          Community        Community                                                         Community       Community
                          Wellbeing                                         Wellbeing        Emotional       Emotional
                                          Wellbeing        Wellbeing                                                         & Emotional     & Emotional
                            Index                                            Index           Health [0/1]    Health [0/1]
                                             [0/1]           [0/1]                                                           Health [0/1]    Health [0/1]
                              (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
 Treatment X Post-          -0.217**         -0.073*          0.046            -0.001           -0.012          0.003            -0.032          -0.004
 Shooting                    (0.108)         (0.039)         (0.039)          (0.043)          (0.020)         (0.016)          (0.029)         (0.018)
 Sample Size                 3,413            3,413           3,413           14,182           14,182          14,182           3,376            3,376
 1 Week Post-                -0.029           -0.072          -0.020            0.064           -0.005          -0.001           -0.072          -0.009
 Shooting                   (0.142)          (0.068)         (0.030)          (0.071)          (0.038)         (0.027)          (0.053)         (0.024)
 2 Weeks Post-              -0.249*         -0.116**           0.031            0.025            0.023          -0.006           -0.065         -0.026*
 Shooting                   (0.127)          (0.056)         (0.057)          (0.063)          (0.029)         (0.032)          (0.066)         (0.015)
 3 Weeks Post-               -0.012            0.053           0.026           -0.028           -0.031           0.018            0.078           0.009
 Shooting                   (0.140)          (0.061)         (0.040)          (0.053)          (0.025)         (0.023)          (0.062)         (0.030)
 4 Weeks Post-             -0.651***        -0.166***        0.173***          -0.064           -0.038           0.001           -0.069           0.023
 Shooting                   (0.126)          (0.045)         (0.050)          (0.078)          (0.034)         (0.027)          (0.043)         (0.022)
 Sample Size                  3,413            3,413           3,413          14,182           14,182          14,182             3,376           3,376
 Pre-Shooting Mean           -0.11            0.50             0.09            -0.06            0.43            0.20             0.28             0.03
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting
(Treatment = 1) and those who lived in counties that bordered counties that had mass shootings (Treatment = 0). Sample is further restricted to those who were
interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. Table displays coefficient estimates for the interaction
of Treatment (indicating whether respondent lived in a county that experienced a mass shooting) and Post-Shooting (indicating whether the interview occurred
after the mass shooting). All regressions control for the Treatment indicator, Post-Shooting indicator, age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity,
educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. County-clustered standard errors are in parentheses. Estimates include Gallup
sampling weights. Last row displays the pre-shooting mean for respondents in the treatment group.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                        55
Appendix Table 2: Mass Shootings and Community and Emotional Wellbeing - "Never-Treated" Border Counties Included
(10+ Victims)

                                          Excellent        Poor                                                            Excellent          Poor
                         Community                                        Emotional         Excellent        Poor
                                         Community       Community                                                        Community        Community
                         Wellbeing                                        Wellbeing        Emotional      Emotional
                                         Wellbeing       Wellbeing                                                        & Emotional      & Emotional
                           Index                                           Index           Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]
                                            [0/1]          [0/1]                                                          Health [0/1]     Health [0/1]
                             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
 Treatment X Post-        -0.271**         -0.099**          0.063           -0.062           -0.038          0.015           -0.022           -0.008
 Shooting                  (0.103)          (0.041)         (0.040)         (0.075)          (0.039)         (0.029)         (0.035)          (0.017)
 Sample Size                2,666           2,666           2,666            7,397            7,397           7,397           2,638            2,638
 1 Week Post-               -0.109          -0.111           -0.013          0.080            -0.021          -0.034          -0.056           -0.017
 Shooting                  (0.111)         (0.074)          (0.028)         (0.096)          (0.060)         (0.032)         (0.061)          (0.014)
 2 Weeks Post-            -0.320**         -0.144**          0.061           -0.090           0.003           0.044           -0.063         -0.031**
 Shooting                  (0.131)          (0.061)         (0.058)         (0.089)          (0.050)         (0.034)         (0.076)          (0.013)
 3 Weeks Post-              -0.014          0.045            0.023           -0.043           -0.051          -0.007          0.107            0.006
 Shooting                  (0.165)         (0.075)          (0.049)         (0.082)          (0.042)         (0.030)         (0.075)          (0.034)
 4 Weeks Post-            -0.671***       -0.179***        0.194***          -0.204           -0.086          0.062           -0.068           0.026
 Shooting                  (0.145)         (0.054)         (0.055)          (0.137)          (0.065)         (0.049)         (0.045)          (0.026)
 Sample Size                2,666           2,666           2,666            7,397            7,397           7,397           2,638            2,638
 Pre-Shooting Mean          -0.05            0.53            0.07            -0.04            0.44            0.20             0.29            0.03
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to respondents who lived in a county that had a mass shooting
with 10 or more victims (Treatment = 1) and those who lived in counties that bordered counties that had mass shootings (Treatment = 0). Sample is further
restricted to those who were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. Table displays coefficient
estimates for the interaction of Treatment (indicating whether respondent lived in a county that experienced a mass shooting) and Post-Shooting (indicating
whether the interview occurred after the mass shooting). All regressions control for the Treatment indicator, Post-Shooting indicator, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, race/ethnicity, educational attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. County-clustered standard errors are in parentheses.
Estimates include Gallup sampling weights. Last row displays the pre-shooting mean for respondents in the treatment group.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                                                      56
Appendix Table 3: Heterogeneity Tests

               Community     Excellent            Poor         Emotional    Excellent        Poor        Excellent Community   Poor Community
               Wellbeing    Community         Community        Wellbeing   Emotional      Emotional       & Emotional Health     & Emotional
                  Index    Wellbeing [0/1]   Wellbeing [0/1]     Index     Health [0/1]   Health [0/1]            [0/1]          Health [0/1]
                   (1)           (2)               (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)                  (7)                (8)
                 -0.609*      -0.254**           0.024           -0.183       -0.070         0.090               -0.228              0.087
 Parents
                 (0.067)       (0.014)          (0.904)         (0.204)      (0.290)        (0.183)             (0.137)             (0.292)
                 N=223           223              223             1,099       1,099          1,099                 222                222
                [=-0.10]     [=0.50]           [=0.08]         [=-0.05]     [=0.41]        [=0.19]             [=0.27]             [=0.03]

 Childless       0.078          -0.069           -0.028          -0.017       -0.046         -0.001             -0.065              -0.009
 Adults         (0.624)        (0.221)           (0.778)        (0.954)      (0.485)        (0.990)            (0.198)             (0.835)
                N=512            512               512            2,682       2,682           2,682              504                 504
               [=-0.11]       [=0.51]           [=0.09]        [=-0.07]     [=0.44]        [=0.22]            [=0.29]             [=0.04]

                 -0.184       -0.168**           -0.035          -0.093     -0.095**         0.030            -0.235**              0.028
 Men
                (0.528)        (0.030)           (0.788)        (0.362)      (0.015)        (0.412)            (0.013)             (0.743)
                N=380            380               380            1,919       1,919          1,919               374                 374
               [=-0.12]       [=0.46]           [=0.08]        [=0.04]      [=0.46]        [=0.17]            [=0.29]             [=0.03]

                 -0.078        -0.129*           -0.045          -0.055       -0.035         0.030              -0.109              0.027
 Women
                (0.791)        (0.056)           (0.741)        (0.683)      (0.552)        (0.400)            (0.108)             (0.712)
                N=355            355               355            1,862       1,862          1,862               352                 352
               [=-0.10]       [=0.55]           [=0.10]        [=-0.17]     [=0.40]        [=0.24]            [=0.27]             [=0.04]

 White, non-     0.139          -0.034           -0.117          -0.089     -0.096**         0.017            -0.107**              -0.019
 Hispanic       (0.574)        (0.543)           (0.237)        (0.404)      (0.025)        (0.653)            (0.019)             (0.693)
                N=504            504               504            2,735       2,735          2,735               497                 497
               [=-0.22]       [=0.46]           [=0.11]        [=-0.06]     [=0.42]        [=0.20]            [=0.25]             [=0.03]

 Black, non-     -0.435         -0.201            0.075          -0.154       -0.040         0.134              -0.138              0.167
 Hispanic       (0.487)        (0.345)           (0.633)        (0.586)      (0.746)        (0.213)            (0.326)             (0.263)
                N=100            100               100            343          343            343                100                 100
               [=-0.14]       [=0.52]           [=0.10]        [=-0.10]     [=0.46]        [=0.25]            [=0.34]             [=0.05]

                                                                     57
 Other, non-           -0.050             -0.237              0.000              0.114            0.094            0.010                1.000                   0.000
 Hispanic                 -                  -                  -               (0.360)          (0.313)          (0.886)                 -                       -
                       N=18                 18                 18                 229              229              229                  18                      18
                      [=0.25]            [=0.60]             [=0.00]           [=0.09]          [=0.47]          [=0.14]               [=0.32]                 [=0.00]

                        -0.806           -0.551**              0.011             -0.164          -0.059*          0.127**                -0.183                  0.015
 Hispanic
                       (0.331)            (0.045)             (0.772)           (0.119)          (0.055)          (0.041)               (0.339)                 (0.624)
                       N=113                113                 113               474              474              474                   111                     111
                      [=0.22]            [=0.62]             [=0.03]           [=-0.08]         [=0.42]          [=0.21]               [=0.35]                 [=0.03]

 Less than              -0.280             -0.469             -0.044             -0.058           -0.104           0.095                 0.281                   -0.160
 High School           (0.361)            (0.342)             (0.246)           (0.802)          (0.429)          (0.383)               (0.678)                 (0.460)
                        N=39                 39                 39                202              202              202                   38                       38
                      [=-0.17]           [=0.59]             [=0.18]           [=-0.19]         [=0.41]          [=0.24]               [=0.34]                 [=0.11]

                        -0.188             -0.274             -0.224             0.092            0.006            -0.009              -0.280**                  0.023
 High School
                       (0.692)            (0.276)             (0.236)           (0.672)          (0.950)          (0.873)               (0.045)                 (0.787)
                       N=158                158                 158               581              581              581                   155                     155
                      [=-0.07]           [=0.50]             [=0.09]           [=-0.07]         [=0.43]          [=0.20]               [=0.23]                 [=0.02]

                        0.018              -0.075             -0.025             -0.189           -0.079           0.086                 0.031                   -0.050
 Some College
                       (0.945)            (0.540)             (0.643)           (0.368)          (0.285)          (0.262)               (0.599)                 (0.745)
                       N=222                222                 222               1,088           1,088            1,088                  220                     220
                      [=-0.26]           [=0.43]             [=0.10]           [=-0.08]         [=0.42]          [=0.22]               [=0.25]                 [=0.02]

 College or              -0.060           -0.029              0.033              -0.064          -0.068*            0.001                 -0.184*                  -0.009
 More                   (0.827)          (0.822)             (0.771)            (0.298)          (0.082)           (0.975)                (0.089)                 (0.877)
                        N=316              316                 316                1,910           1,910             1,910                   313                     313
                       [=0.02]          [=0.54]             [=0.06]            [=-0.01]         [=0.43]           [=0.18]                [=0.34]                 [=0.03]
Notes: Authors' analysis based on Mother Jones and Gallup 2008 to 2017. Sample is restricted to include respondents who lived in a county that had a mass
shooting and were interviewed up to 28 days before or up to 28 days after the shooting; the day of the shooting is excluded. 47 mass shootings occurred during
the study period. Table displays coefficient for "post-shooting"; all regressions control for age, sex, marital status, parental status, race/ethnicity, educational
attainment, county fixed effects, and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are calculated using the wild cluster bootstrap method; p-values are in parentheses;
pre-shooting means are in brackets []. Estimates include Gallup sampling weights.
*
  p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                                                       58
