                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         LIQUIDITY RISK AT LARGE U.S. BANKS

                                      Laurence M. Ball

                                     Working Paper 28124
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28124


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




I am grateful for excellent research assistance from Benjamin Chasin, Tuna Coluk, and Jakree
Koosakul, and for suggestions from Michael Arnold, Daniel Ball, Matthew Chasin, Katherine
Gleason, Patrick Honohan, Marco Macchiavelli, Christopher Martin, Mark Paddrik, Jonathan
Rose, seminar participants at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, and a
number of finance professionals who spoke to me off the record. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Laurence M. Ball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Risk at Large U.S. Banks
Laurence M. Ball
NBER Working Paper No. 28124
November 2020
JEL No. G21,G24,G28

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies liquidity risk at the six largest U.S. banks. The starting point is the stress tests
performed under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regulation, which compare a bank's liquid
assets to its loss of cash in a stress scenario that regulators say is based on the 2008 financial
crisis. These tests find that all of the large banks could endure a liquidity crisis for 30 days
without running out of cash. This paper argues, however, that some of the assumptions in the
LCR stress scenario are not pessimistic enough to capture what could happen in a crisis like 2008.
The paper then proposes changes in the dubious assumptions and performs revised stress tests.
For 2019 Q4, the revised tests suggest it is unlikely that any of the six banks would survive a
liquidity crisis for 30 days. This negative finding is most clear-cut for Goldman Sachs and
Morgan Stanley.


Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

      The central events of the 2008 financial crisis were liquidity crises at large financial

institutions. These firms lost the confidence of customers and counterparties, leading to losses of

cash through withdrawals of deposits, cutoffs of short-term lending, and other channels. Lehman

Brothers was forced into bankruptcy and Washington Mutual was closed by the FDIC. Other firms

such as Bear Stearns were sold at distressed prices, and many survived only with extraordinary

assistance from the Federal Reserve.

      How great is the risk of similar crises in the future? Since 2008, financial institutions--which

I will simply call "banks"--have increased their levels of capital and curbed some risky activities,

in part because of new regulations. But such measures will never eliminate risk completely, and

sooner or later some unexpected mishap will shake confidence in large banks. When that happens,

will a flight of customers and counterparties again drain the banks of cash and threaten their

survival? Or can banks weather such a crisis because of improvements in liquidity management or

liquidity regulation?

      Opinions on this question vary. Bankers say that liquidity risk has fallen greatly since 2008

because banks have increased their reserves of liquid assets (e.g., Bank Policy Institute, 2019).

Skeptics point out that banks still have high levels of runnable liabilities, making them susceptible

to sudden losses of cash (e.g., Johnson and Scott, 2019). The Treasury Department's Office of

Financial Research (2019) rates banks' liquidity risk as "moderate."

      This paper contributes to the debate by analyzing liquidity risk at specific banks. I examine

the six largest U.S. banks: JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup, Wells Fargo, Goldman

Sachs, and Morgan Stanley. I ask whether these firms could survive the kinds of liquidity crises that

occurred in 2008.

                                                  1
      My starting point is the fact that, since 2017, the six big banks have been subject to the

Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regulation. This rule requires a bank to repeatedly perform a

liquidity stress test. The bank must calculate its loss of cash in a 30-day stress scenario specified in

the rule, a scenario that regulators say is based on the 2008 crisis. The bank must also calculate its

holdings of "high quality liquid assets" (HQLA) that could be monetized quickly to accommodate

cash outflows. A bank's LCR--the ratio of its HQLA to its loss of cash in the stress scenario--must

be at least 100%.

      The six big banks comply with the LCR rule. This fact implies that, if the rule's stress scenario

captures what would happen in a liquidity crisis, the banks could survive a crisis for 30 days. That

period is a long time compared to the runs at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, which wiped out

those firms' cash in less than a week. With 30 days, a bank and its regulators would have a good

chance of resolving a crisis in an orderly way.

      This paper argues, however, that some of the LCR rule's assumptions are not pessimistic

enough to capture what would happen in a crisis like 2008. A bank's losses of cash in a crisis would

probably exceed its losses in the rule's stress scenario, so compliance with the rule does not really

ensure that the bank could survive for 30 days.

      Specifically, I argue that the LCR stress scenario understates three types of cash outflows:

withdrawals of retail deposits; losses of secured funding such as repurchase agreements; and

collateral calls under derivatives contracts. The scenario also overstates the level of cash inflows

available to offset outflows.

      After pointing out these problems, I propose changes in the LCR stress scenario that seem

reasonable based on the 2008 experience. I then try to derive revised LCRs for the six large banks.

Lacking some relevant information, I cannot determine these LCRs exactly, but I derive a range of

                                                   2
possible LCRs for each bank. I use data from the fourth quarter of 2019, before banking was

disrupted by the pandemic.

      My changes in stress scenario assumptions lead to substantial changes in LCRs. Based on

official assumptions, the LCRs for the six banks vary from 115% to 134%. In contrast, for each of

the six, the range for the revised LCR lies mostly or entirely below 100%. These results suggest that

none of the banks could survive a liquidity crisis for 30 days. This finding is most clear for Goldman

Sachs, whose range for the revised LCR is 65% to 88%, and Morgan Stanley, whose range is 68%

to 83%.

      The calculation of an LCR is a stress test, an inherently speculative exercise in imagining what

might happen in unusual circumstances. The stress tests in this paper are even more speculative than

most because I lack proprietary information that banks and regulators use in their tests. Nonetheless,

I believe it is useful for a disinterested researcher to analyze liquidity risk as well as possible with

public information. History teaches us that we should not uncritically accept the risk assessments

of banks and regulators.

      The rest of this paper begins with overviews of liquidity risk at large banks and of the LCR

rule. I then discuss the problematic parts of the rule, my proposed revisions, and the derivation of

revised LCRs for the six banks.



II. MAJOR TYPES OF LIQUIDITY RISK

      Each of the large banks is a financial holding company that makes investments and owns

subsidiaries that operate various businesses. These subsidiaries include commercial banks that take

deposits and make loans. They also include broker-dealers that serve as financial intermediaries,

buying or borrowing securities from clients and selling or lending them to other clients. Some of the

                                                   3
broker-dealer businesses include prime brokers serving large investors such as hedge funds, and

some include retail brokers.

      These businesses expose the banks to various types of liquidity risk. The following types were

among the most important in 2008 and remain important today:

Deposit Runs

      The four largest banks--JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and Citi--hold

hundreds of billions of dollars of deposits from individuals, firms, and governments. Goldman Sachs

and Morgan Stanley have deposit franchises that are smaller and more specialized but have grown

since 2008.

      Deposits expose banks to the most famous kind of liquidity risk: the risk of a run in which

depositors start to question the safety of their money and make sudden large withdrawals.

      The most famous liquidity crises of 2008--those at Lehman, Bear Stearns, and AIG--did not

involve deposit runs. However, runs occurred at a number of banks when losses on mortgages shook

confidence in their viability (Rose, 2015). The largest of these banks was Wachovia, which avoided

failure when it was acquired by Wells Fargo. Runs led the FDIC to close at least a dozen banks,

including Washington Mutual and Indy Mac.

      Many of the deposits withdrawn in the 2008 runs were large ones that were not fully insured

by the FDIC. However, there were also substantial withdrawals of insured deposits. Apparently, not

all insured depositors were confident that they were protected if their banks failed. (See Section 4

for more on this point.)

Losses of Repurchase Agreements

      Repurchase agreements, or repos, are an important source of funds for all the large banks. In

a repo, a bank sells a security and agrees to buy it back a short time later at a slightly higher price.

                                                   4
In economic terms, a repo is equivalent to a short-term loan of cash to the bank with the security as

collateral. Banks' counterparties in repos are financial institutions such as mutual funds with spare

cash to lend.

      The securities that banks use for repos include both securities they own and securities they

have received in transactions called reverse repos. In the latter case, a bank is an intermediary: it

temporarily gives cash to one counterparty in exchange for a security (a reverse repo) and gives the

security to another counterparty to recoup the cash (a repo).

      The terms of repos are short--often overnight--but normally they are rolled over repeatedly

and provide banks with a steady source of funds. Before 2008, banks and their regulators assumed

that repos would roll over even for a bank in distress, because the bank's counterparties seemed to

face little risk. Repos impose haircuts on collateral: the cash received by a bank is less than the value

of the security it pledges. If the bank defaults on its obligation to return cash, the counterparty can

make itself whole by seizing the security.

      A major surprise in 2008 was that distressed banks abruptly lost repo funding--first Bear

Stearns in March and then Lehman Brothers in September. When counterparties became worried

that these firms might fail, they refused to roll over repos, returned collateral, and demanded the

cash they had lent. It is not completely clear why this happened, but students of the episode suggest

that the counterparties feared some kind of inconvenience, risk, or bad publicity from dealing with

Bear and Lehman (see Duffie, 2011, and Ball, 2018). Whatever the reasons, losses of repos were

the largest factors in Bear's and Lehman's liquidity crises.

Prime Broker Runs

      Some of the large banks operate prime brokers that serve large investors such as hedge funds.

These customers deposit cash and securities with the prime brokers and may receive margin loans

                                                   5
to help them buy the securities. Customers also borrow securities from their prime brokers to make

short sales, and post cash collateral. Some of the securities that prime brokers lend to customers

belong to other customers.

      A prime broker's customers are exposed to the bank that operates the prime broker. If the bank

fails, customers may lose cash that they have deposited. They may also lose collateral they have

posted--either securities posted for margin loans or cash posted to borrow securities. If that

happens, the customers are disadvantaged because they are usually on the wrong side of haircuts:

the collateral they stand to lose is greater in value than the cash or securities they have received from

the prime broker.

      Because of these risks, customers have strong incentives to flee a prime broker if they fear it

will fail. They are likely to withdraw the cash and securities they have deposited and return

borrowed securities to recover their cash collateral.

      In such a run, customers' withdrawals of cash and the need to return cash collateral are

liquidity drains for the bank. When customers withdraw securities, the direct effect on liquidity is

positive, because the customers must return margin loans collateralized by the securities. However,

as emphasized by Duffie (2013) and Infante and Vardoulakis (2019), these "collateral runs" end up

reducing liquidity because the prime broker can no longer raise cash by lending the securities to

other customers. This loss of cash exceeds the gain from returning the securities to their owners

because of differences in haircuts.

      In 2008, prime broker runs were significant factors in the crises at Bear Stearns, Lehman

Brothers, and Morgan Stanley. Duffie (2013) reports that Morgan Stanley's prime broker lost $57

billion of cash from September 10 to September 22. The firm survived the loss only with massive

support from the Fed's Primary Dealer Credit Facility (Ball, 2018, chapter 10).

                                                   6
Collateral Calls

      Large banks are parties to derivatives contracts with notional values of many trillions of

dollars. These contracts create liquidity risk because they require the posting of cash collateral under

various circumstances that may arise in a financial crisis.

      One trigger for collateral calls is a change in a bank's financial condition, such as a downgrade

by rating agencies. This type of collateral call was one factor in Lehman Brothers' liquidity crisis.

      Another trigger is a change in the market value of a derivatives contract. This value changes

when prices change for the securities referenced in the contract. If the value of a bank's derivatives

position falls, which means the value of its counterparty's position rises, the bank must post

collateral called "variation margin." This collateral protects the gain by the counterparty from the

risk that the bank will default on the contract.

      A famous example from 2008 is the credit default swaps sold by AIG for mortgage-backed

securities. As the prices of the MBSs fell, AIG received repeated collateral calls from the holders

of the credit default swaps. This cash drain was a major factor in AIG's liquidity crisis and near-

failure.



III. DEVELOPING A LIQUIDITY STRESS TEST

      This section reviews the Liquidity Coverage Ratio rule and the stress test it requires banks to

perform, and then introduces my approach to modifying the test.

An Overview of The LCR Rule

      The LCR rule was adopted in 2014 by the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC, and it

became fully effective in 2017. The full rule is presented in the Federal Register (2014, pp. 61440-

61541). Like many U.S. bank regulations, the rule is based on an international standard developed

                                                   7
by the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision at the BIS.

      The rule requires that a covered bank repeatedly perform a liquidity stress test. The bank must

compute its cash outflows in a 30-day stress scenario, which include the liquidity drains discussed

in Section 2 and others such as take-ups of loan commitments made by the bank. The scenario also

includes offsetting inflows of cash, primarily from decreases in lending by the bank (including

lending through reverse repos). A bank must compute outflows and inflows using assumptions

specified in the rule, which regulators say are based on the 2008 crisis.

      A bank must also calculate its holdings of "high quality liquid assets" (HQLA). The LCR rule

specifies the assets that qualify as HQLA, the most common of which are deposits at the Federal

Reserve, Treasury securities, and securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises. These

assets must be unencumbered so the bank could monetize them in a crisis.

      A bank's Liquidity Coverage Ratio is its HQLA divided by its net cash outflow (outflow

minus inflow). The LCR must normally be 100% or higher, which means the bank could survive a

liquidity crisis for the 30 days covered by the stress scenario. The Basel Committee (2013a) says

that, over these 30 days, "it is assumed that appropriate corrective actions can be taken by

management and supervisors, or that the bank can be resolved in an orderly way."

      Currently, the full LCR rule applies to only eight banks, the ones that regulators have

designated as "globally systemically important banks" (G-SIBs). These banks are the six examined

in this paper plus the two custody banks, BNY Mellon and State Street.

      A G-SIB must compute its LCR every day. It is allowed to let the LCR drop below 100%

temporarily if unusual liquidity stresses arise, but it must develop a plan to eliminate this shortfall

with guidance from supervisors.

      In practice, the LCR has never fallen below 100% for any covered bank. In the fourth quarter

                                                  8
of 2019, the average LCRs at the six banks ranged from 115% at Citigroup to 134% at Morgan

Stanley.

The LCR Calculation and Disclosure

      The LCR rule includes many complex details, some of which we need to discuss before

considering revisions to the rule. To understand these points, it is helpful to examine the quarterly

LCR disclosure that banks are required to publish. Figure 1 shows the disclosure for JPMorgan

Chase for the fourth quarter of 2019.

      Measuring HQLA: In defining HQLA, the LCR rule recognizes that assets are liquid to

varying degrees. The rule defines HQLA as a weighted sum of different kinds of assets, with only

the most liquid having the highest weight of one. Other assets have lower weights to capture the risk

that not all of them could be monetized quickly.

      Specifically, there are three classes of HQLA. Level 1 HQLA, which have a weight of one,

include deposits at the Federal Reserve, Treasury securities, and the sovereign debt of some foreign

countries. Level 2A HQLA, with a weight of 0.85, include some other sovereign debt and securities

issued by government-sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (aka agency

securities). Level 2B HQLA, with a weight of 0.5, include equities in the Russell 1000 index and

many investment-grade corporate and municipal bonds.1

      Lines 1-4 of the LCR disclosure report a bank's calculation of its HQLA. In this part of the

disclosure, the column labeled "Average Unweighted Amount" reports the bank's holdings of

Levels 1, 2A, and 2B assets, and the simple sum of the three. All figures are averages of daily levels


1
 Municipal bonds were not included in HQLA when the LCR rule was adopted, but they were
added through amendments in 2016 and 2019. The equities and bonds that count as Level 2B
HQLA are limited in a number of ways. Securities are excluded, for example, if they are issued
by financial institutions or if their prices are unusually volatile.

                                                   9
over a quarter. The column labeled "Average Weighted Amount" reports the three types of assets

multiplied by their weights, and the weighted sum. The weighted sum is total HQLA in the

numerator of the LCR.

      It is debatable whether the assets in the Level 2B category should be included in HQLA, even

with a 0.5 weight. Experts on liquidity management suggest that equities and corporate and

municipal bonds are not reliable sources of liquidity in a systemic crisis (e.g. Matz, 2011, pp. 256-

262). This issue is not important in practice, however, because Level 2B assets are a very small part

of the HQLA reported by the big banks. Level 2B assets are less than 0.1 percent of total HQLA at

JPMorgan Chase.

      An important nuance is that not all of the unencumbered HQLA owned by a bank is "eligible"

for satisfying the LCR rule. The rule excludes some HQLA held by subsidiaries of the bank if these

assets are not freely transferable to other parts of the enterprise for regulatory or other reasons. As

we will see, this detail complicates my calculations of LCRs with revised outflow assumptions,

because these assumptions affect the amounts of HQLA that are eligible.

      Cash Outflows and Inflows: Lines 5-19 of the LCR disclosure summarize the cash outflows

in the LCR stress scenario. Here, the numbers in the "Unweighted" column are exposures to losses

of cash, such as levels of deposits that customers could withdraw or commitments by the bank to

provide credit. The "Weighted" column reports the amounts of these possible losses that occur in

the stress scenario. In most cases, the weighted amounts are determined by multiplying the

unweighted exposures by assumed outflow rates, such as withdrawal rates for deposits and take-up

rates for loan commitments.

      The disclosure summarizes calculations based on a plethora of outflow rates. For example, the

stress scenario includes outflow rates for deposits based on factors such as insurance coverage, the

                                                  10
types of customers who hold deposits, the customers' other relationships with the bank, what

deposits are used for, and whether deposits were placed with the bank by a broker. The outflow rates

for deposits range from 3% to 100%. Most of the outflows reported in the disclosure are aggregates

of items with different outflow rates.

      One part of the disclosure that will be important below is Line 13, "Secured wholesale funding

and asset exchange outflow." Among the outflows included here are losses of repos and losses of

cash collateral for securities loaned by the bank. Repos and securities loans have outflow rates

ranging from zero to 100% depending primarily on the types of securities involved.

      Cash inflows in the stress scenario are summarized in Lines 20-28. The calculation of inflows

parallels the calculation of outflows: possible inflows in the Unweighted column are multiplied by

inflow rates. For all the big banks, the largest category of inflows is "Secured lending and asset

exchange inflow," Line 20. This item is the mirror image of the secured-funding outflow on Line

13: it includes decreases in reverse repos and in loans of cash collateralized by securities.

      The LCR: Lines 29-33 of the disclosure compute the LCR, which is the ratio of HQLA to net

cash outflow. The level of HQLA is simply taken from Line 1, but the calculation of net cash

outflow includes two wrinkles.

      First, an initial level of net cash outflow, shown on Line 30, is computed as total outflows

minus total inflows--but with the level of inflows capped at 75% of outflows. According to

regulators, this cap is meant to ensure that banks are not "overly reliant on inflows that may not

materialize in a stress scenario" (Federal Register, p. 61478). In practice, the cap does not affect

LCR calculations for the big banks, because their inflows are less than 75% of outflows. However,

the reasoning behind the cap will be relevant for my revision of the LCR rule.

      Second, the initial level of net outflow is augmented by a "maturity mismatch" term to get the

                                                 11
final level, shown on Line 32. The mismatch term accounts for the fact that the cash outflows

reported on the disclosure may occur earlier within the 30-day stress period than the inflows. The

term is calculated so that the final net cash outflow equals the highest net outflow on any day within

the 30-day period.

A Critical Look at the LCR Calculation

      A stress test is a sound approach to assessing liquidity risk, one that banks have long used in

their internal risk management. However, the results of a test are credible only if its specific

assumptions are reasonable. Is that true of the test prescribed by the LCR rule?

      I will not question the measurement of HQLA in the numerator of the LCR. As noted above,

almost all of the HQLA reported by the big banks are Level 1 and 2A assets such as deposits at the

Fed and Treasury and agency securities. Clearly these assets are easy to monetize, even in a crisis

like 2008.

      In contrast, it is not at all clear whether the LCR rule's assumptions about cash outflows and

inflows are reasonable. I therefore examine these assumptions as carefully as I can.

      The assumptions of the U.S. LCR rule were taken with only minor changes from the rule

proposed by the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision. Both the Basel Committee and U.S.

regulators say the assumptions are based on the 2008 crisis. The Basel Committee (2013a) says:

"The stress scenario specified incorporates many of the shocks experienced during the crisis that

started in 2007 into one significant stress scenario." The Federal Reserve says that outflow rates

"were calibrated based on historical data observed during the recent financial crisis" (Board of

Governors, 2014).

      Both the Basel Committee and U.S. regulators say their stress scenarios combine idiosyncratic

shocks at a bank and market-wide shocks. U.S. regulators also say their calibration is based on "a

                                                 12
substantial amount of supervisory data collected from U.S. financial institutions" (Board of

Governors, 2014).

        However, beyond these broad principles, regulators have said remarkably little to justify the

specific assumptions of the LCR rule. For example, the many outflow rates for different types of

deposits and secured funding are presented with almost no comment. Regulators do not cite relevant

evidence, such as outflow rates in 2008.

        There has also been little discussion of specific LCR assumptions by academic researchers.

All I can find is a slide from a 2012 talk by Darrell Duffie, who cryptically questions several

assumptions, including low outflow rates for some deposits and repos. Duffie also remarks that

"other runoff ratios seem arbitrary or `negotiated.'"

        This paper tries to fill the gap in research and judge whether the LCR's outflow and inflow

assumptions are reasonable. This task is challenging because I lack the supervisory information

available to regulators, but I do my best using public information. Like regulators, I use the 2008

crisis as the primary basis for calibration.

        Some of the assumptions in the LCR stress scenario appear reasonable. For some others, there

is insufficient evidence to judge one way or the other. An example is outflows from take-ups of loan

commitments, which are included on Line 16 of the LCR disclosure. Take-ups of commitments rose

considerably in 2008 as banks' customers lost access to other financing (Ivashina and Scharfstein,

2010), but it is unclear how to calibrate an outflow rate for commitments. In such cases, I give the

benefit of the doubt to the LCR regulation and leave its assumptions unchanged in my revised stress

test.

        In the end, there are clear reasons to doubt four parts of the LCR stress scenario. The scenario

appears to understate the cash outflows in a crisis from losses of retail deposits (Lines 6 and 7 of the

                                                   13
disclosure); from losses of secured funding (Line 13); and from collateral calls under derivatives

contracts (Line 15). The scenario also overstates the offsetting cash inflows (Lines 20-28). All of

these flaws contribute to an understatement of net cash outflow in the denominator of the LCR.



IV. LOSSES OF RETAIL DEPOSITS

        This section examines the LCR rule's assumptions about outflows of retail deposits, and

proposes revised assumptions. The analysis is based primarily on the 2008 run on Washington

Mutual Bank.

The LCR Rule Assumptions

        In specifying outflow rates for deposits, the LCR rule first distinguishes between deposits of

retail and wholesale customers, where the former include all individuals plus businesses with

deposits below $1.5 million. The deposits of retail customers are then split into three categories:

"stable deposits," "other retail funding," and deposits placed at banks by brokers.

        This paper questions the outflow rates for the "stable" and "other funding" parts of retail

deposits, which are covered in Lines 6 and 7 of the LCR disclosure. I do not question the treatment

of wholesale deposits or brokered retail deposits, for which assumed outflow rates are relatively

high.

        To be counted in the stable category, a retail deposit must be fully covered by FDIC insurance.

It must also meet at least one of two other criteria: it is a "transactional" account such as a demand

deposit or NOW account; or the depositor has "another established relationship with the bank," such

as a second deposit account or a loan, which "would make deposit withdrawal highly unlikely during

a liquidity stress event."

        If a retail deposit does not qualify as stable and it was not placed by a broker, it is included

                                                   14
in "other retail funding."

       The LCR rule assumes a 3% outflow rate for stable retail deposits. The rate for other retail

funding is generally 10%, with small exceptions that are not important for this analysis.2

The Run on Washington Mutual

       As discussed in Section 2, a number of banks experienced deposit runs in 2008. Washington

Mutual, or WaMu, is an interesting case because it was the sixth-largest U.S. bank by deposits and

the largest ever closed by the FDIC. However, the principal reason for focusing on WaMu is data

availability. Rose (2015) reports daily data on WaMu's retail deposits, which we can use to evaluate

the LCR assumptions about retail deposits. Such data are not available for the other banks where

runs occurred.3

       The WaMu run is described by Rose and by Grind (2015). The run began on Monday

September 8, when the bank's regulator, the Office of Thrift Supervision, announced an enforcement

action involving mortgage underwriting. The run accelerated on September 15 when the Lehman

Brothers failure caused panic throughout the financial system, and it ended when the FDIC seized


2
 The   outflow rate is 20% or 40% for "deposits placed at the bank by a third party on behalf of a
retail customer that are not brokered deposits." Those deposits are a negligible part of the other
retail funding category for the banks with major deposit franchises, a fact that is clear because
the average outflow rate for the category is close to 10%. For example, for JPMorgan Chase in
2019 Q4, the average outflow rate for other retail funding (calculated from weighted and
unweighted amounts on the LCR disclosure) is 10.4%.
3
 Focusing on WaMu would be questionable if its run stood out as more severe than others in
2008, but that does not appear to be the case. We can compare runs at different banks using
information from Rose on total deposit outflows, including both retail and wholesale deposits.
WaMu lost 10.1% of its total deposits over 16 days, which implies a 30-day outflow rate of
18.6%. Indy Mac's total deposit outflows were similar: 8.4% over 14 days, for a 30-day rate of
17.6%. Wachovia's run was ended by the Wells Fargo acquisition after a loss of only 2.4% of
deposits over eight days. However, an FDIC analysis during the run suggested that deposit
outflows could accelerate to 1.5% per day, a 30-day rate of 36%, if Wachovia were not acquired
(FDIC, 2008).

                                                15
WaMu on September 25. The episode was a classic bank run, with heavy media coverage of

WaMu's predicament, rumors that the bank might fail, and lines of panicked customers at WaMu's

branches.

      As one would expect, there were heavy withdrawals of deposits that exceeded the FDIC

insurance limit (then $100,000), but there were also substantial withdrawals of fully-insured

deposits. Grind reports that many depositors did not know about insurance or did not trust that it

kept their money safe. WaMu employees tried to explain deposit insurance to worried customers,

but many replied with sentiments like "We just don't want to deal with it."4

      Rose's data on WaMu's retail deposits come from a declaration in a court case concerning the

bank's failure. This document reports daily deposits by "individuals and small businesses," and it

excludes brokered deposits. These data appear comparable to the sum of "stable retail deposits" and

"other retail funding" as defined in the LCR rule.5

      The reported level of deposits was $141.1 billion on September 8, the start of WaMu's run.

Deposits fell to $139.5 billion on September 12, the last business day before the Lehman

bankruptcy, and then $124.6 billion on September 25 when the FDIC seized the bank. The loss of



4
 From August 29 to September 19, WaMu lost $5.7 billion of less-than-fully-insured retail
deposits and $7.2 billion of fully-insured retail deposits (based on total deposits from Blake
[2008] and less-than-fully-insured deposits from an internal WaMu memo [Discussion Materials,
2008]). We do not have this breakdown for the period from September 8 to 25.
5
  The court case is the bankruptcy proceeding for Washington Mutual Inc., the holding company
that owned Washington Mutual Bank. The data on retail deposits appear in a declaration by an
expert witness (Blake, 2009). The declaration does not say whether the series includes brokered
deposits, but we can tell that it does not by comparing the declaration to other sources on
WaMu's deposits. Specifically, it is clear from comparing numbers that retail deposits are
defined the same way in the declaration, in the "Discussion Materials" memo from WaMu, and
in WaMu's 10-Qs for 2008 Q1 and Q2. The 10-Qs explicitly put brokered deposits in a separate
category from retail deposits.

                                                16
deposits over the 17 days from September 8 to September 25 was $16.5 billion, or 11.7% of the

September 8 level.

      These deposit losses were more severe than those assumed in the LCR stress scenario. The

scenario assumes outflows of 3% of stable retail deposits and 10% of other retail funding over 30

days. If the two types of deposits are aggregated, as they are in the WaMu data, the outflow rate

should be somewhere between 3% and 10% over 30 days. In WaMu's actual experience, it lost a

larger percentage of deposits (11.7%) over a shorter period (17 days).

A 30-Day Outflow Rate

      To revise the LCR rule, we need to calibrate deposit outflows over the rule's 30-day stress

period. WaMu's run was terminated after 17 days because the FDIC closed the bank. To use the

WaMu experience, we need an assumption about what would have happened if the FDIC had not

acted and the run had followed its course for another 13 days.

      There are, of course, different possibilities. At the time of its closure, WaMu was seeking new

sources of funds and trying to reassure the public about its health. If these efforts succeeded, deposit

withdrawals might have slowed after September 25. On the other hand, with continuing media

coverage of the run and bad news about the broader financial crisis, confidence in WaMu might

have continued to fall, causing withdrawals to accelerate.

      Given the range of possibilities, I make a natural intermediate assumption: if WaMu had not

been closed, its run would have continued at the same pace as before. More precisely, the daily rate

of deposit outflow after September 25 would have equaled the average daily rate from September

8 to September 25.

      WaMu lost 11.7% of its retail deposits from September 8 to 25, which implies a daily outflow

rate of 1 ­ (1 ­ 0.117)1/17 = 0.729%. If the bank had experienced that daily outflow over 30 days, its

                                                  17
total loss would have been 1 ­ (1 ­ 0.00729)30 = 19.7%. I will use 19.7% as the 30-day outflow rate

for WaMu's retail deposits.

Outflow Rates for Stable and Other Retail Deposits

      The 19.7% figure is an outflow rate for a mixture of stable and other retail deposits as defined

in the LCR rule. To revise the rule, we need separate outflow rates for the two types of deposits. The

daily data on WaMu's deposits are not broken down that way, but I estimate the two rates as

follows:

      I first estimate the fraction of WaMu's retail deposits that fell in each category at the start of

its run. These estimates are based on a breakdown of WaMu's deposits in its 10-Q for the second

quarter of 2008, and they are imprecise because of the timing of the data and because the categories

of deposits in the 10-Q differ from those in the LCR rule. The Appendix describes the details of my

calculation. The end result is an estimate that 32% of WaMu's retail deposits fell in the stable

category and 68% in the other category.

      This estimate and the 19.7% estimate for WaMu's average outflow rate allow us to pin down

a linear combination of the two individual outflow rates. The average of the two rates, weighted by

the fractions of initial deposits in each category, must equal 19.7%:

           (0.32)rs + (0.68)ro = 19.7% ,

where rs and ro are the outflow rates for stable and other retail deposits.

      We need one more assumption to determine the two rates. An assumption that seems plausible

is that the ratio of ro to rs is 10/3, the ratio of the 10% and 3% rates assumed in the LCR rule:

           ro/rs = 10/3 .

This assumption means the rule is correct about the relative severity of liquidity risk from stable and

other deposits. Compared to the WaMu episode, the rule understates the two outflow rates by the

                                                  18
same proportion.

      We now have two equations in rs and ro, which together yield rs = 7.6% and ro = 25.4%. I round

off these numbers to rs = 7.5% and ro = 25.0%. Each of these outflow rates is 2.5 times the

corresponding rate in the LCR rule. I use these rates when I calculate revised LCRs for the six big

banks.



V. LOSSES OF SECURED FUNDING

      This section considers the LCR rule's assumptions about secured funding. This term refers

to any transaction in which a bank has temporarily received cash in exchange for securities, and it

includes repurchase agreements and loans of securities against cash collateral. Once again, I

compare the LCR stress scenario to experiences in 2008, the most relevant of which are those of

Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and Morgan Stanley.

The LCR Rule Assumptions

      A bank's repos and security loans have different types of counterparties with different motives

for giving cash to the bank, and one might think they create different liquidity risks. In most cases,

however, the LCR rule treats different types of secured funding as equivalent transactions. One

important exception is discussed below.

      Secured funding is covered in Line 13 of the LCR disclosure. The unweighted column reports

a bank's total amount of secured funding that matures within 30 days, which means the bank will

have to return cash during the stress period unless the funding is rolled over. The weighted column

is calculated by applying a range of outflow rates to different components of total funding. An




                                                 19
outflow rate is the fraction of funding that does not roll over in the stress scenario.6

      The primary factor that determines the assumed outflow rate for a secured funding transaction

is the liquidity of the security involved--the security that a bank has posted to a repo counterparty

or lent to a customer. The LCR rule refers to this security as the "collateral" in the transaction, and

I will use that terminology in what follows. (This can be confusing in the case of security loans,

because elsewhere the term "collateral" is used for the cash posted by customers who borrow

securities.)

      The LCR rule assumes that secured funding with liquid collateral is more likely to be rolled

over, and therefore produces lower cash outflows, than funding with less liquid collateral. As

discussed below, this basic idea is consistent with banks' experiences in 2008. Counterparties were

more willing to roll repos with liquid collateral because they were less fearful of losses if a bank

defaulted and they needed to seize and sell the collateral.

      The rule distinguishes among collateral with varying degrees of liquidity using the categories

that are also used to determine High Quality Liquid Assets in the numerator of the LCR. The rule

assumes a 0% outflow rate for secured funding with collateral that is Level 1 HQLA, which means

all of this funding is rolled over. Outflow rates become higher as collateral becomes less liquid: they

are 15% for collateral that is Level 2A HQLA, 50% for Level 2B, and 100% for collateral that is not

HQLA of any type.

      I do not question the low outflow rates for secured funding with Level 1 collateral (such as



6
  In addition to repos and securities loans, Line 13 includes less common types of secured
funding such as collateralized deposits. It also includes asset exchanges, transactions in which a
bank pledges securities to obtain more liquid securities rather than cash. The LCR rule includes
cash outflow rates for various types of asset exchanges, which I do not question (see Appendix
for details).

                                                  20
Treasury securities) and Level 2A collateral (such as agency securities). I also do not question the

100% outflow rate for non-HQLA collateral, which is obviously the most pessimistic possible

assumption. I will, however, question the 50% rate for the in-between category of Level 2B HQLA,

and argue that 100% is more realistic for this category as well as for non-HQLA collateral. This

detail is important because the big banks have large amounts of secured funding with Level 2B

collateral.

      There is one other important nuance in the LCR assumptions about secured funding. Although

the outflow rate is usually 100% for non-HQLA collateral, the rule makes an exception for some

loans of non-HQLA securities. The outflow rate is only 50% if the loans are made to effect

customers' short positions and the securities belong to other customers of the bank. The special

treatment of these transactions is a second assumption about secured funding that I question.7

The Outflow Rate for Level 2B Funding

      Level 2B HQLA include Russell 1000 equities and many investment-grade bonds issued by

corporations and municipalities. The LCR stress scenario assumes that a bank loses 50% of funding

with this type of collateral but retains the other 50%. Here I argue that this assumption is clearly

overoptimistic for repos and questionable for securities loans, although there is less evidence about

the latter. All in all, a 100% outflow rate for Level 2B funding is more reasonable than a 50% rate.

      Level 2B Repos: We have lots of information on losses of repos in the Lehman Brothers and

Bear Stearns crises. These firms completely lost the ability to roll over repos with any collateral

besides Treasury and agency securities. This happened suddenly: at both Lehman and Bear,



7
 The LCR treatment of secured funding also includes details that I ignore, such as special
outflow rates for some collateralized deposits and for transactions with a government or
government-sponsored enterprise.

                                                 21
previously stable repo funding collapsed in less than a week, a far shorter period than the 30 days

covered by the LCR stress test.

      Ball (2018, chapter 5) describes the collapse of Lehman's repo funding in September 2008.

Lehman's repo collateral included about $100 billion of non-Treasury/agency securities, of which

a large part was investment-grade bonds and major-index equities that would probably be

categorized as Level 2B HQLA under the LCR rule. Repo funding was stable until Tuesday

September 9, when bad news including a disappointing earnings announcement triggered a collapse

of confidence in Lehman and repo counterparties began to flee. Over the weekend of September 13-

14, consultants advising Lehman suggested that no non-Treasury/agency repos would roll over

during the week of September 15, and that expectation was a major reason for Lehman's bankruptcy

filing.

      Journalist Kate Kelly (2009) gives a detailed account of Bear Stearns's crisis in March 2008,

and policymakers such as Cox (2009) and Dudley (2009) give overviews. Dudley's summary is that

"Bear Stearns saw a complete loss of its short-term secured funding virtually overnight." As a result,

the firm's liquidity pool, which had been stable, dropped from $18 billion on March 10 to $2 billion

on March 13, when Bear notified regulators that it would be "unable to operate normally" on the

next day and received an emergency loan from the Fed.

      By the ends of the Lehman and Bear crises, these firms even had trouble rolling over repos

collateralized by Treasury and agency securities--the securities that the LCR rule classifies as Level

1 and 2A HQLA. This development was surprising because it appears essentially riskless to lend

cash against Treasuries and agencies. SEC Chair Cox's discussion of Bear's crisis emphasizes its

loss of Treasury and agency repos, and Kelly gives examples, such as a refusal by Fidelity

Investments to accept Treasury collateral on March 14.

                                                 22
      When Bear and Lehman lost repos with Treasury and agency collateral, they were able to

replace them (but not other repos) with General Collateral Finance (GCF) repos. GCF repos are

arranged anonymously through a clearinghouse, so they remain available to a bank even if it

experiences a run. Because of this back-up market, Treasury and agency repos create little liquidity

risk, as the LCR rule assumes. But Bear's and Lehman's difficulties in rolling these repos are

nonetheless relevant: they reinforce the point that a distressed bank is unlikely to roll any repos with

less liquid collateral, including Level 2B HQLA.8

      Loans of Level 2B Securities: In addition to repos, a bank's secured funding includes the cash

posted by prime broker customers when they borrow securities from the bank. It seems reasonable

to assume that, for a given type of security, a bank's cash outflow rate is at least as high for loans

of the security as for repos collateralized with the security. In particular, if the outflow rate is 100%

for repos with Level 2B collateral, as I assume, it should also be 100% for loans of Level 2B

securities.

      The reason involves the haircuts in repos and securities loans. In a repo, the value of the

security pledged by a bank exceeds the cash it receives. This overcollateralization reduces

counterparties' incentives to terminate repos with a distressed bank (although not by enough to

prevent the repo runs on Bear and Lehman). In contrast, when a bank lends a security, the cash


8
  A suggestion I have heard from readers (but not seen in writing): If a bank cannot roll over
repos with Level 2B collateral, it can recoup its lost cash by selling the collateral. That seems
possible, at least if the collateral is Russell 1000 equities that the bank owns. However, I ignore
this possibility because it appears that neither Lehman nor Bear Stearns sought to raise cash by
selling Level 2B assets during their crises. A likely reason is that unusual asset sales would have
signaled distress at a time when the firms were desperately trying to maintain the appearance of
business as usual to quell runs. Cohan (2009) reports that asset sales were suggested by some
Bear executives but vetoed by CEO Alan Schwartz because of "signaling risk." Duffie (2011)
says that banks facing liquidity crises eschew asset sales because "even if they can sell enough
assets to raise cash, market participants may make fatal inferences."

                                                   23
posted by the borrower usually exceeds the value of the security, which means the borrower suffers

a loss if the bank fails to unwind the transaction. This fact gives customers of a distressed bank a

strong incentive to return borrowed securities and demand cash.

      Bear, Lehman, and Morgan Stanley experienced prime broker runs that drastically reduced

their securities loans. Customers who had borrowed securities returned them and demanded cash.

In addition, as discussed in section 2, the banks experienced collateral runs: they were forced to

terminate loans of rehypothecated securities because the owners of the securities withdrew them.

There is not much quantitative evidence on the resulting cash outflows, but accounts suggest they

were large and happened abruptly.

      We have a vivid account of Bear Stearns's prime broker run from Kelly's book. The run

occurred largely on March 12-13, 2008, when Bear's repo funding was also collapsing. Kelly says

that "hedge funds were racing for the exits, taking billions of dollars with them," and quotes the

panicked head of Bear's prime broker as telling its CEO that "our cash is flying out the door." She

also reports the experience of a Goldman Sachs executive who "was witnessing, firsthand, the mass

exodus from [Bear's] prime brokerage, as panicked hedge fund clients contacted Goldman to see

about moving their balances there."

      We have some quantitative evidence on the decline in securities loans at Lehman Brothers.

Over the last three business days before the bankruptcy, the value of securities lent for customer

short positions fell from $34.4 billion to $24.3 billion, a drop of 29% (Lowitt and Tonucci, 2008).

Extrapolating that experience yields a 30-day outflow rate of 97%.

      In light of these experiences, and the incentives created by haircuts, it seems dubious to

assume that a bank can maintain a substantial fraction of its securities loans for any type of security

except Treasuries and agencies. (In the case of Treasuries and agencies, even if customers terminate

                                                  24
securities loans the bank can recoup the cash it loses by pledging the securities in GCF repos.)9

The Special Treatment of Loans of Customers' Securities

      Here I question an arcane detail of the LCR rule's assumptions about secured funding with

non-HQLA collateral. A 100% outflow rate applies to most funding with this type of collateral,

including a bank's loans of non-HQLA securities to effect customer short positions when the bank

owns the securities. However, the outflow rate is only 50% for the same type of securities loans

when the securities are owned by other customers of the bank­ that is, when the bank rehypothecates

non-HQLA securities that customers have deposited in prime broker accounts or posted as collateral

for margin loans.

      These assumptions do not make sense. A bank's securities loans create liquidity risk because

borrowers may return the securities and demand cash that they posted in the transaction. That is

likely to happen if customers lose confidence in the bank's viability. There is no apparent reason that

this risk should differ depending on who owns the securities. Indeed, customers who borrow

securities are unlikely even to know whether the securities are part of a bank's inventory or come

from other customers.

      There is actually a reason to think that loans of customers' securities expose a bank to more

liquidity risk than loans of its own securities, not less as the LCR rule assumes. The reason is the

risk of collateral runs: the owners of securities lent by the bank may demand the securities back,

which would force the bank to stop lending them and return cash to borrowers. There is no such risk

when the bank lends its own securities. The risk of collateral runs is separate from the risk that


9
 In a prime broker run, customers withdraw cash deposits from their brokerage accounts as well
as demanding the return of cash they posted for securities loans. The LCR rule assumes a 100%
outflow rate for most brokerage deposits, so the treatment of this item is not overly optimistic
and I do not change it in my revised stress scenario.

                                                  25
borrowers of securities choose to return them and demand cash, the risk for which the ownership

of the securities seems irrelevant.10

      In the discussion of the LCR rule in the Federal Register (p. 61507), regulators report that

commentators on the rule criticized the inconsistent treatment of securities loans with non-HQLA

collateral. The commentators argued, as I do, that "the source of the collateral covering the customer

short position is irrelevant" to the risk that borrowers will return the collateral. They say that the

outflow rate should be the same for all loans of non-HQLA securities.

      The commentators--which are presumably banks seeking a less stringent regulation--say that

the 50% outflow rate for some loans of non-HQLA securities should be extended to other loans of

these securities, which have a 100% rate under the current rule. But that change, while making the

rule more internally consistent, would not be prudent. The 2008 experience suggests a 100% outflow

rate for securities loans even for collateral in the relatively liquid category of Level 2B HQLA. It

follows that the outflow rate should also be 100% for all non-HQLA collateral, regardless of the

source of the collateral.



VI. DERIVATIVES VALUATION CHANGES11

      Derivatives contracts include a variety of provisions concerning cash collateral. When a bank

enters a contract, it must post "initial margin" to guarantee its performance, and after that the bank's


10
  Regulators discuss the 50% outflow rate examined here in the Federal Register (2014, p.
61507). The justification for the assumption is difficult to understand, but it appears to rest on
symmetry with the 50% cash inflow rate assumed for margin loans secured with non-HQLA
collateral. Section 7 of this paper criticizes assumptions of symmetry between cash outflows and
inflows.
11
  The problem with the LCR rule that this section discusses was pointed out to me by an
economist at a regulatory agency.

                                                  26
counterparties can demand additional collateral in certain circumstances. The bank must post

"variation margin" if the value of a contract decreases, which can happen when prices change for

the underlying assets referenced in the contract. Other triggers for collateral calls include rating

downgrades of the bank and changes in the value of non-cash collateral that the bank has previously

posted.

      The LCR stress scenario includes cash outflows from several types of collateral calls. Many

of the assumptions about these outflows are difficult to evaluate, but one is clearly problematic: the

assumption about variation margin.

The Dubious Assumption About Variation Margin

      A bank must post variation margin when the fair value of a derivatives contract becomes

negative for the bank and positive for its counterparty. The new collateral protects the counterparty

from loss if the bank defaults on the contract. A famous example is the collateral calls on AIG's

credit default swaps in 2008. These calls were triggered by declines in the values of AIG's CDS

positions due to falling prices for the mortgage-backed securities that AIG guaranteed.

      In the LCR stress scenario, cash outflows from variation margin are determined in a different

way from most outflows. The calibration is not based on the liquidity crises of 2008. Instead, each

bank's calibration is based on its own experience in the recent past.

      Specifically, the rule requires a bank to look back over the previous 24 months. For every 30-

day period within that time span, the bank must compute its net cash outflow due to derivatives

valuation changes: collateral it must post due to decreases in derivatives values minus collateral it

receives from counterparties due to increases in values. The outflow from valuation changes in the

LCR stress scenario is the highest absolute value of the bank's net outflow in any of the 30-day

periods.

                                                 27
      When regulators published the final LCR rule, they gave a cryptic explanation for the

treatment of variation margin: "The historical experience of the covered company with its

derivatives portfolio should be a reasonable proxy for potential derivative valuation changes"

(Federal Register, 2014, p. 61490).

      Historical experience is a reasonable basis for calibrating the LCR stress scenario, but the 24-

month look-back period seems inappropriate. It means that the assumed outflows of variation margin

are based entirely on recent history, which often will be a tranquil period in financial markets.

Outflows in a financial crisis could be much larger than any 30-day outflow in the previous 24

months.

      A financial crisis typically causes volatility in the prices of many securities, which in turn

implies volatility in the values of derivatives that reference the securities. In this environment, a

bank faces greater risks of demands for variation margin than it normally does.

      The use of a 24-month look-back period is especially puzzling in light of other regulation of

derivatives. In 2015, U.S. regulators adopted a Basel Committee proposal concerning the initial

margin that banks must post when they enter derivatives contracts. The Basel Committee (2013b)

says that initial margin must protect counterparties against exposures in an "extreme but plausible"

scenario with a one percent chance of occurring. It also says that calibration of the scenario should

be "based on historical data that incorporates a period of significant financial stress... to ensure that

sufficient margin will be available when it is most needed." This approach seems more prudent than

calibration based on the last 24 months.

Revising the Assumption

      While it is clear that the LCR treatment of variation margin is unsatisfactory, it is not clear

how the treatment should be changed or how much difference it makes for cash outflows at the big

                                                   28
banks. For each bank, we would like to know (i) the outflows due to variation margin that it

currently reports and (ii) the outflows in a more reasonable stress scenario. The difference between

these numbers would tell us how much the LCR rule understates outflows. Unfortunately, there are

two problems.

      First, we do not know the outflows from variation margin that banks currently report. These

outflows are included in Line 15 of the LCR disclosure, "Outflow related to derivative exposures

and other collateral requirements." But this line also includes other kinds of collateral calls, such as

those triggered by rating downgrades, plus non-contingent payments due under derivatives contracts.

      Second, not much evidence is available on postings of variation margin during financial crises.

There are data from AIG's crisis in 2008, discussed below, but it is not clear whether this episode

is a good guide to risks facing banks today.

      Lacking a better approach, I revise the LCR stress scenario in a crude way: I double the

derivatives-related outflows reported on Line 15 of the disclosure. That is, I assume that outflows

in a crisis are 100% higher than the levels computed under the LCR rule. 100% is a round number,

and it does not strike me as obviously too high or too low.

      To interpret my assumption, suppose that half of the outflows that are currently reported on

Line 15 are due to variation margin. In this case, raising the total amount on Line 15 by 100% is

equivalent to raising outflows from variation margin by 200%. These outflows are three times as

large in the revised stress scenario as they are under the LCR calculation based on 24 months.

      As a check on the plausibility of my revised assumption, I compare its implications to the

experience of AIG. As detailed below, my doubling of Line 15 adds amounts ranging from $9

billion to $40 billion to the cash outflows in stress tests for the big banks. The average is $29 billion.

In the summer and fall of 2008, AIG had to post $35 billion in variation margin on its CDS

                                                   29
contracts, and more was expected until the Fed created Maiden Lane III in November (FCIC, 2011).

That entity paid an additional $27 billion on one day to purchase the securities referenced in the

CDSs and terminate the CDSs. These cash outflows are the same order of magnitude as the

additional variation margin implied by my revised assumption.



VII. INFLOWS IN THE LCR CALCULATION

      So far this paper has argued that the LCR stress scenario understates the cash outflows that

are likely in a liquidity crisis. This section argues that the scenario also overstates the cash inflows

available to offset outflows.

      For all the big banks, the largest category of inflows is "secured lending and asset exchanges,"

Line 20 of the LCR disclosure. I argue that the treatment of this item is inconsistent with both the

2008 experience and basic principles of liquidity management. I also suggest reasons that other

types of inflows may be overstated, and propose an adjustment to total inflows to account for all of

these problems.

The LCR Rule's Treatment of Secured Lending

      We have previously discussed secured funding, transactions in which a bank temporarily

receives cash in exchange for securities. Secured lending is the opposite: the bank temporarily

provides cash to a counterparty and receives securities as collateral. The main types of secured

lending are reverse repurchase agreements and margin loans that help finance customers' purchases

of securities.

      The LCR stress scenario assumes that part of a bank's secured lending with maturities of 30

days or less does not roll over. That creates a cash inflow, just as an outflow occurs when secured

funding does not roll over.

                                                  30
      The specific LCR assumptions about secured lending are symmetric to the assumptions about

secured funding. In particular, the inflow rate for a secured lending transaction is usually the same

as the outflow rate for secured funding with the same collateral. The inflow rate is zero when the

collateral held by the bank is Level 1 HQLA, 15% for Level 2A, 50% for Level 2B, and 100% for

collateral that is not HQLA.

      Like many parts of the LCR rule, the assumptions about secured lending are rarely discussed.

Regulators apparently believe that a bank facing a crisis will treat counterparties to which it lends

cash in the same way as it is treated by counterparties that provide it with cash. In particular, the

bank will terminate large fractions of its lending against Level 2B and non-HQLA collateral.

However, no rationale for this idea appears in official discussions of the LCR rule such as the

Federal Register (2014) and Basel Committee (2013a).

      Regulators' thinking may reflect the fact that much of banks' secured funding involves

rehypothecation of collateral they receive through secured lending. Fed Governor Stein discussed

this case in a 2013 speech:

If a dealer borrows on a collateralized basis with repo and then turns around and lends the proceeds
to a hedge fund in a similar fashion, the LCR deems the dealer to have no net liquidity
exposure--and hence imposes no incremental liquidity requirement.

Stein is pointing out that, in the LCR stress scenario, the cash inflow associated with the loan to the

hedge fund equals the outflow associated with the repo, because the collateral in the two transactions

is the same. There is no effect on net cash outflow or the required level of HQLA. Stein continues:

The implicit logic is that as long as the dealer can generate the necessary cash by not rolling over
its loan to the hedge fund, it will always be able to handle any outflows of funding that come from
being unable to roll over its own borrowing.12


12
  Stein goes on to criticize this part of the LCR rule based on externalities: if a bank generates
cash by reducing its lending, it causes liquidity stress for its customers. This effect is outside the

                                                  31
Critiques of the Symmetry Assumption

      The LCR's symmetric treatment of secured funding and lending conflicts with widely-

accepted principles of liquidity management. Experts on the subject say that a bank facing a crisis

could offset losses of funding by reducing its lending, but that the bank has strong incentives not to

do so because of reputational costs. A decrease in lending would be a signal of distress that worsens

the run on the bank. In addition, even if the bank survives, its action would damage customer

relationships and reduce the value of its franchise.

      These ideas appear, for example, in a book on liquidity management by consultants from

PricewaterhouseCoopers (Venkat and Baird, 2016, pp. 131-132). These authors warn:

[A] suspension of activities, such as reverse repo or other customer funding operations, could be
perceived as signs of distress. These contingent actions may be necessary during the later stages of
a crisis; however, at earlier stages, perceived signals of weakness may actually precipitate a liquidity
crunch for the institution.

The authors also warn that a cutoff of lending will drive away customers "who believe that the

institution has spurned their business."

      Matz (2011, pp. 35-36) says that one failure of liquidity management in 2008 was that banks

did not understand the asymmetry between secured funding and lending. They "underestimated or

ignored the need to extend credit in order to avoid reputational threats." In the same vein, the

international Senior Supervisors Group (2009) reports that "asymmetrical unwinding of client

positions was a material drain on liquidity." Banks lost cash when customers closed short positions,

and they still needed to lend cash to finance other customers' long positions.

      The LCR's treatment of secured lending has even been criticized by Federal Reserve officials,

including Tarullo (2014) and Van Der Weide (2016). The latter questions the idea, discussed above,


scope of my analysis.

                                                  32
that a bank faces no net liquidity risk when it receives collateral in secured lending transactions and

passes it on in secured funding transactions. Such an arrangement is called a "matched book." Van

Der Weide says13:

The LCR generally assumes a very large book of matched book repo can be unwound pretty
seamlessly in a very short period of time. We don't think that's a reasonable assumption.... The
funding risk is primarily one where firms often have very strong reputational incentives to maintain
their lending to many of their clients, even if they're losing funding on the repo side.

The Experience of Lehman Brothers

      We have extensive information on cash outflows and inflows in the Lehman Brothers crisis,

thanks to documents made public by Lehman's court-appointed bankruptcy examiner (Valukas,

2010). This evidence is starkly at odds with the idea that a bank will offset losses of secured funding

by terminating secured lending in a symmetric fashion.

      The evidence includes memos from Lehman's Treasury department that give a daily

accounting of cash flows and the firm's dwindling liquidity pool. As discussed before, cash flowed

out of Lehman during its final week because repos did not roll over and customers closed short

positions. In contrast, the Treasury memos do not report any offsetting inflows from termination of

secured lending. Indeed, there is no evidence that Lehman executives even discussed the possibility

of raising cash that way. (They did discuss other possibilities for raising cash, such as drawing on

credit lines.)14


13
  Van Der Weide makes this point in discussing the proposed Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)
rule. That regulation focuses on banks' liquidity over a one-year horizon and sets minimum
levels for equity and non-runnable liabilities such as long-term debt. Unlike the LCR rule, the
NSFR rule treats secured funding and lending asymmetrically. An increase in matched book repo
implies an increase in required stable funding.
14
  Ball (2018, chapter 5) reviews this experience. The relevant memos, which are available
through links in the footnotes of the Valukas report, include Lehman memos on September 13
and October 7 and a memo from Lehman's advisors at Lazard on September 13 or 14 (fns 5604,

                                                  33
      Earlier in 2008, both Lehman and the New York Fed had performed liquidity stress tests for

the firm. Summaries of these tests occasionally mention the possibility of cutting off secured

lending, and reject the idea. A Fed test from June assumes "no cash inflows from reverse repos of

less liquid securities." Lehman tests in April and July assume the firm would "avoid termination of

prime broker agreements" and maintain liquidity "without reducing client funding." For all the tests,

the results include large cash outflows from secured funding and no inflows from secured lending.15

      Recall Venkat and Baird's view that, despite reputational costs, a bank might reduce secured

lending "during the later stages of a crisis." Based on Lehman's experience, even this view seems

too optimistic about cash inflows. Lehman maintained its secured lending even as its liquidity was

completely exhausted and it declared bankruptcy.

Other Inflows

      So far my analysis of inflows in the LCR stress scenario has focused on secured lending. The

other components of inflows are smaller and we have less information to evaluate them, but some

seem questionable:

      Retail and Wholesale Cash Inflows: These items, reported on Lines 21 and 22 of the LCR

disclosure, reflect payments due over the next 30 days on loans to retail customers and unsecured

loans to wholesale customers. In computing cash inflows, the rule applies weights of 100% for

customers that are financial institutions (a subset of wholesale customers) and 50% for all other

customers. This calibration means that none of the payments due from financial institutions, and


6341, and 2716). Although Lehman did not choose to terminate any secured lending, some
customers who had received margin loans terminated them to avoid losing securities they had
posted as collateral.
15
  These  stress tests are summarized in memos available through the Valukas footnotes (fn 6331
for the New York Fed test and fn 6329 for the Lehman tests).

                                                 34
only half of those from other customers, are refinanced or replaced by new lending.

      Liquidity experts say that banks must always roll over a substantial part of their lending to

preserve customer relationships. Banks must also continue to make new loans to protect their

reputations (e.g., Matz, p. 241-243). In light of these issues, the LCR assumptions about inflows

from loan payments seem aggressive.

      Net Derivative Cash Inflow: This item is reported on Line 24 of the LCR disclosure. It covers

payments due to a bank over the next 30 days under derivatives contracts, including the return of

collateral. A risk ignored by the LCR rule is that the bank's counterparties may not deliver the

payments.

      This problem arose for Lehman Brothers, according to the Trustee who oversaw the

liquidation of the firm's U.S. broker-dealer (Giddens, 2010, pp. 29-39). The Trustee reports that, as

counterparties "became concerned about Lehman's continuing operations," they failed to return

collateral for currency derivatives after Lehman fulfilled its obligations to them. The Trustee says:

"These significant increases in failed transactions reduced [the broker-dealer's] available cash and

increased the need for financing positions at the very time when borrowing capacity was

contracting."

      Duffie (2012) also briefly mentions this type of problem. In a liquidity crisis, Duffie warns,

"contractual claims to cash can fail (e.g., margin)."

Adjusting Inflows in the Stress Scenario

      While it seems clear that the LCR stress scenario is overly optimistic about inflows, it is hard

to know how drastically the assumptions should be changed. In looking for a reasonable calibration,

I take inspiration from a provision of the LCR rule mentioned in section 3: the cap on total inflows.

      This provision limits the inflows that a bank can count when it calculates its net cash outflows:

                                                  35
inflows cannot exceed 75% of gross outflows. If a bank's outflows are $100 and its inflows would

otherwise be $90 under the LCR assumptions, then inflows are capped at $75 and net cash outflows

are $25 rather than $10.

        Regulators gave a cryptic explanation for the inflow cap when they published the LCR rule.

At several points in the Federal Register, they say that the cap ensures banks are not "overly reliant

on inflows," which "may not materialize in a period of stress." They do not say why inflows

calculated under the other LCR assumptions "may not materialize," but I conjecture that they are

thinking of the issues about inflows discussed above.

        In practice, the inflow cap is far from binding for any of the big banks: for the six, total

inflows range from 11% to 58% of total outflows. Therefore, the cap is irrelevant for the banks'

liquidity management.

        This fact suggests a flaw in the LCR rule. The factors that may prevent inflows from

occurring--such as reputational effects of cutting off secured lending--are present regardless of the

ratio of inflows to outflows. It is generally prudent to scale down the inflows in the LCR stress

scenario, and the cap in the current rule does not do so for the big banks.

        To scale down inflows in my revised stress scenario, I borrow the 75% figure from the inflow

cap in the current rule. I presume that this figure is motivated by reasonable intuition on the part of

regulators about the severity of the problems that might prevent inflows from materializing. To

account for these problems, I simply multiply total inflows on Line 28 of the LCR disclosure by

0.75.



VIII. BOUNDS FOR ELIGIBLE HQLA

        My goal is to calculate LCRs for the six big banks based on the revised assumptions about

                                                  36
cash outflows and inflows discussed above. Unfortunately, an arcane detail of the LCR rule

complicates these calculations and makes them less precise. This part of the rule concerns the

calculation of HQLA in the numerator of the LCR.

      To understand this issue, recall that the big "banks" are financial holding companies with

subsidiaries including commercial banks and broker-dealers. The total HQLA of a bank includes

assets owned directly by the holding company and assets owned by the subsidiaries. According to

the LCR rule, not all of total HQLA counts as "eligible" HQLA in the LCR numerator. Eligible

HQLA includes all HQLA owned by the holding company but only part of the HQLA owned by

subsidiaries. This provision is motivated by regulatory restrictions on transfers of HQLA between

different parts of a bank, which can prevent the bank from accessing its subsidiaries' HQLA to

absorb liquidity losses.

      The Appendix describes this part of the LCR rule in more detail. The reason it matters is that

the amount of a subsidiary's HQLA that counts in a bank's eligible HQLA depends on how much

of the net cash outflow in the bank's stress scenario occurs at the subsidiary. This amount changes

when the assumptions of the scenario change. As a result, my revisions to the scenario change the

eligible HQLA in the numerator of the LCR as well as the NCO in the denominator.

      With only publically available information, it is not possible to calculate a bank's eligible

HQLA after my changes in LCR assumptions. All we can do is determine bounds on eligible HQLA.

The lower bound is eligible HQLA under the official LCR rule, which a bank reports on its LCR

disclosure. The upper bound is the bank's total HQLA, including HQLA that is ineligible under the

official rule.

      Banks are not required to report total HQLA in their LCR disclosures, only eligible HQLA.

Goldman Sachs voluntarily reports total HQLA, but the other big banks do not. In three

                                                37
cases--Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and Morgan Stanley--we can estimate total HQLA from

information in the banks' 10-Ks. See the Appendix for details. Unfortunately, we lack information

on total HQLA at JPMorgan Chase and Citi, so for those banks we do not have upper bounds on the

revised level of eligible HQLA.



IX. REVISED LCRS FOR THE SIX LARGE BANKS

      Earlier sections of this paper propose changes to four parts of the LCR stress scenario. This

section examines the implications for the six big banks in 2019 Q4. I calculate the total change in

net cash outflow implied by my revised assumptions, and then compute ranges for revised LCRs

using the upper and lower bounds on eligible HQLA.

Revised Calculations of Net Cash Outflow

      Table 1 summarizes my four proposed changes in the LCR stress scenario: those concerning

retail deposits, secured funding, derivatives, and cash inflows. The Table also describes how to

calculate the effects of the revised assumptions on a bank's net cash outflow.

      For most of the revised assumptions, the effects on NCO are easy to calculate from

information in LCR disclosures. The one exception is outflows from secured funding. The

disclosures lump together all types of secured funding, and we need to know how much falls in the

categories for which I increase the assumed outflow rates. To estimate these amounts, I use banks'

disclosures on form FR Y-15, the Banking Organization Systemic Risk Report, which breaks down

secured funding by type of collateral. See the Appendix for details.

      Table 2 reports calculations of net cash outflows for 2019 Q4, with a row for each of the big

banks. The banks are ordered by their assets at end of the quarter, which are reported for reference

in the first column of the Table. The second column shows net cash outflow as computed under the

                                                38
official LCR rule, from Line 32 of the LCR disclosure ("official NCO"). Columns (3) through (6)

show the increases in NCO resulting from each of my changes in outflow and inflow assumptions.

We can see that each of the four changes is material for most of the banks.

      Column (7) shows one more adjustment to net cash outflow: an addition to the maturity

mismatch term, Line 31 in the LCR disclosure. To derive this adjustment, I assume that the official

stress scenario understates a bank's peak level of net cash outflow within the 30-day stress period

by the same fraction as it understates net outflow at 30 days. The addition to the maturity mismatch

term proves to be substantial for one bank, JPMorgan Chase, but small for the other five.16

      Column (8) of Table 2 shows net cash outflow after all my adjustments ("revised NCO"). This

quantity equals official NCO in column (2) plus the additions in columns (3)-(7). Finally, column

(9) gives revised NCO in (8) as a percentage of official NCO. Revised NCO ranges from 125% of

official NCO for Wells Fargo to 198% for Morgan Stanley.

Ranges for Revised LCRs

      Table 3 examines the impact of the revised stress scenario assumptions on the LCR. Columns

(1) and (2) repeat the official and revised versions of net cash outflow from Table 2. Column (3)

reports eligible HQLA under the official LCR rule ("official eligible HQLA"), and column (4)

reports total HQLA (with missing values for JPMorgan and Citi). As discussed above, these two

values of HQLA are bounds on eligible HQLA under the revised stress assumptions.

      The rest of Table 3 shows alternative versions of the LCR for the six banks. Column (5)



16
  In the LCR disclosure, Line 30 gives net cash outflow after 30 days and Line 32 gives the peak
net outflow within 30 days. Line 32 is the denominator of the LCR. The maturity mismatch term,
Line 31, is the difference between Lines 32 and 30. I revise the number in Line 30 by adding the
increases in net outflow in columns (3)-(6) of Table 2. I then assume that Lines 31 and 32
increase by the same percentage as Line 30, which yields the figures in columns (7) and (8).

                                                39
reports the official LCR: official eligible HQLA divided by official NCO. Column (6) reports

official eligible HQLA divided by revised NCO, and column (7) reports total HQLA divided by

revised NCO. The numerators of the LCRs in columns (6) and (7) are bounds on eligible HQLA in

the revised stress scenario, so the numbers in these columns are bounds on the revised LCR.

      Finally, column (8) gives official NCO divided by revised NCO. To interpret this ratio, note

that official NCO is the minimum level of eligible HQLA that a bank must hold to comply with the

current LCR rule--the level of HQLA that would yield an official LCR of 100%. Column (8) shows

what the revised LCR would be if a bank reduced its HQLA to the legal minimum.

      The results in Table 3 are shown visually in Figure 2. For each bank, the Figure shows the

range of revised LCRs determined by the bounds on eligible HQLA. The Figure also shows the

official LCR and the revised LCR if HQLA were the legal minimum.

      Recall that we do not know total HQLA for JPMorgan Chase or Citi. In Figure 2, I use proxies

for these missing numbers to derive upper bounds on JP Morgan's and Citi's revised LCRs. For

each of these firms, I assume that the ratio of total HQLA to official eligible HQLA equals the

average of that ratio at the other four banks. This average ratio is 1.19.

Discussion

      The six big banks fall naturally into two groups. The members of the first group are Goldman

Sachs and Morgan Stanley, the two firms that are primarily broker-dealers and investment banks.

They have the highest official LCRs of the six banks, but the lowest revised LCRs. Their ranges of

revised LCRs are well below 100%: 65% to 88% for Goldman Sachs and 68% to 83% for Morgan

Stanley.

      The second group contains the four banks with large commercial banking franchises. For each

of these banks, most or all of the range for the revised LCR is below 100%. The upper bounds on

                                                 40
the range are around 100% and the lower bounds are around 80-85% except for Wells Fargo, which

has a narrow range of 96% to 97%. Based on these results, it is likely that the revised LCRs for the

four banks are less than 100%, but this finding is less clear-cut than it is for Goldman Sachs and

Morgan Stanley.

      The result that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley have the lowest revised LCRs reflects the

fact that the broker-dealer operations at these firms involve large amounts of secured funding and

lending and derivatives transactions. My revisions to the LCR stress scenario imply higher net cash

outflows from these activities. These factors outweigh the fact that my assumptions about retail

deposits have less effect on Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley than on the other banks.

      The finding that the big banks probably have LCRs below 100% means that, if the revised

stress scenario captures what would happen in a future financial crisis, the banks do not have enough

liquidity to survive the crisis for 30 days. They would run out of cash before 30 days unless rescued

by an acquirer or the Federal Reserve.

      This result suggests that the current LCR rule does not adequately protect large banks from

liquidity risk. We can get a sense of how inadequate the rule is by examining the ratio of the

minimum HQLA required by the rule to the revised level of net cash outflow (the last column of

Table 3). This ratio varies from 50% to 80%, with Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley again at the

low end. These numbers imply that minimal compliance with the LCR rule would leave banks with

far too little liquidity to survive a 30-day crisis.



X. CONCLUSION

      During the 2008 financial crisis, markets lost confidence in large banks because of their losses

on real estate investments. We do not know what will trigger the next financial crisis. Confidence

                                                       41
in banks might be shaken by losses on another asset class or some other adverse event in financial

markets. A crisis could have roots in a deep recession, or political instability, or a pandemic, or

accelerating climate change. A crisis could occur at an individual bank because of a blunder in

strategy or the revelation of illegal behavior.

      Whatever the trigger, history teaches us that a loss of confidence in a bank will cause its

customers and counterparties to reduce their exposure to the bank. These actions can quickly

become a run in which the bank is drained of cash and its survival is threatened.

      The LCR rule seeks to ensure that a bank can survive a run for at least 30 days, providing time

for the bank and regulators to find an orderly resolution of the crisis. The rule requires that a bank

hold enough liquid assets to absorb net cash outflows in a 30-day stress scenario. This paper argues,

however, that some of the assumptions in the stress scenario understate the cash outflows that are

likely in a crisis and overstate the offsetting inflows. Consequently, compliance with the rule does

not really ensure that a bank would survive for 30 days.

      This paper also proposes revisions to the problematic assumptions in the LCR stress scenario

and uses them to estimate revised LCRs for the six largest U.S. banks. The results suggest that all

of the banks have LCRs below 100%, which means a crisis would drive them to failure in less than

30 days unless they were rescued by an acquirer or the Federal Reserve. This finding is most clear

for Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.

      There is much uncertainty about the appropriate parameters for a liquidity stress test, but I do

not think my pessimistic revisions of the LCR assumptions are especially aggressive. The net cash

outflows in a liquidity crisis might be smaller than my results suggest, but they also might be larger.

One place where my change in assumptions is cautious is the treatment of cash inflows. I assume

that inflows are only 75% of the level in the LCR scenario, but one could argue for even smaller

                                                  42
inflows based on evidence such as Lehman's unwillingness to cut secured lending.

      This paper's assessment of liquidity risk could be improved if regulators release more

information. To start with, they should provide more explanation for the many choices of inflow and

outflow assumptions in the LCR stress scenario. It would also help if regulators release more data

from the 2008 financial crisis. The FDIC, for example, could presumably provide data on deposit

runs at the banks it seized.

      It would be easier to calculate LCRs under alternative assumptions if banks provided more

information than they currently do in their LCR disclosures. For example, disaggregation of secured

funding by collateral type, and of derivatives collateral calls by type of trigger, could eliminate some

guesswork from my LCR calculations. Information on net cash outflow and HQLA at banks'

subsidiaries would enable calculations of eligible HQLA under my revised stress assumptions, so

one could derive a single value for a bank's revised LCR rather than a range.




                                                  43
APPENDIX

A. Stable and Other Retail Deposits at Washington Mutual

      Section 4 calculates outflow rates for stable and other retail deposits at Washington Mutual

using an estimate that, at the start of the run, 32% of the retail deposits in the two categories were

stable and 68% were other. Here I discuss the basis for this estimate.

      We do not have any breakdown of retail deposits at the start of the run on September 8, 2008,

but we have some information for June 30 from WaMu's 10-Q for 2008 Q2 (p. 54). Total retail

deposits (excluding brokered deposits) were $148.3 billion on June 30, slightly higher than the

$141.1 billion on September 8. I estimate the percentages of stable and other deposits on June 30

and assume these percentages were the same on September 8.

      Recall that stable retail deposits are fully insured and also meet at least one of two other

criteria: they are transactional accounts or relational accounts, the latter meaning that the deposit

holder has another relationship with the bank such as another account or a loan.

      The 10-Q decomposes total retail deposits on June 30 into three categories: checking deposits

of $47.2 billion, savings and money market deposits of $58.0 billion, and time deposits of $43.1

billion. Checking deposits are transactional deposits and the other two categories are not.

      Unfortunately, I do not have information on insurance coverage for transactional and non-

transactional deposits or on how many of the latter are relational. Given these limitations of the data,

I simply assume that the level of stable deposits equals the level of transactional deposits. This level

is (47.2) / (148.3) = 32% of stable plus other retail deposits.

      With this assumption, the level of stable deposits could be either overstated or understated.

The former is possible because transactional deposits may include some that are not insured, so not

stable. The latter is possible because insured relational deposits are excluded.

                                                  44
      I conjecture that insured relational deposits are more common than uninsured transactional

deposits, which means I am conservative in estimating the fraction of deposits that are stable. If I

assumed a fraction larger than 32%, the calculations in Section 4 would produce higher outflow rates

for both stable and other retail deposits: the increases relative to the LCR assumptions would be

larger.

      Some information on deposit insurance supports the idea that my assumption about stable

deposits is conservative. A WaMu memo reports that on August 29, $16.6 billion of WaMu's retail

deposits were deposits exceeding $100,000, which means they were not fully insured.17 Those

deposits were 11.7% of total retail deposits of $141.5 billion on August 29. If we suppose that the

percentage of uninsured deposits was also 11.7% on June 30, and that this percentage applies to

both transactional and non-transactional deposits as well as total retail deposits, then (0.117)($47.2

billion) = $5.5 billion of transactional deposits were uninsured and should not count in stable

deposits. These assumptions also imply that insured non-transactional deposits were (0.883)($101.1

billion) = $89.3 billion. If at least $5.5 billion out of this $89.3 billion were relational deposits, then

stable retail deposits were at least as large as transactional deposits.

B. Calculating Revised Outflows from Secured Funding

      My revisions to the LCR stress scenario include increases in outflow rates for two categories

of secured funding: funding with collateral that is Level 2B HQLA, and customer short positions

with non-HQLA collateral where the collateral belongs to other customers. For both of these

categories, the outflow rate is 50% in the LCR stress scenario but 100% in my revised scenario.

      We need to know the levels of these two types of funding to compute revised LCRs. The LCR


17
  The memo, titled "Discussion Materials" and dated September 23, was released by the
bankruptcy examiner for Washington Mutual Inc.

                                                    45
disclosure reports only an aggregate of secured funding, but a breakdown by collateral type appears

in another regulatory filing: FR Y-15, the Banking Organization Systemic Risk Report.

      The LCR calculations that banks disclose, and my revisions of these calculations, are done at

the quarterly frequency. Form Y-15 is published at the end of each quarter, but the reported levels

of secured funding are averages over the last twelve months. I use these twelve-month levels as

proxies for quarterly levels, presuming that secured funding is stable enough over time that this

approximation is reasonable.

      Secured funding is reported on Schedule G of Form Y-15. On that Schedule, the first column

of Line 3a reports secured funding with Level 2B collateral that matures within 30 days. That is the

first category of funding for which I revise the LCR outflow rate.

      On Schedule G, the first column of Line 4 reports secured funding with non-HQLA collateral

that matures within 30 days. The Schedule does not report how much of this funding is customer

short positions with collateral owned by other customers, the second type of funding for which I

revise the outflow rate. However, I can estimate this quantity by combining information in Form Y-

15 and the LCR disclosure. My approach uses the fact that the outflow from secured funding in Line

13 of the disclosure equals the sum of different types of funding weighted by their outflow rates.

      A complication is that Line 13 includes outflows related to asset exchanges as well as secured

funding. These transactions are ones in which securities are exchanged temporarily for more liquid

securities rather than cash. In the LCR scenario, the assumed outflow rate for an asset exchange is

the difference between the outflow rates for secured funding with the type of collateral pledged in

the exchange and with the type of collateral received in the exchange. For example, for an exchange

of a Level 2B security for a Level 2A security, the outflow rate is 0.5 ­ 0.15 = 0.35.

      Schedule G of Form Y-15 reports exchanges of Level 2A securities for Level 1 securities,

                                                46
which have an outflow rate of 0.15. The Schedule also reports an aggregate of all other asset

exchanges: Level 2B securities for Level 1, non-HQLA securities for Level 1, Level 2B for Level

2A, non-HQLA for Level 2A, and non-HQLA for Level 2B. The outflow rates for these categories

are 0.5, 1.0, 0.35, 0.85, and 0.5, respectively. I take the average of these five rates, which is 0.64,

and assume it is the outflow rate for all the asset exchanges that are grouped together.18

      With this background, we can proceed to estimate the level of secured funding that is customer

short positions with non-HQLA collateral owned by other customers. I will use the terms "special

non-HQLA funding" (S) for this category, "regular non-HQLA funding" (R) for other funding with

non-HQLA collateral, and "total non-HQLA funding" (T) for the sum of the two: T=S+R.

      We start with the fact that the total outflows reported on Line 13 of the LCR disclosure are

a weighted sum of various types of secured funding and asset exchanges:

      F = (0.15)(2A) + (0.15)(E1) + (0.5)(2B) + (0.5)S + (1.0)R + (0.64)(EO) ,

where F is total outflows, 2A and 2B are secured funding with Level 2A and 2B collateral, E1 is

exchanges of Level 1 for Level 2A assets, and EO is all other asset exchanges. The weights on these

variables are LCR outflow rates. Substituting T-S for R and solving for S yields:

      S = -2F + (0.3)(2A) + (0.3)(E1) + (1.0)(2B) + (2.0)T + (1.28)(EO) .

      We can use the last equation to estimate a bank's special non-HQLA funding. The levels of

the various types of funding and asset exchanges on the right side of the equation are reported on

Form Y-15. Outflows in the LCR stress scenario (F) are reported in the Weighted column of Line



18
  The levels of the asset exchanges that are grouped together are small, so my results are not
very sensitive to the assumed average outflow rate. My calculation ignores special outflow rates
that the LCR rule prescribes for certain kinds of transactions, such as secured funding from
foreign central banks and asset exchanges in which the bank rehypothecates the asset it receives
for a term exceeding 30 days.

                                                  47
13 of the LCR disclosure. I use the average of these outflows over the last four quarters to match

the time period covered by Form Y-15. My calculations for 2019 Q4 use outflows in the four

quarterly LCR disclosures for 2019.

      We now have estimated levels for the two types of secured funding for which I revise outflow

rates, Level 2B funding and special non-HQLA funding. I increase both outflow rates from 50% to

100%. These changes increase a bank's net cash outflow by 50% of Level 2B funding plus 50% of

special non-HQLA funding.

      Table A1 reports the increases in secured-funding outflows for the six banks in 2019 Q4,

which also appear in column 4 of Table 2. Table A1 also breaks these increases into the parts due

to Level 2B funding and special non-HQLA funding. The increases due to Level 2B funding are

larger, but both increases are material for most of the banks.19

C. How Adjustments to NCO Affect Eligible HQLA

      As discussed in Section 8, eligible HQLA in the numerator of the LCR excludes some HQLA

held at a bank's subsidiaries. This fact complicates my analysis because the amounts of HQLA that

count as eligible change when I revise assumptions about outflows and inflows. Here I describe this

aspect of the LCR rule and its implications for calculating revised LCRs.

      This part of the LCR rule is Section 22 Parts (b)(3) and (b)(4). In determining how much of

the HQLA held at a subsidiary is eligible HQLA, the rule first distinguishes between assets that are

freely transferable to other parts of the bank and assets that are "trapped" at the subsidiary for

regulatory or other reasons. All of the freely transferable HQLA is included in the bank's eligible

HQLA. Trapped HQLA is included only up to a limit, which is the amount of the bank's net cash



19
  For JPMorgan Chase, my calculation yields S = -$3.8 billion. I set S to zero in this case.

                                                 48
outflow that occurs at the subsidiary.

      This provision is meant to ensure that enough HQLA is available to absorb cash outflows

anywhere at a bank even if some HQLA is trapped at subsidiaries. One can demonstrate that this

goal is met if eligible HQLA as defined in the rule exceeds NCO.

      When I revise the LCR stress scenario, the resulting increase in a bank's NCO occurs partly

at the holding company and partly at subsidiaries. If some of the HQLA trapped at a subsidiary is

ineligible because it exceeds NCO at the subsidiary, part of this HQLA becomes eligible when NCO

rises. That implies an increase in eligible HQLA in the numerator of the LCR.

      The LCR disclosure reports a bank's total levels of eligible HQLA and NCO but does not

provide a breakdown for the holding company and subsidiaries. Without such information, we do

not know the bank's eligible HQLA after my changes in outflow and inflow assumptions, but we

have bounds on that quantity. The lower bound is eligible HQLA under the official LCR rule,

because my changes in assumptions cannot reduce eligible HQLA. The upper bound is the bank's

total HQLA, which is eligible HQLA if none is ineligible with my assumptions.

D. Determining Total HQLA

      A bank's total HQLA is the upper bound on its eligible HQLA in the revised stress scenario.

One of the big banks, Goldman Sachs, reports its total HQLA ($229.0 billion) on its LCR disclosure.

For three of the others­Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and Morgan Stanley­I estimate total HQLA

from information reported on the banks' 10-Ks for 2019 Q4, as described here. Unfortunately, I do

not see a way to estimate total HQLA for JPMorgan Chase or Citigroup.

      On their 10-Ks, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America, and Wells Fargo all report a pool of assets

called "Global Liquidity Sources" or something similar. They all say that the types of assets

included in these liquidity pools are "substantially the same" as those included in the LCR rule's

                                                49
definition of HQLA. The pools differ from eligible HQLA on the LCR disclosure in two ways: (i)

they do not exclude any HQLA held at subsidiaries; and (ii) all types of HQLA are given weights

of one.20

      The upper bound on HQLA in the revised stress scenario is total HQLA with no assets at

subsidiaries excluded, like the pools reported in the 10-Ks, but with the weights in the LCR rule

applied to different types of HQLA. I estimate this quantity in several steps summarized in Table

A2:

      C Column (1) of the Table gives each bank's liquidity pool from its 10-K, which I take as an

estimate of unweighted total HQLA. Subtracting unweighted eligible HQLA from the LCR

disclosure (column (2)) gives unweighted ineligible HQLA (column (3)).

      C Column (4) gives an estimate of weighted ineligible HQLA. The three banks'10-Ks indicate

that almost all of the assets included in ineligble HQLA are Level 1 or Level 2A, but we do not

know the breakdown between the two. I assume that the weight on all ineligible HQLA is 0.925, the

average of the weights for Levels 1 and 2A.21

      C Adding weighted ineligible HQLA to weighted eligible HQLA from the LCR disclosure


20
  The liquidity pools are Bank of America's "Global Liquidity Sources" (p. 50 of its 10-K), the
unencumbered part of Wells Fargo's "Primary Sources of Liquidity (p. 84), and Morgan
Stanley's "Global Liquidity Reserve" (p. 46). My calculations use the average levels of these
pools over 2019 Q4, except for Wells where I use the level at the end of the quarter because the
average is not available.
21
  The 10-Ks break the liquidity pools into different types of assets, but two of the categories are
mixtures of Level 1 and 2A HQLA: agency securities and foreign sovereign debt. (Agencies
include securities that are fully guaranteed by the government, which are Level 1, and GSE
securities that are not fully guaranteed, which are Level 2A.)




                                                 50
(column (5)) yields weighted total HQLA (column (6)). This item is the upper bound on revised

HQLA that is also reported in column (4) of Table 3.




                                              51
REFERENCES

Ball, Laurence M., The Fed and Lehman Brothers: Setting the Record Straight on a Financial
Disaster, Cambridge University Press, 2018.

Bank Policy Institute, "Evaluation of G20 Too-Big-To-Fail Reforms," letter submitted to the
Financial Stability Board, Bank for International Settlements, July 24, 2019.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity
Risk Monitoring Tools," Bank for International Settlements, January 2013a.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared
Derivatives," Bank for International Settlements, September 2013b.

Blake, Thomas, Declaration to the United States Bankruptcy Court, District of Delaware, Chapter
11 Case #08-12229 (MFW).

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, staff memo on "Draft Final Rule to Implement
a Liquidity Coverage Ratio Requirement," August 29, 2014.

Cohan, William D., House of Cards: A Tale of Hubris and Wretched Excess on Wall Street, Anchor
Books, 2009.

Discussion Materials, internal Washington Mutual memo, September 23 2008, exhibit released by
bankruptcy examiner for Washington Mutual, Inc., Chapter 11 Case #08-12229 (MFW), United
States Bankruptcy Court, District of Delaware.

Duffie, Darrell, How Big Banks Fail and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press, 2011.

Duffie, Darrell, "Liquidity and Stress Testing," slides for Financial Advisory Roundtable, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, June 8, 2012.

Duffie, Darrell, "Replumbing the Financial System: Uneven Progress," International Journal of
Central Banking, January 2013.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Memo to the FDIC Board of Directors, Re: Wachovia,
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission document 140.

Federal Register, "Liquidity Coverage Ratio: Liquidity Risk Measurement Standards," October 10,
2014, pp. 61440-61541.

Forms 10-K and 10-Q, various banks, various quarters.

Form FR Y-15, various banks, various quarters.


                                               52
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Final Report, 2011.

Giddens, James W., SIPA Trustee's Preliminary Investigation Report and Recommendations, SIPA
Liquidation of Lehman Brothers Inc., 2010.

Grind, Kirsten, The Lost Bank: The Story of Washington Mutual--The Biggest Bank Failure in
American History, Simon and Schuster, 2012.

Infante, Sebastian, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis, "Collateral Runs," Finance and Economics
Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, 2018-022.

Ivashina, Victoria, and David S. Scharfstein, "Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,"
Journal of Financial Economics, September 2010.

Johnson, Brian A., and Hal S. Scott, "Controlling the Long-Term Problems of Short-Term Funding,"
Journal of Financial Regulation, August 2019.

Kelly, Kate, Street Fighters: The Last 72 Hours of Bear Stearns, the Toughest Firm on Wall Street,
Portfolio, 2009.

Liquidity Coverage Ratio Disclosures, various banks, various quarters.

Lowitt, Ian, and Paolo Tonucci, "Liquidity of Lehman Brothers,"internal Lehman Brothers memo,
October 7, 2008, available through Valukas (2010), fn 6341.

Matz, Leonard, Liquidity Risk Management and Measurement: Basel III and Beyond, Xlibris, 2011.

Office of Financial Research, Annual Report to Congress, 2019.

Rose, Jonathan D., "Old-Fashioned Deposit Runs," Finance and Economics Discussion Series,
Federal Reserve Board, 2015-111.

Senior Supervisors Group, Report on Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of
2008, Financial Stability Board, October 21,2009.

Stein, Jeremy, "The Fire-Sales Problem and Securities Financing Transactions," speech at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, November 7, 2013.

Tarullo, Daniel K., "Liquidity Regulation," speech at The Clearing House Annual Conference,
November 20, 2014.

Valukas, Anton, Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. Chapter 11 Proceedings Examiner's Report,
Chapter 11 Case #08-13555 (JMP), United States Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New York
2010.


                                               53
Van Der Weide, Mark, in transcript of open meeting of the Federal Reserve Board, May 3, 2016.

Venkat, Shyam, and Stephen Baird, Liquidity Risk Management: A Practioner's Perspective, Wiley,
2016.




                                              54
                                         Table 1
                        REVISIONS TO LCR STRESS SCENARIO


RETAIL DEPOSITS (Lines 6-7)
    Raise outflow rate from 3% to 7.5% for stable retail deposits and from 10% to 25% for other
retail deposits.*


SECURED FUNDING (Line 13)
  Raise outflow rate from 50% to 100% for funding secured by Level 2B HQLA and for loans of
non-HQLA securities owned by customers.**


DERIVATIVES (Line 15)
   Double derivatives-related outflow on Line 15.


INFLOWS (Lines 20-28)
   Reduce total inflow on Line 28 by 25%.




Line Numbers refer to LCR disclosure.
*Increase in outflow is Revised outflow ­ Official outflow. Revised outflow is (0.075)(Unweighted
Line 6) + (0.25)(Unweighted Line 7). Official outflow is Weighted Line 6 + Weighted Line 7.
Weighted Line 7 accounts for official outflow rates above 10% for small parts of other retail
deposits.
**See Appendix Part B for details of calculation.




                                               55
                                                              TABLE 2
                                            REVISIONS TO NET CASH OUTFLOW, 2019 Q4
                                                       (in billions of dollars)




Summary of Calculations (Lines refer to LCR disclosure):
 (1) Assets at end of quarter, from 10-K.
 (2) Line 32.
 (3) [(0.075)(Unweighted Line 6) + (0.25)(Unweighted Line 7)] ­ [Weighted Line 6 + Weighted Line 7].*
 (4) See Appendix Part B and Table A1.
 (5) 100% of Line 15.
 (6) 25% of Line 28.
 (7) See fn 16.
 (8) Sum of Columns 2-7.


*For Morgan Stanley, this formula yields -$0.9 billion. This number is set to zero in calculating revised NCO.
                                                          TABLE 3
                                       ALTERNATIVE LIQUIDITY COVERAGE RATIOS, 2019 Q4




Columns 1-4 are billions of dollars.

Summary of Calculations:
  (1) From Table 2 Column 2.
  (2) From Table 2 Column 8.
  (3) LCR disclosure Line 1.
  (4) See Appendix Part D and Table A2. Not available for JPMorgan Chase or Citigroup.
  (5) Column 3 / Column 1.
  (6) Column 3 / Column 2.
  (7) Column 4 / Column 2.
  (8) Column 1 / Column 2.
                                      TABLE A1
                 ADDITIONS TO SECURED-FUNDING OUTLOW, 2019 Q4
                                (in billions of dollars)




Summary of Calculations:
  See Appendix Part B.




                                         TABLE A2
                           CALCULATION OF TOTAL HQLA, 2019 Q4
                                   (in billions of dollars)




Summary of Calculations:
 (1) From 10-K. See Appendix Part D.
 (2) From LCR disclosure Line 1, Unweighted Column.
 (3) Column 1 - Column 2.
 (4) (0.925)(Column 3).
 (5) From LCR disclosure Line 1, Weighted Column.
 (6) Column 4 + Column 5.
Figure 1. LCR disclosure, JPMorgan Chase, 2019 Q4
The following table presents further detail on the Firm's average LCR, and average unweighted and weighted amount of HQLA,
cash outflows and cash inflows, for the three months ended December 31, 2019.

                                                                                                                        Average              Average
Three months ended December 31, 2019                                                                                  Unweighted            Weighted
(in millions)                                                                                                          Amount(a)            Amount(b)
HIGH-QUALITY LIQUID ASSETS
    1     Total eligible high-quality liquid assets (HQLA), of which:(c)                                          $         553,152 $           545,286
    2       Eligible level 1 liquid assets                                                                                  501,408             501,408
    3       Eligible level 2A liquid assets                                                                                  51,447              43,730
    4       Eligible level 2B liquid assets                                                                                     297                 148
CASH OUTFLOW AMOUNTS
    5     Deposit outflow from retail customers and counterparties, of which:                                     $         759,498 $            45,539
    6       Stable retail deposit outflow                                                                                   477,018              14,311
    7       Other retail funding outflow                                                                                    243,480              25,257
    8       Brokered deposit outflow                                                                                         39,000               5,971
    9     Unsecured wholesale funding outflow, of which:                                                                    785,360             285,234
   10       Operational deposit outflow                                                                                     548,374             136,807
   11       Non-operational funding outflow                                                                                 229,770             141,211
   12       Unsecured debt outflow                                                                                            7,216               7,216
   13     Secured wholesale funding and asset exchange outflow(d)                                                           732,315             178,947
   14     Additional outflow requirements, of which:                                                                        482,015             148,067
   15       Outflow related to derivative exposures and other collateral requirements                                        53,606              39,977
   16       Outflow related to credit and liquidity facilities including unconsolidated structured
              transactions and mortgage commitments                                                                         428,409             108,090
   17     Other contractual funding obligation outflow                                                                       4,956                4,956
   18     Other contingent funding obligations outflow(e)                                                                  293,047               10,519
   19     TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW                                                                                      $      3,057,191 $            673,262
CASH INFLOW AMOUNTS
   20     Secured lending and asset exchange cash inflow(d)                                                       $         758,707 $          198,014
   21     Retail cash inflow                                                                                                 25,676             12,838
   22     Unsecured wholesale cash inflow(f)                                                                                 30,845             24,050
   23     Other cash inflows, of which:                                                                                      19,971             19,724
   24       Net derivative cash inflow                                                                                        2,968               2,968
   25       Securities cash inflow                                                                                            5,218               5,218
   26       Broker-dealer segregated account inflow                                                                          11,538             11,538
   27       Other cash inflow                                                                                                   247                   --
   28     TOTAL CASH INFLOW                                                                                       $         835,199 $          254,626
                                                                                                                                             Average
                                                                                                                                            Weighted
                                                                                                                                            Amount(b)
     29       HQLA AMOUNT(c)                                                                                                            $       545,286
     30       TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOW AMOUNT EXCLUDING THE MATURITY MISMATCH ADD-ON                                                      $       418,636
     31       MATURITY MISMATCH ADD-ON                                                                                                           50,766
     32       TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOW AMOUNT                                                                                             $       469,402
     33       LIQUIDITY COVERAGE RATIO (%)                                                                                                           116%
(a) Represents the average notional amount of (1) eligible HQLA before applying regulatory-prescribed haircuts; and (2) balances subject to outflows and
    inflows over a prospective 30-day period before applying regulatory-prescribed outflow and inflow rates.
(b) Represents the average weighted amount after applying regulatory prescribed (1) HQLA haircuts; and (2) cash outflow and inflow rates, respectively.
(c) Excludes average excess HQLA at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. that are not transferable to non-bank affiliates.
(d) Outflows on line 13 predominantly relate to securities loaned or sold under repurchase agreements and collateralized deposits; these amounts are largely
    offset by inflows reported on line 20 from securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements and margin loans. These amounts include outflows
    and inflows associated with certain prime brokerage activities.
(e) Predominantly reflects repurchases of debt securities issued by the Firm that mature more than 30 calendar days after the calculation date.
(f) Predominantly reflects repayments of wholesale loans.




                                                                             2
                                           Figure 2
                      Alternative Liquidity Coverage Ratios, 2019 Q4



JPMorgan Chase



Bank of America



       Citigroup



    Wells Fargo



 Goldman Sachs



 Morgan Stanley


               50%           75%          100%          125%           150%




                     Official LCR
                     Range for Revised LCR
                     LCR if Minimal Compliance
