                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PRIVATE EQUITY RETURNS:
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BUSINESS CREDIT CARD SECURITIZATION MARKET

                                      Matthias Fleckenstein
                                      Francis A. Longstaff

                                       Working Paper 28134
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28134


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2020




 We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Brian Boyer, Mark Garmaise, Arthur
 Korteweg, Adair Morse, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Taylor Nadauld, and Antoinette Schoar. We
 thank Mohit Shukla for research assistance. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed
 herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of
 text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Equity Returns: Empirical Evidence from the Business Credit Card Securitization
Market
Matthias Fleckenstein and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 28134
November 2020
JEL No. G12,G5

                                           ABSTRACT

We present a new approach for estimating private equity returns using secondary market prices
for entrepreneurial business credit card securitizations. We show that the market requires a
significantly higher premium for entrepreneurial credit risk than for household credit risk.
Entrepreneurial risk is systematic in nature and has much in common with risks in corporate bond
and real-estate-backed lending markets. The expected return on private equity is on the order of
14 percent and the volatility of private equity returns is comparable to that of the smallest quintile
of publicly traded firms.


Matthias Fleckenstein
University of Delaware
Lerner College of Business and Economics
310 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
mflecken@udel.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                            1. INTRODUCTION


What is the expected return from entrepreneurial investment? This issue is of
fundamental importance given that the total value of private entrepreneurial eq-
uity in the U.S. is more than $12 trillion and represents a substantial fraction
of aggregate household wealth.1 Despite the importance of this issue, however,
there appears to be little consensus about the risk and return of private equity--
estimates of the average return on private equity reported in the literature range
from about 5 to 60 percent. A major reason for this may simply be that since
private equity does not generally trade in the capital markets, researchers have
had to turn to alternative methodologies to estimate returns. Although innova-
tive, these alternative approaches face the challenge of having to rely on incom-
plete, noisy, and potentially biased data on limited partnership cash flows, NAVs
provided by venture capital funds, or other self-reported measures to estimate
private equity returns (see Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) and Korteweg (2019)).
Without using actual market prices, it is difficult to estimate the returns on en-
trepreneurial investment directly. Furthermore, these alternative approaches are
generally limited to the small subset of entrepreneurial firms receiving venture
capital funding or buyout financing.2
    This paper introduces a novel approach for estimating the investment returns
on small private entrepreneurial firms. The key to our approach is the use of
secondary market prices for business credit card securitizations, where the credit
cards are targeted specifically to entrepreneurs with firms having fewer than ten

1
 For example, see Federal Reserve Statistical Release Z.1 Financial Accounts of
the United States, First Quarter 2020, Table B.101.
2
  Venture capital financing of private firms accounts for only a small fraction
(less than one percent) of the entire private equity market (Moskowitz, and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)). Furthermore, firms receiving venture capital fund-
ing or buyout financing may not be fully representative of the broader class of
entrepreneurial firms. For example, Chemmanur, Krishnan, and Nandy (2011)
report that private firms that received venture capital funding between the years
1972 and 2000 had average total assets of $8.1 million, sales of $32.7 million and
more than 250 employees. Axelson, Jenkinson, Str¨  omberg, and Weisbach (2013)
report that the average enterprise value of private companies receiving buyout
financing was more than $600 million.


                                        1
employees and less than three million dollars in revenues. From these secondary
market prices we can directly identify the credit spreads and excess returns for a
broad class of securities that are representative of the debt claims on the assets
of these entrepreneurial firms. We can then invert a standard Merton (1974)
structural credit model to solve for implied risk and return measures for equity
investments in these firms.
     Credit card borrowing represents an important source of debt capital for
many small entrepreneurial firms. The pool of assets underlying the business
credit card securitizations in our sample consists of receivables from over one
million cardholders. These credit cards can only be used for business purposes.
The entrepreneur that owns the firm is jointly and severally liable with the busi-
ness for all transactions on the account. Thus, the credit risk inherent in these
receivables is a direct reflection of the credit risk of entrepreneurship. Because of
this, the receivables represent general debt claims on the underlying assets and
associated cash flows of these small entrepreneurial firms, and their pricing can
be used to shed light on the returns of private equity claims on those assets.

    Several important results emerge from our analysis. First, we find that
the market prices entrepreneurial credit risk very differently from conventional
household credit risk. In particular, we find that even after controlling for the
underlying credit risk and structural features of the securitizations, the credit
spread for entrepreneurial credit card securitizations is more than 150 basis points
higher than for consumer credit card securitizations.
      Second, motivated by the theoretical literature suggesting that entrepreneur-
ial risk may be very systematic or procyclical in nature, we contrast the credit
losses for the business credit card securitizations in our sample with those for
consumer credit cards and other types of personal and commercial loans. We find
that charge-off rates for entrepreneurial credit cards are much more related to
the credit risk of asset-based loans than is the case for consumer credit cards. We
also show that the credit spread for entrepreneurial credit card securitizations
is much more related to general macroeconomic and financial market factors.
Furthermore, we show that entrepreneurial credit spreads are more related to
corporate bond spreads than they are to consumer credit spreads. Together,
these results suggest that entrepreneurial risk is strongly systematic in nature
which, in turn, may explain the large risk premium incorporated into the credit
spread of the securitizations.
     Turning to the estimation of private equity returns, we adopt a three-step
approach. First, we compute the returns on the securitized debt claims on the
assets of the underlying entrepreneurial firms. Second, we use historical data
to estimate a range of potential leverage ratios for these entrepreneurial firms.
Third, we use these calibrated inputs in a standard Merton (1974) structural

                                         2
credit framework to solve for the implied moments of returns on private equity
claims on these entrepreneurial firms.
     The results indicate that the expected return on private equity is about
14 percent during the 2000­2010 sample period, which implies a private equity
premium of about 11 percent. This contrasts with the realized excess return
for publicly traded stock which was essentially zero over the same time period.
Our estimate of the expected return on private equity investments is towards
the lower end of the broad range of estimates that appear in the private equity
literature.
     The results also demonstrate that private equity returns are very volatile.
We find that the annualized volatility of private equity returns is on the order
of 90 percent during the sample period. This estimate is comparable to the
volatility of returns for the smallest quintile of CRSP/Compustat firms during
the same time period. Furthermore, this estimate is comparable to the volatility
of deal-level private equity returns reported by Chen, Baierl, and Kaplan (2002),
Cochrane (2005), and others.

    Finally, our results imply that the systematic risk of entrepreneurship is
comparable to that of smaller publicly-traded firms. In particular, our results
suggest that the market beta of private equity is on the order of 1.21.

     In summary, this paper makes several contributions to the private equity
literature. First, the results indicate that the market views entrepreneurs as
being very different from ordinary consumers or households. In particular, en-
trepreneurial credit risk has much more in common with corporate credit risk
than with household credit risk. Second, because of the systematic nature of
entrepreneurial risk, the cost of capital for private equity is relatively high com-
pared to more traditional types of investments. Thus, entrepreneurship faces a
high hurdle in the competition for scarce investment capital. This result is par-
ticularly important given the fundamental role that entrepreneurship plays in the
macroeconomy. Finally, our results demonstrate that using prices from securi-
tized debt markets can open new windows in measuring risk and return for asset
classes that have traditionally been difficult to study. In particular, our approach
could potentially be applied to a broad set of securitized entrepreneurial and
consumer/household debt claims such as Small Business Administration loans,
business loan syndications, student loans, auto loans, home equity lines of credit,
and personal lines of credit.




                                         3
                       2. RELATED LITERATURE


This paper is related to a number of important literatures. Foremost among
these is the extensive literature on the estimation of private equity returns.
There are two primary empirical approaches within this literature. The first uses
self-reported data such as the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to estimate
the returns on private entrepreneurial investment. Important examples include
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) who find that returns on private equity
are similar to those on public equity, a result they describe as the private equity
premium puzzle. Their results also highlight the important point that the vast
majority of firms in the private equity asset class are smaller ventures operated
as sole proprietorships and/or family businesses by self-employed entrepreneurs.
Kartashova (2014) extends the original data set and finds that private equity
returns are higher than public equity returns during the subsequent decade. A
number of recent papers, however, raise questions about the reliability of self-
reported entrepreneurial income data (see Tedds (2010), Hurst, Li, and Pugsley
(2014), and Astebro and Chen (2014)).

     The second approach is to use limited partner cash flows and NAV values
reported by venture capital funds to estimate the returns on private equity at
either the deal level or the fund level. Kaplan and Sensoy (2015), Korteweg
(2019), and Brown, Harris, Hu, Jenkinson, Kaplan, and Robinson (2020) pro-
vide excellent surveys of this extensive literature. Important examples include
Gompers and Lerner (1997), Peng (2001), Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003),
Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Cochrane (2005), Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009),
Korteweg and Sorensen (2010, 2017), Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012),
Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou (2012), Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013),
Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014), Korteweg and Nagel (2016), Robinson and
Sensoy (2016), Ang, Chen, Goetzmann, and Phalippou (2018), Harris, Jenkin-
son, Kaplan, and Stucke (2018), Gornall and Strebulaev (2019), and many others.
Because of the nature of the cash flow and NAV data, however, researchers in
this area face many challenges in estimating private equity returns. Some of the
problems with the data identified and discussed in the literature include selection
and survivorship biases, stale or incorrectly reported NAVs, incomplete or miss-
ing cash flow information, and the inconsistent treatment of fees. As examples,
see Emery (2003), Jenkinson, Sousa, and Stucke (2013), Sorensen, Wang, and
Yang (2014), Jegadeesh, Kr¨ aussl, and Pollet (2015), Barber and Yasuda (2017),
Brown, Gredil, and Kaplan (2019), and Korteweg (2019).
     The data issues inherent in both of the primary empirical approaches used
in this literature may be a contributing factor to the lack of consensus about
the risk and return of private equity. Korteweg (2019) states: "[There is] a


                                        4
substantial degree of heterogeneity in risk-adjusted return estimates, depending
on the time period, empirical method, and data source used. There is currently
no consensus as to what the main empirical approach should be toward estimating
risk and return in private equity or how relevant benchmark returns should be
constructed."

     This paper advances the literature on the risk and return of private equity
by introducing a new empirical approach based on the secondary market prices
of securitized entrepreneurial debt. An important advantage of our approach
is that it allows us to estimate private equity returns using objective market
prices rather than relying on self-reported estimates or the cash flow and NAV
measures reported by private equity funds. We note that several other recent
papers use secondary market prices for listed private equity funds and funds-of-
funds or limited partnership transactions. For example, see Jegadeesh, Kr¨   aussl,
and Pollet (2015), McCourt (2018), Boyer, Nadauld, Vorkink, and Weisbach
(2019), and Nadauld, Sensoy, Vorkink, and Weisbach (2018). A key distinction
of our approach, however, is that it allows us to estimate private equity returns
for a much broader class of small entrepreneurial firms than just the very limited
set that have access to the venture capital markets.3
     This paper is also related to the literature on the nature and implications
of entrepreneurial risk. One segment of this literature focuses on what moti-
vates individuals to become entrepreneurs and how entrepreneurs differ from
non-entrepreneurs. Examples include Lazear and Moore (1984), Evans and
Leighton (1989), Hamilton (2000), Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002),
Fairlie and Robb (2007), Vereshchagina and Hopenhayn (2009), Hyytinen, Il-
makunnas, and Toivanen (2013), Hvide and Panos (2014), and Levine and Ru-
binstein (2017). Another segment highlights the important roles that liquidity
constraints and an individual's financial/housing wealth play in decisions to pur-
sue entrepreneurship. Key examples of this literature include Evans and Jo-
vanovic (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989), Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen
(1994a, 1994b), Black, de Meza, and Jeffreys (1996), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997),
Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), Quadrini (2000), Hurst and Lusardi (2004),
Cagetti and De Nardi (2009), Hall and Woodward (2010), Fairlie and Krashinsky
(2012), Franzoni, Novak, and Phalippou (2012), Wang, Wang, and Yang (2012),
Corradin and Popov (2015), Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2016), Schmalz,
Sraer, and Thesmar (2017), and Levine and Rubinstein (2019). A third seg-
ment focuses on entrepreneurial risk and the systematic/procyclical nature of
entrepreneurial activity in the economy. Important examples include Kihlstrom
and Laffont (1979), Shleifer (1986), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Gertler and
3
 The Kauffmann Foundation (2019) reports that only 0.50 percent of small firms
are funded by venture capital.


                                        5
Gilchrist (1994), Rampini (2004), Caggese (2012), Koellinger and Thurik (2012),
Parker (2012), Manso (2016), Levine and Rubinstein (2019), Brown, Harris, Hu,
Jenkinson, Kaplan, and Robinson (2020), and Jovanovic, Ma, and Rousseau
(2020). This paper extends the literature by providing new evidence that en-
trepreneurial risk is strongly systematic in nature and opens a new window on
the relation between household financial/housing wealth and entrepreneurship
by showing that entrepreneurial credit risk is related to credit risk in the housing
and real estate markets.


                   3. CREDIT CARD SECURITIZATIONS


This section provides a brief introduction to the basic structure and characteris-
tics of credit card asset-backed securities (ABS). The Internet Appendix provides
full details about these securities and the credit card ABS market.4

      Credit cards represent an important source of financing for entrepreneurs.
For example, total transaction volume for small business credit cards was $245
billion in 2017.5 Table 4 of Robb and Robinson (2014) indicates that credit card
debt represents 46.3 percent of total outsider debt for the nearly 5,000 startup
firms in the Kauffman Firm Survey data set. The Small Business Credit Survey
published by the Federal Reserve Banks reports that applying for bank lines of
credit/loans and credit cards are the two most common ways in which small
entrepreneurial firms seek financing.6

     Entrepreneurs, of course, make use of other types of financing besides credit
card debt. Accordingly, it is important to emphasize that our approach does
not rely on the assumption that credit card debt is the primary source of en-
trepreneurial credit. Rather, all our approach requires is that the pricing of credit
card debt in the market be representative of how other forms of entrepreneurial
debt would be priced. In other words, we simply use the secondary market prices
of credit card securitizations as proxies for how the market would price other
types of entrepreneurial credit. Given the general nature of credit card debt and
its comparability to other types of unsecured credit, however, this assumption
appears very plausible.

4
    This discussion parallels that in Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020).
5
 Statista (www.statista.com) at https://www.statista.com/statistics/936159/
leading-small-business-credit-cards-usa-by-purchase-volume/.
6
 See https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/2016/
SBCS-Report-EmployerFirms-2016.pdf


                                          6
     The underlying collateral for credit card ABS consists of a pool of receivables
generated when cardholders make charges on their credit cards to purchase goods
and services. From the credit card issuer's perspective, credit card receivables
are simply short-term unsecured loans.7 The issuer pools the receivables and
transfers them to a separate entity (master trust), which issues series of notes to
investors. The master trust receivables are not segregated by series. Instead, the
pool of receivables supports all outstanding series.

     To illustrate, imagine that an issuer transfers $100 of card receivables to
a master trust. There are at least two ways in which these receivables can be
securitized. In the first, the master trust issues a single class of notes with a total
notional value of $100, and all of the cash flows from the receivables flow through
directly to the noteholders. Since the cash flows received by the notes exactly
mirror those from the receivables, however, it is clear that investing in the notes
is economically equivalent to owning the receivables--owning the notes is simply
an alternative legal form of holding the underlying assets. One example of this
type of securitization is a mortgage-backed pass-through security in which an
investor receives all of the principal and interest payments from an underlying
pool of mortgages exactly as if the investor directly owned the mortgages.
      The second and more common way of securitizing credit card receivables
is for the master trust to issue a series of tranched notes. For example, the
receivables could be securitized by issuing a series of A, B, and C tranches with
notional amounts of $70, $20, and $10, respectively. The C tranche absorbs the
first $10 of credit losses, the B tranche absorbs the next $20 of credit losses, while
the A tranche absorbs the remaining credit losses. Alternatively, the C, B, and
A tranches can be described as attaching and detaching at zero and 10 percent,
10 and 30 percent, and 30 and 100 percent, respectively. The attachment point
represents the percentage of the receivables pool balance that can default before
the tranche experiences first losses. The detachment point represents the level
of credit card defaults that leads to a total loss of the tranche. Finally, it is
important to recognize that if an investor were to purchase all of the A, B, and C
tranches issued in the securitization, the resulting portfolio would be equivalent to
owning the single class of notes issued in the first type of securitization described
above. Intuitively, this follows since the collective cash flows that would be
received by the portfolio would be identical to those that would be received by
a single class of notes which, in turn, would be identical to the total cash flows
generated by the underlying receivables. Thus, holding the portfolio of all of the
tranches issued in a securitization can also be viewed as economically equivalent
7
 Cardholders pay back either the full principal on this unsecured loan or make
partial payment. In the latter case, the issuer finances the remaining balance
and earns interest (finance charges).


                                          7
to owning the underlying pool of receivables.
     The process by which cash flows are allocated to investors has two distinct
periods: revolving and controlled amortization (in some cases, controlled accu-
mulation). If there are no losses, the two-period structure mimics a traditional
bond in the sense that interest is distributed every month and principal is paid
in a single "bullet" cash flow on the maturity date.
     Specifically, upon issuance, a credit card ABS begins the "revolving period,"
during which investor coupon cash flows are paid from finance charge collections
on the credit card accounts, and principal collections are used to purchase new
receivables. Any residual cash flows after paying investor interest and charge-offs
is referred to as "excess spread" and, depending on the master trust, serves as
credit enhancement or is released to the issuer.

     The revolving period continues for a predetermined length of time, and then
the controlled amortization (accumulation) period begins when principal collec-
tions are distributed to investors. For instance, a credit card ABS with a five-year
expected maturity might revolve for 48 months and then enter amortization for
the final 12 months. In the case of controlled amortization, principal cash flows
are distributed in equal installments, for instance 1/12 of the invested amount
every month for 12 months. In the case of controlled accumulation, principal
cash flows are deposited into a collection account (principal funding account) ev-
ery month and then paid out as a single cash flow at the end of the accumulation
period.
     Sustained defaults or charge-offs on the pool of credit card accounts trig-
ger early amortization, independent of whether the credit card ABS is in the
revolving period or in controlled amortization (accumulation). Typical early
amortization trigger events include collateral performance deterioration (e.g. the
three-month average excess spread falls below zero, or the collateral balance falls
below the investor invested amount), seller/servicer problems (e.g. seller inter-
est falls below the required minimum level, or the seller fails to transfer new
receivables into the trust when necessary), but also legal issues (e.g. breach of
representation or warranties by the issuer, or default, bankruptcy, and insol-
vency of the seller or servicer). Early amortization is a reflection of financial
stress within the collateral pool, and the credit card ABS immediately starts
to amortize with principal balances being paid to investors according to their
seniority.




                                         8
             4. THE ADVANTA BUSINESS CREDIT CARD


The key to our ability to identify private equity returns is the use of secondary
market prices for financial claims on the underlying assets of private entrepreneur-
ial firms. Data for this asset class can be difficult to find given its highly special-
ized nature. Using a combination of hand-collected data and proprietary market
sources, however, we were fortunate to be able to construct an extensive data
set for the securitizations issued by the Advanta Business Card Master Trust.
This unique data set provides us with a "natural experiment" from which we can
identify the risk and return characteristics of entrepreneurial investment.
     Advanta Corp. (Advanta) was a monoline credit card bank and one of the
largest issuers of credit cards to small business entrepreneurs in the U.S. Ad-
vanta's business credit cards were targeted towards small firms with fewer than
ten employees and less than three million dollars in annual revenues. Accounts
were restricted to business owners, and applicants needed proof of business own-
ership or involvement and were asked to provide their Federal tax I.D. num-
ber and business phone and address before finalization of the card acceptance.8
Among Advanta's core customers were small independent brick-and-mortar and
online retailers, small business start-ups, business professionals such as consul-
tants, lawyers, physicians, contractors, television writers and producers, and on-
line content developers. By signing the account agreement, the entrepreneur
acknowledged that the credit card was to be used for commercial and business
purposes only. Advanta could monitor business credit card usage and cancel the
card if patterns of personal use were detected.9 Furthermore, small entrepreneurs
signed as personal guarantors of the business credit card. Specifically, under the
cardholder agreement, the entrepreneur and the business were jointly and sever-
ally liable for all transactions on the business card account.10 Since the business
credit cards are personally guaranteed, our estimates can be interpreted as a com-
bination of the entrepreneurial firm and the personal assets of the entrepreneur.

     Advanta's line of small business credit cards were tailored to the needs of
small entrepreneurial firms and business professionals and thus had features not
offered by regular consumer credit cards, including higher credit limits, longer
8
    See, https://www.financeglobe.com/credit-cards/card-205/.
9
 Advanta stipulates that "Under the terms of our cardholder agreements, our
business cards may be used for business purposes only." See, Advanta Corp.,
10-K, 2001.
10
  Many business credit card issuers such as Advanta report only to business
credit bureaus, so the entrepreneur's personal credit score is not affected by
usage patterns on its business credit card.


                                          9
billing cycles, additional cards for employees, personalized business checks, busi-
ness purchase reward incentives, and business purchase protections. In addition,
through Advanta's website, cardholders were able to use an array of tools and
services to set up and build their businesses. For instance, Advanta offered pay-
roll management, employee expense tracking, and online tools for credit card
accounting and bookkeeping, business and health insurance, discounts on busi-
ness travel, tools to create web sites, tutorials on developing business plans,
marketing, tax and legal advice on business and personal finances, and many
other small business topics.11

     Table 1 reports summmary statistics about Advanta cardholders from Ad-
vanta's 2006 10-K filing. As shown, Advanta was one of the largest issuers of
business credit cards in the U.S. with more than one million accounts at the
end of 2006. Credit limits for Advanta accounts ranged from about $5,000 to
$25,000. Account balances typically ranged from zero to $10,000, with an average
balance of about $6,000 (for non-zero balance accounts). Furthermore, Advanta
cardholders had relatively high credit scores. In particular, Table 1 shows that
while FICO scores for some Advanta cardholders were below 600, the majority
were in excess of 720. As discussed in the Internet Appendix, these FICO scores
are comparable to those for cardholders in typical consumer credit card securi-
tizations. Finally, Table 1 also shows that the largest concentrations of Advanta
cardholders were in California, Florida, Texas, and New York. The Internet
Appendix provides additional details about Advanta's cardholders as well as an
in-depth discussion of the history, business model, and regulatory environment
of Advanta.


                                 5. THE DATA


This section summarizes some of primary data used in the paper. This data is
obtained from a combination of hand-collected sources and proprietary industry
market data. The Internet Appendix provides a full description of all variables
used in the study along with the sources of the data.

     We collect secondary market price data for all A, B, and C tranches from
the securitizations of the Advanta Master Trust business credit card receivables
portfolio from August 2000 to December 2010. We also hand collect data on
attachment/detachment points and the floating coupons paid by each tranche
from 424(b) (5) filings with the SEC and servicer reports from 10-D filings with
the SEC. Each of the tranches in the sample pays a floating coupon that equals

11
     See, www.advanta.com, accessed via https://archive.org/web/.


                                        10
one-month Libor plus a fixed spread. The attachment and detachment points
for the tranches are the same throughout the entire sample period.12 Table 2
provides summary statistics for the secondary market prices of the tranches.

     As discussed earlier, the portfolio consisting of all of the tranches issued in
a securitization is economically equivalent to investing in an alternative single-
class pass-through securitization which, in turn, is equivalent from a cash flow
perspective to owning the underlying receivables directly. Since we are interested
in the entrepreneurial credit risk associated with the Advanta business credit card
receivables, we make use of this equivalence by focusing specifically on the risk
and return characteristics of the portfolio of all tranches issued in a securitization
(rather than on individual tranches). For expositional clarity, we refer to this
portfolio simply as a "bond."

     We also collect data on characteristics of the Advanta Master Trust's col-
lateral pool of receivables. Specifically, we collect the monthly payment rate,
portfolio yield, excess spread, and the charge-off rate for the collateral pool. The
monthly payment rate (MPR) measures the speed at which cardholders pay down
the amount owed on their credit card balances and it is computed as the ratio
of total cash flows into the trust each month divided by the portfolio receivables
balance, expressed as a percentage. The portfolio yield is the annualized per-
centage gross return on the receivables portfolio and it is calculated as the total
monthly (gross) cash flows into the master trust divided by the outstanding prin-
cipal balance at the beginning of the month.13 Excess spread is the annualized
percentage net return on the portfolio and it is calculated as the annualized rate
of (gross) portfolio yield less servicing fees, coupon cash flows to noteholders,
charge-offs, and any other trust expenses. Excess spread represents a source of
credit enhancement for the notes. Intuitively, as long as the excess spread is posi-
tive, the securitization generates enough cash inflows to cover cash outflows. The
charge-off rate measures the rate of default on the credit card receivables and it
is calculated as the (one-month) annualized percentage rate of charge-offs on the
portfolio. Credit card receivables are typically charged off after the cardholder
has been delinquent in paying the revolving balance for more than 180 days.

12
  Specifically, the B tranche attaches at the 8.9918 percent detachment point of
the C tranche, and the A tranche attaches at the 21.5805 percent detachment
point of the B tranche.
13
  Gross cash inflows consist of interest on the revolving principal balances (fi-
nance charges) plus income from fees on the accounts such as late charges, card
annual fees, cash advance fees, overdraft charges, and card interchange. Cash
inflows include recoveries on defaulted receivables, but exclude charge-offs from
the current month.


                                         11
     To provide additional perspective, it is useful to compare the results from
the Advanta business credit card securitizations to those from a broader cross-
section of more-conventional consumer credit card securitizations. Accordingly,
we also collect the information described above for nine of the largest U.S. con-
sumer credit card issuers over the same time period. Specifically, we extend
the sample to include the credit card securitizations for the master trusts set
up by American Express, Bank of America, Bank One, Citibank (Citi), J.P.
Morgan Chase (Chase), Capital One, First National Bank (First National), and
World Financial Network/Alliance Data System (World Financial). Table 3 re-
ports summary statistics for the monthly payment rates, portfolio yields, excess
spreads, and charge-off rates for Advanta and the other issuers.


                6. ENTREPRENEURIAL CREDIT RISK


As a preliminary step in our analysis, it is useful to first provide some broad
perspective about the nature of entrepreneurial credit risk. Accordingly, we begin
by calculating credit spreads for the Advanta business credit card securitizations.
We then contrast their properties with those of more conventional consumer
credit card securitizations.

     Recall that our approach is to calculate credit spreads at the bond level
(rather than at an individual tranche level). An important advantage of this
approach is that it allow us to interpret the credit spread for Advanta in exactly
the same way that we would interpret, for example, a corporate bond spread.
Furthermore, this approach has the advantage of making it easier to compare
credit spreads across issuers (since individual tranches typically vary in terms of
their subordination levels across issuers).

     In calculating credit spreads, we follow Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020)
by first swapping the Libor-based floating coupons on the individual securities
into fixed rate coupons using standard basis and interest rate swaps. We obtain
the swap rate data from the Bloomberg system. We then solve for the credit
spread for a bond by taking the difference between its yield and the yield on a
Treasury bond with the identical fixed coupon rate and maturity. The price of
the matched-maturity matched-coupon Treasury bond is calculated from zero-
coupon bond prices obtained by bootstrapping the Treasury constant maturity
rates provided by the Federal Reserve's Selected Interest Rates H.15 release using
a standard spline methodology.

     Table 4 provides summary statistics for the credit spreads for Advanta's busi-
ness credit card securitizations as well as the consumer credit card securitizations
of the other issuers. Figure 1 plots the credit spread for the Advanta bonds along

                                        12
with the average credit spread for the consumer credit card bonds. As shown
in Figure 1, the credit spreads for Advanta and the other issuers were gener-
ally similar during the pre-financial-crisis period. Beginning in 2008, however,
the credit spreads began to diverge significantly with the Advanta credit spread
reaching a maximum of more than 1750 basis points, substantially higher than
the nearly 900 basis point maximum credit spread for the consumer credit card
securitizations during the financial crisis. This is also reflected in the summary
statistics reported in Table 4 showing that the average credit spreads over the
entire sample period for the Advanta and consumer credit card bonds are 283.95
and 123.52 basis points, respectively. Figure 2 plots the time series of charge-off
rates for the Advanta securitizations and those for the consumer credit card se-
curitizations of the other issuers in the sample. These results appear consistent
with the evidence in Table 3 and Figure 2 that charge-off rates for Advanta busi-
ness credit cards are higher on average than the charge-off rates for consumer
credit cards during the sample period.
     These results, however, raise several intriguing research issues. Are the larger
credit spreads for the Advanta bonds simply due to their higher realized credit
losses? Or are the larger credit spreads at least partially due to differences in how
the market perceives and prices entrepreneurial credit risk relative to household
or consumer credit risk?

     To address these issues, we use a simple panel regression approach. Specifi-
cally, we regress the monthly credit spreads for the individual securitizations on a
number of structural variables controlling for the potential credit risk of the un-
derlying collateral pool of receivables, and test whether there is a residual spread
that is unique to Advanta. This approach parallels that of Collin-Dufresne,
Goldstein, and Martin (2001) who regress corporate credit spreads on structural
variables that serve as controls for the underlying credit risk of the bonds. As
controls for the credit risk of the collateral pools underlying the securitizations,
we use the maturity of the securitizations as well as the four variables sum-
marized in Table 3--the monthly payment rate, the portfolio yield, the excess
spread, and the charge-off rate. Recall that the monthly payment rate reflects
the speed at which credit card balances are paid off by cardholders. Thus, we
would expect lower credit losses to occur when borrowers pay off their balances
more rapidly. Both the portfolio yield and the excess spread are measures of the
cash flows available to the master trust to service securitized debt. We would
expect higher portfolio yields and excess spreads to be associated with lower
credit losses. The charge-off rate is a direct measure of realized credit losses
on the underlying receivables portfolio. We would expect that higher charge-off
rates should be associated with higher credit spreads. To test for the possibility
that entrepreneurial credit risk is priced differently by the market, we include
an indicator function that takes value one for Advanta securitizations, and zero

                                         13
otherwise. Finally, we include annual fixed effects in the panel regression as
additional controls.
     Table 5 reports the results from the panel regression. As shown, credit
spreads are generally related to the structural variables in the way we would ex-
pect in the specifications that include the control variables individually. In par-
ticular, the coefficient for the monthly payment rate is negative and significant,
indicating that credit spreads are lower when credit card balances tend to be paid
off more rapidly. Similarly, the coefficient for the excess spread is negative and
significant, consistent with the interpretation that investors in the securitizations
face less credit risk when the cash flows available to service coupon payments and
principal payments increase. The coefficient for the monthly charge-off rate is
positive and significant, suggesting that credit spreads increase in response to
higher realized credit losses in the underlying credit card receivables.

     Table 5 also shows that there is a significant credit premium for the Advanta
business credit card securitizations even after controlling for the structural credit
risks of the underlying collateral pool. In particular, the indicator for Advanta
is positive and highly significant in each of the regression specifications shown
in Table 5. Focusing on the final specification with all of the control variables
included, the point estimate of the Advanta credit premium is 165.70 basis points
and has a t-statistic of 4.50.


      7. HOW SYSTEMATIC IS ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK?


The results from the panel regression in Table 5 strongly suggest that the market
views entrepreneurial credit risk as fundamentally different in nature from that
of conventional household or consumer credit risk and prices it accordingly. One
possibility implied by the literature is that entrepreneurship may be procycli-
cal in nature. For example, Levin and Rubinstein (2019) present a model in
which entrepreneurs are selected on collateral, and entrepreneurship is procycli-
cal (also see Koellinger and Thurik (2012)). If entrepreneurship is more sensitive
to macroeconomic fluctuations, then the large credit premium incorporated into
the prices of Advanta's securitizations may be a reflection of their systematic
market risk. We examine these possibilities in this section.
     As a first step, we explore the relation between ex post entrepreneurial credit
risk and a number of broader types of consumer and business credit risk. In
particular, we regress changes in the charge-off rates experienced by the Advanta
Business Card Master Trust portfolio on changes in the charge-off rates reported
by commercial banks for their consumer loan, single-family mortgage, commercial
real estate, and business loan portfolios. For comparison, we also estimate a

                                         14
similar regression of changes in the charge-off rates for consumer credit card
debt on the same variables. The quarterly commercial bank charge-off rate data
are obtained from the Federal Reserve.

     Table 6 reports the results from the regressions. Focusing first on the results
for the changes in the charge-off rate for consumer credit cards, the table shows
that there is little relation between changes in these charge-off rates and those
for other categories of loans. The one exception is that the coefficient for the
change in the charge-off rate for business loans is positive and significant (at the
ten-percent level).
    In contrast, the regression of changes in the Advanta charge-off rate shows
that there is a significant relation between these charge-off rates and those for
other types of loans. In particular, the coefficients for changes in both the single-
family and commercial real estate charge-off rates are positive and significant.
Furthermore, the coefficient for the change in the charge-off rate for business
loans is positive and significant (at the ten-percent level).

     Taken together, these results suggest that entrepreneurial risk differs in im-
portant ways from conventional household or consumer risk. As shown earlier in
Figure 2, entrepreneurial and consumer risk share some common drivers given
the similarities in their time series patterns. The results indicate, however, that
entrepreneurial risk is also driven by additional factors affecting the risk of other
types of asset classes. In particular, the significant relations between changes in
Advanta charge-off rates and those for single-family mortgages and commercial
real estate suggest that entrepreneurial risk may have an important collateral-
value dimension. This is consistent with the extensive literature about the impact
of liquidity constraints and household housing wealth on entrepreneurial activ-
ity. For example, Evans and Jovanovic (1989) and Levine and Rubinstein (2019)
present models in which individuals' wealth or collateral directly impacts their
ability to pursue entrepreneurship. Black, de Meza, and Jeffreys (1996), Corradin
and Popov (2015), and Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017) provide empirical
evidence of the link between housing values and entrepreneurship. Our results
open a new window on this literature by showing that entrepreneurial credit risk
has important commonalities with the credit risk experienced in other collateral-
value-dependent lending markets. Furthermore, our results suggest that time
variation in macroeconomic conditions and asset valuations may be important
drivers of systematic entrepreneurial risk.
    To explore this issue in more depth, we regress changes in Advanta credit
spreads on a number of macroeconomic and asset pricing factors. As macroe-
conomic variables, we include the percentage change in industrial production,
the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, initial jobless claims, and
changes in a number of measures of consumer and business sentiment and con-

                                         15
fidence. As asset pricing measures, we include stock market returns (CRSP
value-weight index), Treasury bond returns (Bloomberg Treasury total return
index), and housing returns (percentage changes in the Case-Shiller index). We
also include changes in the VIX index of stock market volatility as well as changes
in the MOVE index of Treasury rate volatility. To provide additional perspec-
tive, we also estimate the regression using changes in the credit spread for the
consumer credit card securitization. Table 7 reports the regression results.

     As shown, both changes in consumer credit card and Advanta credit spreads
are significantly related to changes in macroeconomic conditions. What is inter-
esting, however, is that changes in credit spreads for the consumer credit card
securitizations appear to be more closely tied to changes in macroeconomic vari-
ables that directly impact households such as inflation and employment. In
contrast, changes in credit spreads for Advanta securitizations also appear to be
related to a much broader set of macroeconomic factors such as industrial pro-
duction and measures of general consumer, business, and economic confidence.
     Table 7 also shows that changes in the Advanta credit spread are signifi-
cantly positively related to changes in housing values. In addition, changes in
the Advanta credit spread are significantly related to changes in the VIX and
MOVE measures of volatility in the stock and Treasury bond markets. These re-
sults provide direct support for the hypothesis that entrepreneurial risk is linked
to collateral values and the risks inherent in individuals' wealth. In contrast,
none of the financial market variables is significant in the regression for changes
in consumer credit card securitization credit spreads.
     As a third way of exploring the properties of entrepreneurial risk, we next
regress changes in Advanta credit spreads on changes in a number of other credit
spreads observable in the secondary capital markets. In particular, we regress
monthly changes in Advanta credit spreads on changes in the average credit
spreads for the consumer credit card securitizations of the other issuers in the
sample and on changes in AAA, BAA, and high-yield corporate bond spreads.
Table 8 reports the results from the regression.
     The regression results again indicate that the market views entrepreneurial
risk as very different in character from household or consumer risk. As shown,
changes in the Advanta credit spread are not significantly related to changes in
the credit spreads for the consumer credit card securitizations. Instead, changes
in the Advanta credit spreads are significantly related to corporate credit spreads.
In particular, the coefficients for changes in the BBB and high yield corporate
credit spread are both positive and significant. These results suggest that en-
trepreneurial credit risk is viewed by the market as having much more to do with
the macroeconomic factors driving risk in the broader corporate business sector
than it has with general consumer risk. Again, these results provide support

                                        16
for models such as Levin and Rubinstein (2019) in which entrepreneurial risk
behaves differently from other types of household or consumer risk because of its
dependence on asset/collateral values.


             8. IMPLEMENTING THE MERTON MODEL


In this section, we begin with a brief review of the Merton (1974) structural credit
modeling framework we will use in estimating private equity returns. We next
discuss how we apply this framework to Advanta and describe the calibration of
the model.

8.1 The Merton Model
Using the Merton (1974) structural credit framework to model the relation be-
tween equity returns and credit spreads has become standard in the literature.
Key examples include Campbell and Taksler (2003), Vassalou and Xing (2004),
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008), Bharath and Shumway (2008), Chen,
Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009), Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008), Coval,
Jurek, and Stafford (2009), Chava and Purnanandam (2010), Galappi and Yan
(2011), He and Xiong (2012), and Friewald, Wagner, and Zechner (2014). Our
approach follows this extensive literature in using the familiar Merton (1974)
framework in studying the returns from entrepreneurial investment.
     In its simplest form, the Merton (1974) framework is typically used to value
a debt claim for an issuer that may default. The capital structure of the issuer
is assumed to consist of equity with a value denoted as S , and a zero-coupon
bond with a notional amount F , maturity T , and a value denoted by B . The
underlying assets of the issuer are denoted V and are assumed to follow the
dynamics,



                           dV = µ V dt +  V dZ,                                 (1)
                           dV = r V dt +  V dZ,                                 (2)


under the objective and risk-neutral measures, respectively. In these dynamics,
µ and  denote constants, r is the riskless rate, and Z is a standard Brownian
motion.
     Merton (1974) shows that the issuer's equity can be represented as a call
option on the underlying assets of the issuer, allowing the Black and Scholes
(1973) model to be used to solve for S ,

                                        17
                                                         
                   S = V N (d) - F e-rT N (d -              2 T )             (3)

                          ln(V /F ) + (r +  2 /2)T
                    d =                            .                          (4)
                                      2 T

where N (·) is the cumulative standard normal distribution function. By defini-
tion, B = V - S .
     Given this closed-form expression for S , it is straightforward to solve for
the moments of returns for both the debt and equity components of the issuer's
capital structure under the objective measure. The Internet Appendix shows
that the expected return µB and the standard deviation of returns B for the
bond can be expressed as


                              µ - r(1 - X ) - (µ - r)N (d)
                      µB =                                 ,                  (5)
                                           X
                               (1 - N (d))
                      B =                  ,                                  (6)
                                   X

where X = B/V is the leverage ratio. Similarly, the expected return µS and
standard deviation of returns S for the equity can be expressed as


                                        (µ - r)N (d)
                             µS = r +                ,                        (7)
                                           1-X
                                    N (d)
                             S =          .                                   (8)
                                    1-X

8.2 Applying the Merton Model to Advanta
Our approach will be to apply the Merton (1974) framework to the Advanta
securitizations. In doing this, however, it is important to acknowledge that care
must be taken in the mapping from a stylized theoretical model such as Merton
(1974) into the structure of actual debt claims traded in the financial markets.
     First, the Merton (1974) model assumes that the debt in the issuer's capital
structure consists of a single zero-coupon bond. In reality, actual capital struc-
tures for debt issuers are far more complex. Following standard practice in the

                                        18
financial literature, we will take some liberties by interpreting the debt claim
in the Merton (1974) more broadly. Specifically, the portfolio of business credit
card receivables underlying an Advanta securitization--consisting of a portfolio
of debt claims on the assets of the entrepreneurs--can be viewed as playing the
same economic role as the zero-coupon bond in the Merton (1974) model. Note
that this also allows us to interpret the collective assets of the entrepreneurs
carrying Advanta credit card balances as the underlying assets V in the Merton
(1974) model.

     Second, actual Advanta securitizations make monthly coupon payments to
investors throughout the life of the security. In contrast, the zero-coupon bond in
the Merton (1974) framework does not. We observe, however, that the coupon
rates for securitizations are set in a way that allows them to be issued at or
close to par. Because of this feature, a very natural way of adapting the Merton
model to the Advanta securitizations is simply to assume that the debt claims
are issued at par or, equivalently, that the notional amount F of the debt equals
the initial value of the debt claim B . This interpretation is supported by the
results in Table 2 showing that the average prices of the Advanta tranches over
the sample period are all close to par.
8.3. Model Calibration

The final step is the calibration of the model. Table 9 reports the average value
of the riskless rate during the sample period which we use as the calibrated value
for r. Similarly, we use a calibrated value for T of three years which corresponds
closely to the average maturity of the Advanta securitizations during the sample
period.

     Given these values, the remaining task is to identify values for the en-
trepreneurial leverage ratio X and the parameters µ and  . In doing this, our
approach will be to use a range of values for X that are consistent with the his-
torical record, and then solve for the implied values of µ and  from the realized
returns of Advanta bonds over the sample period.

     Although there is probably no direct way of measuring the leverage of Ad-
vanta cardholders, we can at least provide some realistic bounds using aggregate
statistics on household and business leverage. In particular, we collect data on
total household, nonfinancial noncorporate business, and nonfinancial corporate
business assets and liabilities from the Federal Reserve's Financial Accounts of
the United States Z.1 Release during the 2000­2010 sample period. Table 9
reports the average ratio of total liabilities to total assets for each of these cate-
gories. As shown, the average leverage ratios range from about 35 to 53 percent.
This range is consistent with those discussed in Heaton and Lucas (2000), Robb
and Robinson (2014), and Kartashova (2014). In light of this, we will simply

                                         19
use values of X ranging from 25 to 60 percent in the calibration rather than se-
lecting a specific point estimate. As it turns out, estimates of the private equity
premium are very robust to the values of X used in the calibration.

     Given a value of X (as well as values of r and T ), the expected bond return
and standard deviation of the bond return shown in Equations (5) and (6) above
are explicit functions of the two parameters µ and  . Thus, given estimates
of these bond return moments, Equations (5) and (6) become a system of two
equations in two unknowns which can be solved directly for the parameters µ and
 . We estimate the expected excess return and standard deviation of returns for
the Advanta bonds over the sample period using the observed monthly returns.
The Internet Appendix provides the details about how these monthly returns are
calculated. Table 9 reports the estimated values for these two return moments.


              9. PRIVATE EQUITY RISK AND RETURN


With the Merton (1974) model calibrated to the Advanta securitizations, we
can now solve for the key moments of private equity returns. Table 10 reports
the estimated values of the expected return, standard deviation, private equity
premium, Sharpe ratio, and market beta of private equity returns across the
range of leverage ratios.
9.1 The Expected Return

As shown, the expected return on private equity is on the order of about 14
percent for all of the leverage ratios in the calibrated range. The estimated
expected return is slightly lower for leverage ratios that are closer to 50 percent,
but all the values are very similar. The average value of the expected return across
the range is 13.82 percent which we can use as a point estimate. These results
indicate that the estimated expected return is very robust to the assumptions
about the leverage ratio used in the calibration.14
    To calculate the private equity premium implied by the model, we simply
subtract the average riskless rate over the sample period from the estimated ex-
pected return on private equity. Table 10 shows that the private equity premium
range from about 10.40 percent to 11.70 percent. The point estimate of the
14
  It is important to observe, however, that this robustness result does not imply
that the equity returns are unaffected by leverage (which would be contrary to
what we would expect). Rather, this result simply means that since we apply
the same leverage assumption to both the bond and equity, the effect of the
assumption largely "washes out" in the estimation methodology.


                                        20
private equity premium across the range of leverage ratios is 10.72 percent.
     This estimate of the private equity premium far exceeds the realized excess
return of publicly-traded stocks during the sample period. For example, the
average annualized value of the Fama and French (2015) market factor (stock
market return minus the riskless rate) is -0.10 percent over the sample period.
     We can also compare these estimates of expected returns or the private
equity premium to those reported in the previous literature. One challenge in
doing this, however, is that there is no clear consensus in the literature on what
the average returns on private equity are. As discussed by Kaplan and Sensoy
(2015), Korteweg (2019), and others, estimates of the average premium on private
equity vary widely across studies based on the data source, time period, and
empirical methodology used. Estimates of the expected return on private implied
by various studies range from roughly 5 percent (Fang, Ivashina, and Lerner
(2015) and Gupta and van Nieuwerburgh (2019)) to about 60 percent (Peng
(2001), Cochrane (2005), and Korteweg and Nagel (2016)). Our point estimate
of the expected return on private equity places our results towards the lower end
of the estimates reported in the literature.15

9.2 Private Equity Return Volatility
The calibrated Merton (1974) model also allows us to estimate the standard
deviation of private equity returns. These estimates are obtained directly from
the closed form solution for the standard deviation of equity returns in Equation
(8).
     Table 10 shows that the estimated standard deviations are on the order
of 90 percent across the range of leverage ratios. The overall average is 94.55
percent which we can again take as the point estimate. While these standard
deviations may appear large relative to the volatility of broader stock market in-
dexes, they are actually fairly comparable to the average volatilities of individual
stocks. For example, Figure 1 of Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwer-
burgh (2016) shows that the average annualized volatility of stock returns for
CRSP/Compustat firms in the smallest size quintile ranged from about 60 to
120 percent during the 2000­2010 sample period. Also recall that the sample pe-
riod includes the 2008 financial crisis which was associated with historically high
levels of return volatility. Our results confirm that entrepreneurial investment is
a highly risky venture, particularly given the lack of diversification in their per-
sonal portfolios that entrepreneurs typically face (see the discussion in Moskowitz
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and Vereshchagina and Hopenhayn (2009)).
15
  See the Internet Appendix for a discussion of the estimated average returns on
private equity reported in the literature.


                                        21
     There is again no clear consensus in the previous literature about the volatil-
ity of private equity returns. Estimates of the annualized volatility of fund-level
private equity returns range from about 5 percent (Gompers and Lerner (1997))
to about 72 percent (McKenzie and Janeway (2011)). Estimates of the volatility
of deal-level private equity returns tend to be substantially higher with values in
the range of 107 percent to 116 percent (Cochrane (2005) and Chen, Baierl, and
Kaplan (2002)).

9.3 Sharpe Ratios

We can also calculate the Sharpe ratio for private equity returns implied by our
estimates of the private equity premium and private equity return volatility. As
shown in Table 10, the implied Sharpe ratios for private equity returns are 0.113
across the range of leverage ratios.

9.4 Private Equity Betas
We can also use the calibrated model to estimate the systematic risk of private
equity. To do this, we regress Advanta bond returns on the five Fama and
French (2015) factors and take the coefficient of 0.127 for the market factor. We
then multiply this bond beta by the ratio of equity volatility to bond volatility
(the ratio of the expressions in Equations (8) and (6)). Table 10 shows that
the estimated beta coefficients vary from about 1.17 to 1.32 across the range of
leverage ratios. The average value is 1.21 which we will again interpret as a point
estimate.
     We can use this estimate to provide a simple back-of-the-envelope estimate of
the implied expected excess return for private equity. Assuming a market equity
premium of 7 percent, the single-factor CAPM implies that the private equity
premium should be about 1.21 × 7 = 8.47 percent. This back-of-the-envelope
calculation is comparable to the private equity premium estimates shown in Table
10.

     In a comprehensive survey, Korteweg (2019) provides an extensive list of
private equity beta estimates reported in literature. These estimates range from
about 0.70 (Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013), Jegadeesh, Kr¨       aussl, and
Pollet (2015)) to 3.20 (Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) and Buchner and Stucke
(2014)). The specific values vary, however, depending on whether the estimates
are for venture capital funds or buyout funds. These results suggest that our esti-
mates of private equity betas are consistent with the general range of previously
reported measures.




                                        22
                              10. CONCLUSION


We introduce a new approach for estimating private equity returns. This ap-
proach uses secondary market prices for debt claims on entrepreneurial assets--in
conjunction with the Merton (1974) structural credit modeling framework--to
infer the moments of private equity returns. An important advantage of this
market-price-based approach is that it avoids the well-known problems of having
to rely on limited partnership cash flow information, NAV estimates provided by
venture capital funds, or other types of self-reported data in estimating private
equity returns.
      We apply our approach to an extensive data set of prices for Advanta's busi-
ness credit card securitizations. Advanta was a major issuer of credit cards to
small entrepreneurial firms with fewer than ten employees and less than three mil-
lion dollars in annual revenues. The underlying collateral for the securitizations
consisted of credit card receivables from a set of over one million cardholders.
Thus, our approach allows us to shed light on private equity returns for a very
broad set of small entrepreneurial firms, rather than for just the limited number
of firms that actually receive venture capital funding and for which cash flow and
NAV data can be sourced from private equity funds.
     We find that the market prices entrepreneurial credit risk very differently
from conventional household credit risk. After controlling for default risk and
structural credit features, we find that Advanta credit card securitizations in-
corporate an additional credit premium of more than 150 basis points relative
to consumer credit card securitizations. We provide evidence that this addi-
tional premium may be a reflection of the much-more systematic nature of en-
trepreneurial risk.

     We obtain estimates of the expected return on private equity that are on
the order of 13 to 15 percent during the 2000­2010 sample period. These values
are towards the lower end of the range of estimates reported in the private equity
literature. We also find that the volatility of private equity returns is comparable
to that of the smallest decile of publicly traded firms. Finally, we estimate
the market beta of private equity to be around 1.21. These results have many
important implications for private equity and entrepreneurship.

     It is important to acknowledge that our results are limited to the set of
small entrepreneurial firms that were Advanta cardholders. Clearly, additional
research would be needed to determine whether our results are applicable to
broader classes of private equity. One advantage of our approach, however, is
that it is scalable and could be applied to other types of entrepreneurial and con-
sumer/household securitization markets such as Small Business Administration


                                        23
loans, business loan syndications, student loans, auto loans, and home equity
lines of credit.




                                     24
                              REFERENCES


Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, 2016, Loan Origina-
tions and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class, Review
of Financial Studies 29, 1635-1670.

Ang, Andrew, Bingxu Chen, William N. Goetzmann, and Ludovic Phalippou,
2018, Estimating Private Equity Returns from Limited Partner Cash Flows,
Journal of Finance 73, 1751-1783.

Astebro, Thomas, and Jing Chen, 2014, The Entrepreneurial Earnings Puzzle:
Mismeasurement or Real?, Journal of Business Venturing 29, 88-105.
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Str¨omberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2013,
Borrow Cheap, Buy High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buy-
outs, Journal of Finance 68, 2223-2267.
Barber, Brad M., and Ayako Yasuda, 2017, Interim Fund Performance and
Fundraising in Private Equity, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 172-194.

Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations, American Economic Review 79, 14-31.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting Default with the
Merton Distance to Default Model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339-1369.

Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities, Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-654.

Black, Jane, David de Meza, and David Jeffreys, 1996, House Prices, the Supply
of Collateral and the Enterprise Economy, The Economic Journal 106, 60-75.
Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald, 1998, What Makes an En-
trepreneur?, Journal of Labor Economics 16, 26-60.

Boyer, Brian, Taylor D. Nadauld, Keith P. Vorkink, and Michael S. Weisbach,
2018, Private Equity Indices Based on Secondary Market Transactions, NBER
Working Paper 25207.

Brown, Gregory W., Oleg R. Gredil, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2019, Do Private
Equity Funds Manipulate Reported Returns?, Journal of Financial Economics
132, 267-297.
Brown, Greg, Bob Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steve Kaplan, and David Robinson,
2020, Private Equity: Accomplishments and Challenges, Journal of Applied Cor-
porate Finance 32, 8-20.

                                      25
Brown, Gregory W., Robert Harris, Wendy Hu, Tim Jenkinson, Steve Kaplan,
and David T. Robinson, 2020, Can Investors Time their Exposure to Private
Equity?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Buchner Axel, and R¨
                   udiger Stucke, 2014, The Systematic Risk of Private Equity,
Working Paper, University of Passau/University of Oxford.
Cagetti, Marco, and Mariacristina De Nardi, 2009, Estate Taxation, Entrepre-
neurship, and Wealth, American Economic Review 99, 85-111.

Caggese, Andrea, 2012, Entrepreneurial Risk, Investment, and Innovation, Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 106, 287-307.
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In Search of Distress
Risk, Journal of Finance 63, 2899-2939.

Campbell, John Y., and Glen B. Taksler, 2003, Equity Volatility and Corporate
Bond Yields, Journal of Finance 58, 2321-2350.

Chava, Sudheer, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2010, Is Default Risk Negatively
Related to Stock Returns? Review of Financial Studies 23, 2523-2559.
Chemmanur, Thomas J., Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi K. Nandy, 2011, How
Does Venture Capital Financing Improve Efficiency in Private Firms? A Look
Beneath the Surface, Review of Financial Studies 24, 4037-4090.

Chen, Peng, Gary T. Baierl, and Paul H.D. Kaplan, 2002, Venture Capital and its
Role in Strategic Asset Allocation, Journal of Portfolio Management 28, 83-90.

Chen, Long, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2009, On the Rela-
tion between the Credit Spread Puzzle and the Equity Premium Puzzle, Review
of Financial Studies 22, 3367-3409.
Cochrane, John H., 2005, The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, Journal of
Financial Economics 75, 3-52.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, J. Spencer Martin, 2001, The De-
terminants of Credit Spread Changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177-2207.

Corradin, Stefano, and Alexander Popov, 2015, House Prices, Home Equity Bor-
rowing, and Entrepreneurship, 2015, Review of Financial Studies 28, 2399-2428.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, Economic Catastrophe
Bonds, American Economic Review 99, 628-666.

Driessen, Joost, Tse-Chun Lin, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, A New Method
to Estimate Risk and Return of Nontraded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case

                                      26
of Private Equity Funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47,
511-535.
Emery, Kenneth, 2003, Private Equity Risk and Reward: Assessing the Stale
Pricing Problem, Journal of Private Equity 6, 43-50.

Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic, 1989, An Estimated Model of Entrepre-
neurial Choice under Liquidity Constraints, Journal of Political Economy 97,
808-827.

Evans, David S., and Linda S Leighton, 1989, Some Empirical Aspects of En-
trepreneurship, American Economic Review 79, 519-535.
Ewens, Michael, Charles M. Jones, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, The Price
of Diversifiable Risk in Venture Capital and Private Equity, Review of Financial
Studies 26, 1854-1889.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A Five-Factor Asset Pricing
Model, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 1-22.

Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner, 2015, The Disintermediation
of Financial Markets: Direct Investing in Private Equity, Journal of Financial
Economics, 116, 160-178.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Harry A. Krashinsky, 2012, Liquidity Constraints, House-
hold Wealth, and Entrepreneurship Revisited, Review of Income and Wealth 58,
279-306.
Fairlie, Robert W., and A. Robb, 2007, Families, Human Capital, and Small
Business: Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owner Surveys, ILR
Review 60, 225-245.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020, The Market Risk Pre-
mium for Unsecured Consumer Credit: Evidence from Credit Card Securitiza-
tions, Working Paper, University of California Los Angeles.
Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private Equity
Performance and Liquidity Risk, Journal of Finance 67, 2341-2373.

Friewald, Nils, Christian Wagner, and Josef Zechner, 2014, The Cross-Section of
Credit Risk Premia and Equity Returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2419-2469.
Garlappi, Lorenzo, and Hong Yan, 2011, Financial Distress and the Cross-Section
of Equity Returns, Journal of Finance 66, 789-822.

Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist, 1994, Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and
the Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109,

                                      27
309-340.
Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 1997, Risk and Reward in Private Equity In-
vestments: The Challenge of Performance Assessment, Journal of Private Equity
1, 5-12.

Gornall, William, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2019, Squaring Venture Capital Valu-
ations with Reality, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 120-143.

Gupta, Arpit, and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, 2019, Valuing Private Equity Strip
by Strip, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward, 2010, The Burden of the Nondiversi-
fiable Risk of Entrepreneurship, American Economic Review 100, 1163-1194.

Hamilton, Barton H., 2000, Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis
of the Returns to Self Employment, Journal of Political Economy 108, 604-631.
Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity
Performance: What Do We Know? Journal of Finance 69, 1851-1882.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and R. Stucke, 2018, Fi-
nancial Intermediation in Private Equity: How Well do Funds of Funds Perform?,
Journal of Financial Economics 129, 287-305.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong, 2012, Rollover Risk and Credit Risk, Journal of
Finance 67, 391-430.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The
Importance of Entrepreneurial Risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.

Herskovic, Bernard, Bryan T. Kelly, Hanno N. Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwer-
burgh, 2016, The Common Factor in Idiosyncratic Volatility: Quantitative Asset
Pricing Implications, Journal of Financial Economics 119, 249-283.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994a, Sticking
it Out: Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints, Journal of Political
Economy 102, 53-75.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994b, Entrepre-
neurial Decisions and Liquidity Constraints, RAND Journal of Economics 25,
334-347.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley, 2014, Are Household Surveys Like
Tax Forms? Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed, Review
of Economics and Statistics 96, 19-33.


                                      28
Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi, 2004, Liquidity Constraints, Household
Wealth, and Entrepreneurship, Journal of Political Economy 112, 319-347.
Hvide, Hans K., and Georgios A. Panos, 2014, Risk Tolerance and Entrepreneur-
ship, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 200-223.

Hyytinen, Ari, Pekka Ilmakunnas, and Otto Toivanen, 2013, The Return-to-
Entrepreneurship Puzzle, Labour Economics 20, 57-67.

Jenkinson, Tim, Miguel Sousa, R¨
                               udiger Stucke, 2013, How Fair are the Valuations
of Private Equity Funds?, Working Paper, University of Oxford.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Roman Kr¨   aussl, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2015, Risk and
Expected Returns of Private Equity Investments: Evidence Based on Market
Prices, Review of Financial Studies 28, 3269-3302.

Jovanovic, Boyan, Sai Ma, and Peter L. Rousseau, 2020, Private Equity and
Growth, NBER Working Paper 28030.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Performance:
Returns, Persistence, and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2015, Private Equity Performance: A
Survey, Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 597-614.

Kartashova, Katya, 2014, Private Equity Premium Puzzle Revisited, American
Economic Review 104, 3297-3334.
Kauffman Foundation, 2019, Access to Capital for Entrepreneurs: Removing
Barriers, Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.

Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Jean-Jacques Laffont, 1979, A General Equilibrium
Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion, Journal of
Political Economy 87, 719-748.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit Cycles, Journal of Political
Economy 105, 211-248.
Koellinger, Philipp D., and A. Roy Thurik, 2012, Entrepreneurship and the Busi-
ness Cycle, Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 1143-1156.

Korteweg, Arthur, 2019, Risk Adjustment in Private Equity Returns, Annual
Review of Financial Economics 11, 131-152.

Korteweg, Arthur, and Stefan Nagel, 2016, Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Ven-
ture Capital, Journal of Finance 71, 1437-1470.



                                      29
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2010, Risk and Return Characteris-
tics of Venture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies, Review of Financial
Studies 23, 3738-3772.

Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2017, Skill and Luck in Private Equity
Performance, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 535-562.
Lazear, Edward P., and Robert L. Moore, 1984, Incentives, Productivity, and
Labor Contracts, Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 275-296.

Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein, 2017, Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an
Entrepreneur and Do They Earn More?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132,
963-1018.

Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein, 2019, Selection into Entrepreneurship and
Self-Employment, NBER Working Paper 25350.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Matthew Richardson, 2003. The Cash Flow, Return
and Risk Characteristics of Private Equity, NBER Working Paper 9454.

Manso, Gustavo, 2016, Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship,
Review of Financial Studies 29, 2310-2340.
McCourt, Maurice, 2018. Estimating Skill in Private Equity Performance Using
Market Data, Working Paper, University of Melbourne.

McKenzie, Michael D., and William H. Janeway, 2011, Venture Capital Funds
and the Public Equity Market, Accounting & Finance 51, 764-786.

Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure
of Interest Rates, Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002, The Returns to
Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle? American Eco-
nomic Review 92, 745-778.

Nadauld, Taylor D., Berk A. Sensoy, Keith Vorkink, and Michael S. Weisbach,
2019, The Liquidity Cost of Private Equity Investments: Evidence from Sec-
ondary Market Transactions, Journal of Financial Economics 132, 158-181.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-
definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,
Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Parker, Simon C., 2012, Theories of Entrepreneurship, Innovation and the Busi-
ness Cycle, Journal of Economic Surveys 26, 377-394.


                                     30
Peng, Liang, 2001, Building a Venture Capital Index, Working Paper, University
of Colorado, Boulder.
Phalippou, Ludovic, and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009, The Performance of Private
Equity Funds, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1747-1776.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2000, Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility, Review
of Economic Dynamics 3, 1-40.

Rampini, Adriano A., 2004, Entreprenurial Activity, Risk, and the Business Cy-
cle, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 555-573.
Robb, Alicia M., and David T. Robinson, 2014, The Capital Structure Decisions
of New Firms, Review of Financial Studies 27, 153-179.

Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2016, Cyclicality, Performance Mea-
surement, and Cash Flow Liquidity in Private Equity, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 122, 521-543.

Schaefer, Stephen M., and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2008, Structural Models of Credit
Risk are Useful: Evidence from Hedge Ratios on Corporate Bonds, Journal of
Financial Economics 90, 1-19.
Schmalz, Martin C., David A. Sraer, and David J. Thesmar, 2017, Housing
Collateral and Entrepreneurship, Journal of Finance 72, 99-132.

Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Implementation Cycles, Journal of Political Economy 94,
1163-1190.

Sorensen, Morten, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2014, Valuing Private Equity,
Review of Financial Studies 27, 1977-2021.
Tedds, Lindsay M., 2010, Estimating the Income Reporting Function for the
Self-Employed, Empirical Economics 38, 669-687.

Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default Risk in Equity Returns, Jour-
nal of Finance 59, 831-868.
Vereshchagina, Galina, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, 2009, Risk Taking by En-
trepreneurs, American Economic Review 99, 1808-1830.

Wang, Chong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2012, A Unified Model of En-
trepreneurship Dynamics, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 1-23.




                                      31
1800
            Advanta Credit Spread
1600        Consumer Credit Card Credit Spread


1400


1200


1000


 800


 600


 400


 200


   0
            2002           2004           2006         2008          2010




Figure 1. Credit Spreads for Credit Card Securitizations. This figure
shows the credit spread for Advanta business credit card securitizations as well
as the average credit spread for the consumer credit card securitizations of the
other issuers in the sample. Credit spreads are expressed in basis points.




                                        32
  60
             Advanta Credit Card Charge-Offs
             Consumer Credit Card Charge-Offs
  50



  40



  30



  20



  10



   0
             2002             2004              2006          2008            2010




Figure 2. Charge-off Rates for Credit Card Securitizations. This figure
shows the annualized percentage charge-off rate for Advanta business credit card
securitizations as well as the average charge-off rate for the consumer credit card
securitizations of the other issuers in the sample.




                                         33
                                               Table 1


Summary Statistics for Advanta Business Credit Cardholders. This table presents summary statis-
tics about Advanta cardholders from Advantas 2006 10-K filing. Panel A presents summary statistics for
card limits on the business credit cards. Panel B presents account balances on the credit card accounts.
Panel C presents FICO scores of credit card account holders. Panel D presents the geographical location
of account holders within the U.S. Number of accounts denotes the total number of business credit card
accounts in the indicated ranges or categories. Accounts receivable denotes the total dollar amount of credit
card receivables of the accounts in the indicated ranges or categories. Credit limits, account balances, and
accounts receivable are expressed in dollars.


    Panel A -- Credit Limits

                                           Number of      Percentage          Accounts       Percentage
    Credit Limit                            Accounts         of Total        Receivable         of Total


    0.00                                      225,746           21.42         -767,267            -0.02
    0.01 to 1,500                              11,988            1.14         5,517,888            0.15
    1,500 to 5,000                             87,416            8.29       151,891,685            4.03
    5,000 to 10,000                           184,453           17.50       540,906,479           14.34
    10,000 to 15,000                          214,035           20.30       761,581,567           20.20
    15,000 to 25,000                          243,029           23.05     1,410,163,394           37.40
    25,000 to 35,000                           73,875            7.01       672,446,726           17.83
    Over 35,000                                13,555            1.29       228,735,760            6.07

    Total                                   1,054,097          100.00     3,770,476,232          100.00




    Panel B -- Account Balances

    Account                                Number of      Percentage          Accounts       Percentage
    Balance                                 Accounts         of Total        Receivable         of Total


    Less than 0.00                             15,558            1.48       -5,184,772            -0.14
    0.00                                      420,330           39.87                 0            0.00
    0.01 to 5,000                             352,054           33.40       578,537,683           15.35
    5,000 to 10,000                           131,568           12.48       973,572,334           25.82
    10,000 to 20,000                          105,240            9.98     1,467,134,186           38.91
    20,000 to 25,000                           16,941            1.61       377,152,481           10.00
    Over 25,000                                12,406            1.18       379,264,320           10.06

    Total                                   1,054,097          100.00     3,770,476,232          100.00
                               Table 1 Continued



Panel C -- Most Recent FICO Score

                                    Number of    Percentage      Accounts     Percentage
FICO Score                           Accounts      of Total     Receivable      of Total


No FICO Score                              197         0.02          18,123         0.00
Less than 600                           42,425         4.02     216,116,946         5.73
600 to 660                             114,589        10.87     466,005,333        12.36
661 to 719                             328,621        31.18   1,404,664,820        37.26
720 and Higher                         568,265        53.91   1,683,671,010        44.65

Total                                1,054,097       100.00   3,770,476,232       100.00




Panel D -- Geographical Location

                                    Number of    Percentage      Accounts     Percentage
Location                             Accounts      of Total     Receivable      of Total


California                             145,700        13.82     498,881,414        13.23
Florida                                 79,158         7.51     272,669,419         7.23
Texas                                   76,208         7.23     269,426,356         7.15
New York                                70,514         6.69     239,530,062         6.35
Illinois                                42,698         4.05     155,931,372         4.14
Pennsylvania                            42,169         4.00     144,917,210         3.84
Michigan                                35,218         3.34     139,608,903         3.70
Ohio                                    33,868         3.21     139,524,963         3.70
New Jersey                              37,767         3.58     122,940,182         3.26
Georgia                                 26,814         2.55     105,785,695         2.81
North Carolina                          24,462         2.32      94,685,759         2.51
Colorado                                25,229         2.39      94,468,323         2.51
Massachusetts                           27,476         2.61      93,906,422         2.49
Washington                              21,499         2.04      84,030,705         2.23
Virginia                                22,696         2.15      83,042,113         2.20
All Others                             342,621        32.51   1,231,127,334        32.65

Total                                1,054,097       100.00   3,770,476,232       100.00
                                                                Table 2


Summary Statistics for Advanta Credit Card Tranches. This table presents summary statistics for the A, B, and C tranches of the Advanta
credit card securitizations. Detach denotes the detachment point of the indicated tranches. Average maturity denotes the average number of months
until maturity of the tranche. Average spread denotes the average spread above Libor paid by the tranche and is measured in basis points. Average
price, Min price, Median price and Max price denote the average, minimum, median and maximum price of the tranche and is expressed in dollars
per $100 notional value. N denotes the number of observations. The sample period is monthly from August 2000 to December 2010.


                                             Average          Average        Average          Min        Median          Max
      Tranche                  Detach        Maturity          Spread          Price         Price        Price          Price         N


      A Tranche                 1.0000           27.05          15.51           96.86       43.52          99.98        100.93        893
      B Tranche                 0.2158           28.54          76.36           93.49       17.26         100.36        103.53        513
      C Tranche                 0.0899           26.60         174.10           91.80        5.01         101.06        108.99        503
                                                                        Table 3
Summary Statistics for Credit Card Receivables Portfolio Characteristics. This table presents summary statistics for the indicated
characteristics of the portfolios of credit card receivables underlying the securitizations. The statistics for the individual card issuers are computed by
taking averages across all securitizations for each month, and then averaging the monthly averages. The monthly payment rate is the ratio of total
cash flows collected each month divided by the portfolio balance, expressed as a percentage. Portfolio yield is the annualized percentage gross return
on the portfolio. Excess spread is the annualized percentage net return on the portfolio. The Charge-off Rate is the one-month annualized percentage
rate of charge-offs on the portfolio. N denotes the number of months. Average denotes summary statistics taken over the averages for the individual
consumer credit card issuers. The sample period is monthly from August 2000 to December 2010.


                                                     Monthly
                                                     Payment              Portfolio            Excess              Charge-off
           Card Issuer                                  Rate                 Yield             Spread                   Rate                N


           Advanta                                      19.321               22.242              7.101                  9.423              114


           American Express                             22.269               21.370             10.261                  5.477              125
           Bank of America                              15.379               18.946              7.164                  6.866              125
           Bank One                                     17.848               17.118              6.879                  5.777              125
           Citibank                                     18.682               16.405              6.638                  6.069              123
           Chase                                        17.497               16.339              6.061                  5.636              125
           Capital One                                  17.234               19.926              9.235                  4.879              125
           First National                               13.601               17.704              5.768                  7.382               94
           MBNA                                         15.561               19.223              7.643                  6.432              125
           World Financial                              17.684               28.887             12.066                  7.236              125

           Average                                      17.409               19.604              8.033                  6.161             1092
                                                                   Table 4
Summary Statistics for the Credit Spreads of Credit Card Securitizations. This table presents summary statistics for the credit spreads of
the indicated categories of credit card asset-backed securities. The monthly credit spreads for each issuer are averages taken over all securitizations
for that issuer for that that month. All credit spreads are expressed in basis points. Mean and Std. Dev. denote the means and standard deviations
of credit spreads for the indicated issuer. The columns denoted 5%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 95% represent the respective percentiles of the distribution
of credit spreads. N denotes the number of monthly observations. Average denotes summary statistics taken over the averages for the individual
consumer credit card issuers. The sample period is monthly from August 2000 to December 2010.


                                                        Std.
       Card Issuer                       Mean           Dev.           5%          25%           50%           75%             95%          N


       Advanta                          283.95         400.66        47.83        66.02         75.27        432.03        1294.72         125


       American Express                 142.42         183.73        40.68        48.77         56.75        138.22          641.14         82
       Bank of America                  144.92         194.91        31.19        45.50         66.35        122.88          719.00        105
       Bank One                         122.20         161.54        34.14        43.18         51.38        107.85          508.74         88
       Citibank                         118.22         144.29        41.16        46.45         64.39        100.90          504.73        123
       Chase                            111.36         139.83        39.41        46.30         53.41         96.95          458.30        125
       Capital One                      150.72         202.66        46.35        55.72         77.79        108.38          733.00        125
       First National                   100.65         110.62        29.12        37.51         44.54        154.62          267.67         56
       MBNA                             122.14         153.98        38.61        49.36         61.27         97.50          536.09        125
       World Financial                   61.97          19.29        38.26        47.31         60.42         71.14          100.73         61

       Average                          123.52         157.74        41.54        49.11         68.09         93.52          555.27        890
                                                                     Table 5

Results from Panel Regression of Credit Spreads on the Structural Credit Control Variables and the Indicator Variable for Advanta.
This table reports the results from the panel regression of credit spreads for the Advanta and other credit card securizations on the structural credit
control variables and an indicator variable that takes value one for Advanta securitizations, and zero otherwise. Credit spreads are expressed in basis
points. Maturity is expressed in months. The monthly payment rate, the portfolio yield, and the charge-off rate are expressed as percentages. The
time fixed effects represent indicator variables for the individual years during the sample period. Robust standard errors are clustered at the issuer
level. The superscript  denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript  denotes significance at the five-percent level. The sample
period is from August 2000 to December 2010.


                                   Coeff    t-Stat         Coeff    t-Stat         Coeff    t-Stat         Coeff    t-Stat          Coeff    t-Stat


  Maturity                         0.370      4.44         0.341      3.38         0.337      3.14         0.350      3.43          0.387      4.06

  Monthly Payment Rate           -9.866     -3.13            -         -             -         -              -         -         -6.625     -1.49
  Portfolio Yield                    -         -         -2.512     -0.99            -         -              -         -          8.109      1.96
  Excess Spread                      -         -             -         -         -9.300     -4.51             -         -        -14.066     -3.18
  Charge-off Rate                    -         -             -         -             -         -          11.036      2.39        -5.291     -0.78

  Indicator for Advanta          201.224     20.23       201.253     18.30       170.065     15.47       136.661      6.27       165.703       4.50


  Time Fixed Effects                           Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes

  Adj. R2                                    0.583                   0.571                   0.583                   0.580                   0.592
  N                                         16,614                  16,614                  16,614                  16,614                  16,614
                                                Table 6

Results from Regressions of Changes in Advanta and Consumer Credit Card Charge-off Rates
on Changes in Charge-off Rates for Other Types of Loans. This table reports the results from
the regressions of changes in the charge-off rates for Advanta credit cards and consumer credit cards on
changes in the charge-off rates for the indicated types of loans. The superscript  denotes significance at
the ten-percent level; the superscript  denotes significance at the five-percent level. The sample period is
quarterly from 2000 Q3 to 2009 Q4.


                                                             Consumer                   Advanta
                                                            Credit Cards               Credit Card

                                                            Coeff    t-Stat            Coeff     t-Stat


   Intercept                                               0.0181     0.12           0.2452       0.59
   Lagged Dependent Variable                              -0.2556    -1.37          -0.6496      -2.72

      Charge-off   Rate   Consumer Loans                   0.1478      0.29         -1.5403      -1.09
      Charge-off   Rate   Single-Family Mortgages          0.6232      0.78          4.7465       2.14
      Charge-off   Rate   Commercial Real Estate           0.5949      0.81          5.8807       2.90
      Charge-off   Rate   Business Loans                   0.9727      1.77          2.9962       1.92


   Adj. R2                                                            0.036                      0.306
   N                                                                     37                         37
                                              Table 7

Results from Regressions of Changes in the Credit Spreads for Consumer and Advanta Credit
Card Securitizations on Macroeconomic and Financial Market Variables. This table reports the
results from the regressions of changes in credit spreads on the indicated macroeconomic and financial market
variables. Credit spreads are expressed in basis points. Industrial Production is the percentage change in
the Industrial Production Index. Inflation denotes the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index.
Jobless Claims denotes the monthly average of the Conference Board's weekly initial jobless claims index
and is measured in thousands. Consumer Sentiment denotes changes in the Michigan Consumer Sentiment
Index. Consumer, Business, and Economic Confidence denote changes in the Conference Board's Consumer,
Business, and Economic Confidence Indexes, respectively. VIX and MOVE denote changes in the VIX Stock
Market Volatility and Treasury Volatility Indexes, respectively. Stock Market Return denotes the percentage
returns on the CRSP Value Weighted Index. Treasury Market Return denotes the percentage returns on
the Bloomberg Treasury Total Return Index. Housing Market Return denotes the percentage returns on
the Case-Shiller Housing Price Index. The superscript  denotes significance at the ten-percent level; the
superscript  denotes significance at the five-percent level. The sample period is quarterly from 2000 Q3 to
2009 Q4.


                                                 Consumer                            Advanta
                                                Credit Cards                        Credit Card

                                                Coeff       t-Stat                 Coeff        t-Stat


      Intercept                               79.2109          4.62             158.4212          2.56

      Industrial Production                   2.1839         0.33              -32.9000         -2.73
      Inflation                             -61.3719        -2.37              -68.2025         -1.81
      Jobless Claims                         -0.1689        -4.32               -0.3303         -2.18
      Consumer Sentiment                     -0.5656        -0.36                6.0269          1.95
      Consumer Confidence                    -2.3202        -1.59               -3.6869         -1.91
      Business Confidence                    -2.2600        -1.14               -7.8153         -1.73
      Economic Confidence                    -0.4141        -0.26               -5.2157         -1.77

      VIX                                     2.2108         1.02               13.2952          2.32
      MOVE                                    0.2395         0.70               -0.8731         -1.77
      Stock Market Return                    -0.0497        -0.01              -11.3327         -1.51
      Treasury Market Return                  0.3192         0.25                4.0686          0.89
      Housing Market Return                  -7.5353        -1.66              -20.9703         -2.63


      Adj. R2                                                0.324                              0.367
      N                                                        124                                124
                                                Table 8

Results from Regression of Changes in Advanta Credit Spreads on Changes in Consumer
Credit Card Credit Spreads and Corporate Bond Credit Spreads. This table reports the results
from the regression of changes in the credit spreads of Advanta bonds on changes in the credit spreads of
consumer credit card bonds and AAA, BBB, and high yield corporate bonds. Credit spreads are expressed
in basis points. Robust standard errors are based on Newey and West (1987). The superscript  denotes
significance at the ten-percent level; the superscript  denotes significance at the five-percent level. The
sample period is monthly from August 2000 to December 2010.


                                                                         Coeff             Stat


          Intercept                                                     4.5017             0.85

           Consumer Credit Card Spread                                  0.3776             0.67

           AAA Corporate Credit Spread                                 0.4575              0.65
           BBB Corporate Credit Spread                                 2.0424              2.21
           High Yield Corporate Credit Spread                         -0.4893             -2.24


          Adj. R2                                                                         0.378
          N                                                                                 124
                                                  Table 9


Calibration of the Credit Model. This table reports the calibrated values for the credit model used to
infer the moments of the returns on the underlying entrepreneurial assets from those for the Advanta credit
card securitizations. The indicated values for the riskless rate, maturity, and excess returns are based on
monthly values over the sample period. Non-corporate leverage denotes the average annual ratio of total
liabilities to total assets for non-financial non-corporate businesses. Corporate leverage denotes the average
annual ratio of total liabilities to total assets for non-financial corporate businesses. Household leverage
denotes the average annual ratio of total liabilities to total non-financial assets for households and non-
profit organizations. Total asset and liability values are taken from the Federal Reserve Z.1 Release for the
Financial Accounts of the United States. Maturity is expressed in years. All other values are expressed as
percentages. The sample period is August 2000 to December 2010.



             Credit Model Inputs                                              Calibrated Value


              Credit Model Parameters

                  Average Riskless Rate                                                   3.103
                  Average Maturity                                                        3.000


              Advanta Bond Returns

                  Average Annual Excess Return                                            1.121
                  Annualized Standard Deviation                                           9.891
                  Market Beta                                                             0.127


              Leverage Ratio Proxies

                  Non-Corporate Leverage                                                 35.315
                  Corporate Leverage                                                     52.593
                  Household Leverage                                                     42.680
                                             Table 10


Summary Statistics for Implied Private Equity Returns. This table reports summary statistics for
the implied returns for equity investments in the assets underlying Advanta credit card securizations. The
leverage ratio is the ratio of debt to total assets. Expected return and standard deviation denote the value
of the implied expected return on equity investments and the standard deviation of the return on equity
investments for the indicated leverage ratio values, respectively. Sharpe ratio denotes the Sharpe Ratio, and
market beta denotes the loading on the Fama and French (2015) market portfolio. Returns are expressed as
annualized percentages.



                                                                Private
      Leverage               Expected         Standard           Equity        Sharpe         Market
         Ratio                 Return         Deviation        Premium          Ratio          Beta


           0.25                  13.50            91.71            10.39         0.113           1.17
           0.30                  13.42            91.00            10.31         0.113           1.17
           0.35                  13.42            91.05            10.32         0.113           1.17
           0.40                  13.51            91.80            10.40         0.113           1.18
           0.45                  13.67            93.27            10.57         0.113           1.19
           0.50                  13.93            95.54            10.83         0.113           1.22
           0.55                  14.30            98.78            11.19         0.113           1.27
           0.60                  14.80           103.25            11.70         0.113           1.32
       INTERNET APPENDIX FOR




      PRIVATE EQUITY RETURNS:

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM THE BUSINESS
 CREDIT CARD SECURITIZATION MARKET




          Matthias Fleckenstein
          Francis A. Longstaff
                          INTERNET APPENDIX


A.1 Data Sources
Table A1 provides a description of all the data and variables used in the study
along with their definitions and corresponding sources. The key to our abil-
ity to identify private equity returns is the use of secondary market prices and
cash flows for financial claims on the underlying assets of private entrepreneurial
firms. Since data for this asset class is not readily available given its highly spe-
cialized nature, we combine hand-collected data and proprietary market sources
to construct an extensive data set for the securitizations issued by the Advanta
Business Card Master Trust.
     Specifically, we collect information on secondary market prices for all se-
curitizations of the Advanta master trust over the period from August 2000 to
December 2010 from the Bloomberg system by specifying ICAP/Tullett Prebon
(TP ICAP) as the pricing sources. We supplement this pricing data with sec-
ondary market prices for the credit card securitizations of nine of the largest U.S.
consumer credit card issuers over the same time period. These are the master
trusts set up by American Express, Bank of America, Bank One, Citigroup (Citi),
J.P. Morgan Chase (Chase), Capital One, First National Bank (First National),
and World Financial Network/Alliance Data System (World Financial).
     We also collect monthly cash flow information for all securitizations of the
Advanta master trust and the consumer credit card master trusts over the same
period from the Bloomberg system and supplement this data with hand-collected
information from monthly servicer reports (10-D filings) with the SEC. We ob-
tain the 10-D filings from the SEC's Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and
Retrieval system (EDGAR) website. Specifically, we collect monthly payment
rates, portfolio yields, charge-offs, and excess spreads for all securitizations of
the Advanta master trust and the consumer credit card master trusts.

     The monthly payment rate (MPR) is the monthly rate of total principal
cash flows during the month divided by the total principal receivables balance
at the beginning of the month. The MPR is a measure of the speed at which
cardholders pay down the amount owed on their credit cards.
     The charge-off rate is the amount charged off each month divided by the
total outstanding principal balance at the beginning of the month. Credit card
receivables are typically charged off after the cardholder has been delinquent in
paying the revolving balance for more than 180 days. Since the outstanding
principal is reduced by the amount of principal charge-offs at the start of the
next month, charge-offs diminish the collateral value backing the issued notes


                                         1
and the level of receivables backing the notes declines. If charge-offs reach a
threshold specified in the prospectus supplement, an early amortization of the
notes is triggered.
     The excess spread is the annualized rate of (gross) portfolio yield less ser-
vicing fees, coupon cash flows to noteholders, charge-offs, and any other trust
expenses.1 Excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement for the notes.
Intuitively, as long as the excess spread is positive, the securitization generates
enough cash inflows to cover cash outflows. When the average excess spread is
negative (typically calculated over a period of three months), many master trusts
go into early amortization.2
     Portfolio yield is the annualized rate of total monthly cash flows into the
credit card master trust divided by the outstanding principal balance at the be-
ginning of the month. Gross cash inflows consist of interest on the revolving
principal balances (finance charges) plus income from fees on the accounts such
as late charges, card annual fees, cash advance fees, overdraft charges, card inter-
change, and discounted receivables.3 Cash inflows include recoveries on defaulted
receivables, but exclude charge-offs from the current month. The portfolio yield
is a measure of the income generated by the credit card receivables.
     We also hand collect data on attachment and detachment points for all
securitizations of the Advanta Business Card Master trusts and the consumer
credit card master trusts from the prospectus supplements for each individual
securitization. The primary source for obtaining the prospectus supplements are
424-B5 filings with the SEC which we accessed via the SEC's EDGAR website.
For some securitizations in the early part of the sample, we were able to download
1
  The servicing fee is an annual fee expressed in percent and paid to the servicer
of the credit card portfolio for servicing the portfolio on behalf of the master
trust. It is often set as a fixed percentage of the total receivables in the credit
card master trust.
2
  To illustrate how excess spread represents a source of credit enhancement, sup-
pose a master trust generates a portfolio yield of 14.80% and experiences char-
geoffs of 5.50%. The trust has issued notes paying LIBOR floating each month.
Assuming that the floating coupon rate equals 2.05% and that the master trust
is paying a servicing fee of 2%, the excess spread is 14.80% - 2.05% - 2.00% -
5.50% = 5.25%. Intuitively, this means that the master trust generates about
five cents for each dollar invested each month above what is required to pay
investor coupon interest, servicing fees, and other trust expenses.
3
 Some credit card master trusts can add receivables at a discount, typically
ranging between 1% and 5%. The difference between the face value of receivables
and their discount is added to finance charge collections.


                                         2
prospectus supplements available in the Bloomberg system.


A.2 The Credit Card Asset-Backed Securities Market
The market for securities backed by business and consumer credit is a very large
and mature market. Credit card receivables have been securitized since the late
1980s and by the late 1990s securitization had become the dominant funding
source for credit card receivables.4
     Annual issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) increased from just under
$40 billion in 1990 to around $200 billion in 2001. Between 2002 and 2007, annual
issuance was consistently in the range of $230 billion to $275 billion. The volume
of ABSs backed by revolving consumer credit grew at a compound rate of about
19.79 percent between 1989 and 2009. As of year-end 2019, there was more than
$127 billion in credit card ABS outstanding, and $18 billion in credit card ABS
was issued in 2019. Total ABS issuance in 2019 was $306 billion across consumer
credit, automobile, equipment (floorplans, leases and transportation), student
loans, CDO/CLOs and other ABS (franchises, insurance, timeshares). Consumer
credit ABS made up about 7.06% of total $1.8 trillion ABS outstanding as of
year-end 2019.5
      Credit cards represent an important source of financing for entrepreneurs.
For example, total transaction volume for small business credit cards was $245
billion in 2017.6 Table 4 of Robb and Robinson (2014) indicates that credit card
debt represents 46.3 percent of total outsider debt for the nearly 5,000 startup
firms in the Kauffman Firm Survey data set. The Small Business Credit Survey
published by the Federal Reserve Banks reports that applying for bank lines of
credit/loans and credit cards are the two most common ways in which small
entrepreneurial firms seek financing.7
     The underlying collateral of a business credit card ABS consists of account
receivables that are generated when businesses make charges on their credit cards
4
 See, FDIC Credit Card Securitization Manual 2007, https://www.fdic.gov/regu
lations/examinations/credit card securitization/.
5
    https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-abs-issuance-and-outstanding.
6
 Source: Statista (www.statista.com) at https://www.statista.com/statistics/93
6159/ leading-small-business-credit-cards-usa-by-purchase-volume/.
7
 Loans and lines of credit are the first choice for small businesses seeking capital--
86% percent of credit applicants sought a loan or line of credit for their business,
and 31% applied for a credit card. New companies (two years old or less) were
more likely to seek credit cards, at 44 percent.


                                          3
to purchase goods and services. From credit card issuer's perspective, credit
card receivables are in effect a short-term unsecured loan. Cardholders pay back
either the full principal of this unsecured loan or make partial payment. In the
latter case, the issuer finances the remaining balance and earns interest (finance
charges). Intuitively, the idea for pooling credit card receivables is to turn the
volatile cash flows from individual cardholders paying off their credit card debts,
into a stable cash flow that in aggregate resembles a bond which can then be
tranched and sold to investors.
     Credit card issuers typically use "master trusts" for the process of securi-
tizing credit card receivables and creating notes that are subsequently sold to
investors. This is because the master trust structure allows an issuer to sell
multiple securities from the same trust, all of which rely on the same pool of
receivables as collateral. To illustrate, an issuer could transfer say $1 billion of
card receivables from one million accounts to a to a master trust, then issue
multiple notes in various denominations and sizes.

     Even though the receivables are transferred to the master trust, the seller
must maintain an ownership interest in the trust. On the one hand, this "seller's
interest" ensures that the issuer has some skin-in-the-game to maintain the credit
quality of the pool, but it also absorbs seasonal fluctuations in credit card re-
ceivable balances so that the certificateholders' invested amount is always fully
invested in credit card receivables. However, the seller's interest does not provide
credit enhancement for the investors. In other words, the seller has a pari-passu
claim on the master trust cash flows. The size of the seller's participation must
remain at or above a minimum percentage of the trust receivables balance. The
minimum required seller's interest for most master trusts tends to be in the
4% to 7% range of outstanding receivables. If the seller's interest falls below
this threshold, the seller must add receivables or an early amortization event is
triggered.
     As cardholders pay back their card balances, the issuer transfers receivables
from more accounts to the master trust. Moreover, the issuer can add receiv-
ables to the trust and create additional securities which are referred to as a new
"series." However, even though master trusts issue different series over time,
the receivables in the master trust are not segregated to indicate which series
of securities they support. Instead, all the accounts support all the securities.
Master trusts offer different "classes" of securities to investors which have some
parallels with a CDO structure. Specifically, in a typical transaction, the master
trust issues A, B, and C classes. The class C notes are similar to a CDO equity
tranche in that class C investors bear the first losses in early amortization. Class
B notes are junior to class A notes and are allocated the next layer of losses after
class C notes are wiped out. Finally, class A notes are senior to other classes and


                                         4
because class A securities have credit support from junior classes, they typically
receive AAA credit ratings.
     Each class can be thought of as having attachment and detachment points
like a typical CDO. For example, a class C note could have an attachment points
of zero and, say, a detachment point of 15% which means that the tranche thick-
ness of the C class absorbs the first 15 cents of losses for each dollar of credit
card receivables. Similarly, class A notes could have an attachment point, say,
25%, which means that class A investors would not experience losses unless total
losses in the credit card portfolio exceeded 25 cents for each dollar of credit card
receivables.8
     The process by which cash flows are allocated to different investor classes
has parallels to the CDO waterfall structure. Specifically, the typical setup has
two different cash flow periods--revolving and controlled amortization (in some
cases, controlled accumulation). A third, referred to as "early amortization" can
be triggered when the master trust incurs sustained losses. If there are no losses,
the two-period structure mimics a traditional bond in these sense that interest
is distributed every month and principal is paid in a single "bullet" cash flow on
the maturity date.
     After issuance, a credit card ABS enters the "revolving period." In this
phase, all cash flows on receivables are divided into finance charge collections
and principal payments. Monthly finance charges are used to pay the investor
coupon and servicing fees, as well as to cover any receivables that have been
charged off in the month. Any residual cash flows are referred to as "excess
spread" and, depending on the master trust, are used as credit enhancement or
released to the seller. Cash flows from principal collections, by contrast, are not
distributed to investors, but are used to purchase new receivables or to purchase
a portion of the seller's interest if there are no new receivables. The revolving
period continues for a predetermined length of time, typically from two to several
years, and then the controlled amortization (accumulation) period begins where
principal collections are distributed to investors. For instance, a credit card ABS
with a five-year expected maturity might revolve for 48 months and then enter
amortization for the final 12 months.
     There are two primary mechanisms through which amortization is achieved.
These are designated controlled amortization and controlled accumulation. In
the case of controlled amortization, principal cash flows are distributed in equal
installments, for instance 1/12 of the invested amount every month for 12 months.
8
 This example abstracts away other credit enhancements built into master trusts,
such as cash collateral accounts, collateral invested amounts, and excess spread
accumulation accounts.

                                         5
During this period, interest cash flows are based on declining principal balances.
In the case of controlled accumulation, by contrast, principal cash flows are
deposited into a collection account--referred to as "principal funding account"
(PFA)--every month and then paid out as a single "bullet" cash flows at the end
of the accumulation period.
     Independent of whether the credit card ABS is in the revolving period or
controlled amortization (accumulation), early amortization can be triggered if
there are sustained defaults or write-offs on the pool of credit card accounts.
Common early amortization trigger events include collateral performance dete-
rioration (e.g. the three-month average excess spread falls below zero, or the
collateral balance falls below the investor invested amount), seller/servicer prob-
lems (e.g. seller interest falls below the required minimum level, the seller fails
to transfer new receivables into the trust when necessary), but also legal issues
(e.g. breach of representation or warranties by the issuer, or default, bankruptcy,
and insolvency of the seller or servicer). Basically, once an early amortization
even occurs, then a credit card ABS immediately enters starts to amortize and
ABS investors start to receive principal cash flows. The principal received is
distributed to the Class A certificate holders first until the Class A certificate
holders are repaid in full, then to the Class B certificate holders until the Class
B certificate holders are paid in full, and so on for any other classes issued in
a particular series. Cash flow shortfalls owed to the Class A certificate holders
on a specific distribution date reduce the principal amount of the subordinated
classes.
     Credit card ABS have different forms of credit enhancement because as unse-
cured revolving debt obligations, credit card receivables offer no collateral in the
event of cardholder default. Common forms of credit enhancement are excess
spread, a cash collateral account (CCA), a collateral invested amount (CIA),
and subordination. Excess spread is the key form of internal credit enhance-
ment. Intuitively, excess spread is simply the residual cash flow after investor
interest, servicing fees, and charge-offs are allocated to each series. Excess spread
is calculated as the gross portfolio yield less charge-offs less investor coupon less
servicing fees, and is expressed as an annualized percentage of the outstand-
ing principal balance. Typically, a negative three-month moving average excess
spread for a particular series triggers early amortization. Available excess spread
is often shared with other series, deposited into a spread as credit enhancement
or released to the seller. A cash collateral account (CCA) is a segregated cash
reserve account, funded at closing and held by the trust. Amounts deposited in
the CCA are used to cover shortfalls in interest, principal, or servicing expense
for a particular series if excess spread is reduced to zero. The cash to fund the
CCA is usually lent by a third party and invested in high-grade short-term se-
curities, all of which will mature on or before the next distribution date. Draws

                                         6
on the CCA may be reimbursed from future excess spread. A collateral invested
amount (CIA) is a privately-placed tranche of a series that is subordinate in
payment rights to all investor certificates. It basically acts as another layer of
subordination that is used to cover deficiencies if excess spread is reduced to zero.
In some master trusts, the CIA has credit enhancement via a spread account and
is allocated monthly excess spread, if available. Moreover, if the CIA is drawn
on, it can be reimbursed from future excess spread.
      The perhaps most straight-forward form of credit enhancement is subordina-
tion via senior/subordinate investor certificates. Typically, senior participation
is in the form of class A certificates and subordinate participation is in the form
of class B and class C certificates. For example, the receivables could be securi-
tized by issuing a series of A, B, and C tranches with notional amounts of $70,
$20, and $10, respectively. The C tranche absorbs the first $10 of credit losses
(unless those losses can be covered by excess spread, CCA or CIA), the B tranche
absorbs the next $20 of credit losses, while the A tranche absorbs the remaining
credit losses. Principal collections are allocated to subordinate classes only after
the senior certificates are fully repaid.


A.3 The Advanta Business Credit Card
Advanta was a one of the largest issuers of credit cards to small business en-
trepreneurs in the U.S. with more than one million small business credit card
customer accounts. In June 2000, the Advanta Business Card Master Trust had
more than $1.6 billion in credit card receivables and by year-end 2006, receivables
had grown to more than $3.7 billion.9 Advanta's business credit cards targeted
small firms with fewer than ten employees and less than three million dollars
in annual revenues. Among Advanta's core customers were small independent
brick-and-mortar and online retailers, small business start-ups, business profes-
sionals, such as consultants, lawyers, physicians, contractors, television writers
and producers and online content developers.

     Accounts were restricted to business owners, and applicants needed proof
of business ownership or involvement and were asked to provide their Federal
tax I.D. number and business phone and address before finalization of the card
acceptance.10 By signing the account agreement, the entrepreneur acknowledged
that the credit card was to be used for commercial and business purposes only.

9
 See, Advanta Business Card Master Trust, Prospectus for Series 2001-A Notes,
dated March 2001; Prospectus for Series 2006-A Notes, dated March 2006; Ad-
vanta Corp., 10-K, 2001 and 2006.
10
     See, https://www.financeglobe.com/credit-cards/card-205/.


                                         7
      Advanta could monitor business credit card usage and cancel the card if pat-
terns of personal use were detected.11 Furthermore, small entrepreneurs signed as
personal guarantors of the business credit card. Specifically, under the cardholder
agreement, the entrepreneur and the business were jointly and severally liable for
all transactions on the business card account.12 There are also legal ramifications
from commingling business and personal expenses if the entrepreneur were to
file for bankruptcy. Specifically, entrepreneurs using limited liability companies
(LLCs) and corporations to structure their enterprises, risk being held personally
liable for all business debts when they "pierce the corporate veil."

     Small entrepreneurs could apply for business credit cards from Advanta via
its webpage, telephone, or direct-mail. In the initial credit inquiry, Advanta used
information from personal credit reports such as the entrepreneur's FICO score,
as well as the entrepreneur's prior business history.13 Small entrepreneurs were
declined credit if their "underwriting risk score" was below a certain threshold.14

     Advanta's line of small business credit cards was tailored to the needs of
small businesses and entrepreneurs, and thus had features not offered by reg-
ular consumer credit cards, including higher credit limits, longer billing cycles,
additional cards for employees, personalized business checks, business purchase
reward incentives, and business purchase protections. In addition, through Ad-
vanta's website, cardholders were able to use an array of tools and services to
set up and build their businesses. For instance, Advanta offered payroll manage-
ment, employee expense tracking, and online tools for credit card accounting and
bookkeeping, business and health insurance, discounts on business travel, tools
to create web sites, tutorials on developing business plans, marketing, tax and
legal advice on business and personal finances, and many other small business
11
  Advanta stipulates that "Under the terms of our cardholder agreements, our
business cards may be used for business purposes only." See, Advanta Corp.,
10-K, 2001.
12
  Many business credit card issuers such as Advanta report only to business
credit bureaus, so the entrepreneur's personal credit score is not affected by
usage patterns on its business credit card.
13
  Advanta "scores potential applicants based on their current and historical busi-
ness performance via information purchased from an external-reporting agency. . .
The interest rate and credit line size offered varies and is ultimately determined
based upon credit history and creditworthiness of the applicant." See, Advanta
Corp., 10-K, 2000.
14
  Advanta's underwriting risk score "ranks applicants based on their expected
creditworthiness" and is a "measure of credit risk or potential default [of the
entrepreneur]." See, Advanta Corp., 10-K, 2000.


                                        8
topics.15
     Advanta had a line of different business credit cards.16 For instance, the
Advanta Platinum Unlimited Rewards Business Card had zero percent APR
for 15 Months on balance transfers, and 7.99% fixed APR thereafter (7.99%
Variable APR based on prime rate). The card had no annual fees and credit
lines up to $50,000. The grace period on Advanta's Platinum Business Card was
twenty days, so interest charges would not be applied for new purchases during
this time if the entrepreneur paid the balance in full by the due date.17 The
card had rewards points on travel, merchandise and more (one point for every
dollar in purchases). In addition, it had a tiered cash-back rewards program
offering a quarter of a percent for the first $10,000 spent, one percent back at
$80,000 and two percent at $100,000, with an additional one percent cash back
in one area to be selected from a list of items bought most often, from gasoline
to office supplies. The card had no blackout dates on air travel, no limit on
the points the entrepreneur could earn, and free employee cards with no fee
and no per-card monthly spending limits. The card had purchase protections
and $0 fraud liability. Entrepreneurs could also custom-design their business
credit card and order personalized business checks.18 Finally, via online account
access entrepreneurs had a set of tools for account monitoring, itemized expense
reporting, and for setting up personalized billing dates, purchase protections and
extended warranty coverage on purchases.19 Other business credit cards offered
by Advanta included the Advanta Business World Master Card and the Advanta
Net 90 Platinum Business Card which had a 90 day grace period.
    Table A2 reports summary statistics of Advanta business credit cardholders
and consumer credit cardholders. Consumer credit cardholder data are from
American Express Credit Account Master Trust, Chase Issuance Trust and Chase
Master Trust, and First National Master Note Trust. As shown, Advanta's
business credit card accounts had average limits between roughly $10,000 and
$15,000, with limits ranging from about $2,000 to $50,000 throughout 2000 to
2010.20 Account balances typically ranged from zero to $25,000. Furthermore
15
     See, www.advanta.com, accessed via https://archive.org/web/.
16
  See, http://www.moneybluebook.com/reviews-of-the-best-advanta-business-
credit-cards-and-offers/.
17
     See, https://www.financeglobe.com/credit-cards/card-205/.
18
  https://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/21/business/businessspecial/credit-card.h
tml, http://www.selectcreditcard.com/advanta.htm
19
   See, https://www.streetdirectory.com/travel guide/164461/credit cards/benef
it from the advanta cash back credit card rewards.html
20
   See, Advanta, Conference call, Q4 2007.

                                        9
Advanta cardholders had relatively high credit scores. In particular, Table A2
shows that while FICO scores for some Advanta cardholders were below 600,
almost half the accounts had FICO scores of 720 or above. More specifically, the
average entrepreneur had a FICO score of 660 or better, carried a card balance of
$1,630 and had a credit card limit of $10,257.21 Through June 2000, customers'
FICO scores at origination averaged 716. The average increased to 730 by 2003,
and ranged between 725 and 742 through the end of 2008.22 Moreover, since
June 2000, entrepreneurs were declined credit if their FICO score was lower
than 660 or if their FICO score was unavailable at the time of underwriting.23
Table A2 also shows that account balances and FICO scores of Advanta business
cardholders are comparable to those for cardholders in typical consumer credit
card securitizations.


A.4 Advanta Corporation
Advanta Corp. (Advanta) was a monoline credit card bank and one of the largest
issuers of credit cards to small business entrepreneurs in the United States.24
Small business credit cards became Advanta's sole focus when it exited its mort-
gage and leasing services businesses in early 2001, and Advanta's business cards
segment was its only reportable business segment as of year-end 2007.25 More-
21
   See, Advanta Business Card Master Trust, Prospectus for Series 2001-A Notes,
dated March 2001.
22
   "We're continuing to attract a large number of high credit quality customers
who are using the Advanta Business Card to help finance their businesses. By
focusing only on the specific needs of the small business market, we understand
what these business owners really want. From July through September, we added
85,000 new customers to our portfolio, with an average FICO score of 728." See,
Advanta, Conference Call, October 31, 2006.
23
   See, Advanta Business Card Master Trust, Prospectus for Series 2001-A Notes,
dated March 2001.
24
   Advanta did not have any other significant banking operations. It owned two
insurance companies, Advanta Life Insurance Company and Advanta Insurance
Company, which offered credit-related insurance to business card customers.
Prior to 2001, Advanta also operated Advanta Mortgage, Advanta Leasing Ser-
vices, and it had a consumer credit card business. However, Advanta exited the
mortgage and leasing business in the first quarter of 2001 and sold its consumer
credit card portfolio to Fleet Financial Group in 1997.
25
  Since Advanta was a monoline credit card bank for small businesses, the FDIC
did not assign a functional peer group for regulatory comparative capital analysis
to Advanta. See, FDIC (2010).


                                       10
over, business cards accounted for over 90% of Advanta's revenues by fiscal-year
end 2006.26
     Throughout the sample period, Advanta was considered well-capitalized by
the FDIC, as it maintained a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio in excess of 20%,
significantly higher than the regulatory requirements during the period from the
early 2000s leading up to the 2008 financial crisis.27 Advanta's cost of borrowing
over the period from March 2001 to September 2009 averaged 4.987%.28 More-
over, Advanta's securitizations were off-balance sheet and thus protected by the
FDIC safe-harbor rule.29 This means that Advanta's business credit card secu-
ritizations were bankruptcy remote and could receive higher credit ratings than
Advanta as the originator of the business credit card receivables. All of Advanta's
Class A securitizations were initially rated A by Moody's.30
     Advanta was among the many financial services providers impacted by the
2008 financial crisis. Specifically, Advanta began to experience a rapid and sig-
nificant increase in credit card delinquencies and charge-offs in 2008 and into
2009 as borrowers were impacted by rapidly deteriorating economic conditions.
In the first quarter of 2009, Advanta reported a $76 million first-quarter loss as
delinquencies rose to 11.5%, roughly twice the number from the previous year.
Rising levels of charge-offs decreased the excess spread of the securitized business
credit card receivables portfolio.31 During the months of February, March, April

26
     See, Advanta Corp., 10-K Annual Report, 2007.
27
  See, Advanta Corp., Form 8-K (Oct.30, 2008). In the Press release reporting
3Q 2008 results, Advanta reported a Tier 1 capital ratio of 22.3%. The FDIC
requires banks to maintain a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 6% or greater. See
12 C.F.R. § 325.103(b)(1)(ii).
28
     See, S&P Capital IQ, Industry Specific Metrics for Advanta Corp.
29
  The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) safe harbor rule, enacted in
2000, provided bankruptcy remoteness for assets transferred into securitizations,
which meant that the FDIC, as receiver or conservator of a failed bank, could
not repudiate contracts, or recover or reclaim financial assets transferred in con-
nection with securitization transactions when these assets were off-balance-sheet
for accounting purposes (Securitization Safe Harbor Rule, 12 C.F.R. § 360.6).
30
  Credit rating agencies assign credit ratings based on the risk of the under-
lying pool of unsecured small business credit card receivables. See, Moody's
Approach to Rating Credit Card Receivables Backed Securities, available at
www.moodys.com/researchdocumentcontentpage.aspx?doci d=PBS 1065701.
31
  Excess spread is the difference between the gross yield on the pool of secu-
ritized receivables less the cost of financing those receivables (weighted average

                                        11
and May, analysts weighed the prospects of an early amortization event. In June
2009, Advantas Business Card Master Trust entered early amortization when its
three-month average excess spread fell below zero.32
     Despite the turmoil in the first quarter of 2009, however, Advanta's busi-
ness card securitizations continued to pay interest to investors. Moreover, in
May 2009, Advanta offered to buy back Class A notes which had a stabilizing
effect on the market prices of Advanta's securitizations, and the FDIC consid-
ered Advanta adequately capitalized at the time. Over the summer of 2009,
Advanta's securitization continued to recover and in September, Advanta an-
nounced that charge-offs on the business credit card receivables had declined
significantly. Shortly after, in November 2009, Moody's confirmed the ratings
of Advantas Class A notes.33 Advantas securitization continued to stabilize and
Class A notes were paid in full by 2011. Moreover, Moodys eventually upgraded
Advantas Class B notes in September 2011.34

coupon paid on the investor certificates), charge-offs, servicing costs, and any
other trust expenses. Excess spread is typically a source of credit enhancement
for the certificates since it is commonly available to absorb losses on the assets.
Advanta's excess spread decreased from 9.5% in March 2006 to 4.9% in June
2008. During roughly the same time period, the industrys average excess spread
ranged from 7% to 9%. See, FDIC (2010).
32
  Advanta is not the only master trust that had an early amortization event. The
other seven public transactions that have triggered early amortization were issued
by Chevy Chase FSB, Conseco Private LabelMaster Note Trust, First Consumers
Credit Card Master Note Trust, Next Card Master Note Trust, Spiegel Master
Trust, Southeast Bank, Republic Bank (Delaware). See Poon and Kohl (2016).
33
   "Driven primarily by a greater level of certainty with respect to collateral per-
formance. The performance of the trust immediately following the beginning of
the early amortization in May was initially very volatile, but not altogether un-
expected. In recent months, however, there have been signs of performance stabi-
lization. We believe the Class A notes will be paid in full even if performance dete-
riorates marginally from its present level." See, https://www.moodys.com/resea
rch/Moodys-confirms-Advanta-credit-card-trust-senior-notes-rating­PR 192101.
34
  "The decision to upgrade the Class B notes is driven primarily by a mate-
rial improvement in the delinquency rate, a harbinger of future losses, while
other performance metrics remain stable... This improvement in the delin-
quency rate is expected to cause charge-offs to fall in upcoming months." See,
https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-upgrades-Advantas-card-backed-Cl
ass-B-notes­PR 225353.


                                         12
A.5 The Merton Model
We use the familiar Merton (1974) framework to study the returns from en-
trepreneurial investment. This approach follows the extensive literature using
the Merton (1974) structural credit framework to model the relation between
equity returns and credit spreads.
     In its basic form, the Merton (1974) framework is typically used to value a
debt claim for an issuer that may default. The capital structure of the issuer
is assumed to consist of equity denoted by S , and a zero-coupon bond with a
notional amount F , maturity T , and value denoted by B . The standard account-
ing identify V = B + St holds, and the riskfree rate, denoted by r, is assumed
constant. The value of the underlying assets of the issuer are denoted V and are
assumed to follow the dynamics



                           dV = µ V dt +  V dZ                               (A1)
                           dV = r V dt +  V dZ,                              (A2)


under the objective and risk-neutral measures, respectively. In these dynamics,
µ and  denote constants, and Z is a standard Brownian motion. At maturity
T , the payoffs to equity S and debt B , respectively, are

                   S = max (V - F, 0)                                        (A3)
                   B = min (V, F ) = F - max (F - V, 0)                      (A4)


    In this set up, Equation (A3) shows that the issuers equity can be represented
as a call option on the underlying assets of the issuer, allowing the Black and
Scholes (1973) model to be used to solve for S ,


                                                       
                   S = V N (d) - F e-rT N (d -            2 T )              (A5)

                          ln(V /F ) + (r +  2 /2)T
                    d =                            .                         (A6)
                                      2 T

where N (·) is the cumulative standard normal distribution function.

     Since the sum of debt and equity equals the value of the underlying assets,
the value of debt is simply B = V - S .

                                       13
     In the Merton (1974) model, the underlying assets have constant volatility
 . However, the volatility of the debt claim is stochastic and lower leverage is
associated with lower volatility of debt. Specifically, let B denote the volatility
of the debt claim. Merton (1974) implies that

                                                    Vt
                               B = (1 - N (d))         .                         (A7)
                                                    Bt

    Defining the leverage ratio as X = B/V , Equation (A7) can be written as

                                         (1 - N (d))
                               B =                   ,                           (A8)
                                             X

which is Equation (6). Note, that as leverage goes to zero, the volatility of the
debt claim approaches zero and debt becomes risk-free.

   The volatility of equity is also stochastic and increases with leverage. Let
S denote the volatility of equity. Then,

                                               V
                                  S = N (d)      .                               (A9)
                                               S

     Using the definition for the leverage ratio X = B/V , Equation (A9) can be
written as

                                          N (d)
                                    S =         ,                               (A10)
                                          1-X

which is Equation (8). This implies that for an unlevered issuer, equity volatility
equals the volatility of the issuer's assets. Since there is a single source of risk in
the model, deriving expected returns on equity and debt is straightforward. This
is because the Sharpe ratios of assets, equity, and debt are equal (see Merton
(1974), Equation (6)).
   Let the expected returns on equity and debt be denoted by µS ] and µB .
Then,

                                  µ-r   µS - r
                                      =        .                                (A11)
                                          S

Using Equations (A10) and (A11), the expected return on equity µS is given by

                                          14
                                           (µ - r)N (d)
                                µS = r +                ,                   (A13)
                                              1-X

which is Equation (7). Similarly, using Equations (A8) and A(9), the expected
return on the debt claim can be written as

                                µ - r(1 - X ) - (µ - r)N (d)
                         µB =                                ,              (A14)
                                             X

which is Equation (5).


A.6 Credit Spreads and Returns on Advanta Securitizations
Our approach to calculate credit spreads is based on the portfolio of all tranches
issued in a securitization (rather than on individual tranches). An important
advantage of this approach is that holding a portfolio of all tranches is econom-
ically equivalent to holding a single claim on the pool of business credit card
receivables. In turn, this allows us to interpret the credit spread for Advanta in
exactly the same way that we would interpret, for example, a corporate bond
spread. For expositional clarity, we refer to this portfolio as an Advanta "bond."

     As a preliminary step, we swap the Libo­based floating coupons on the
individual tranches into fixed rate coupons using standard basis and interest rate
swaps. To illustrate, consider the Class A notes of the Series 2000-B Advanta
Business Card Master Trust securitization. This A tranche pays a floating coupon
rate of one-month Libor plus 17 basis points every month until maturity which
is expected to be July 21, 2003. Suppose the date is August 31, 2000. The
market swap rate on that date for swapping a floating cash flows based on one-
month Libor into fixed is 6.91 percent. Thus, by entering into the floating to
fixed interest rate swap, we convert the floating rate Class A note into a fixed
rate note with an annual coupon rate of 7.08 percent (6.91 percent + 17 basis
points). We obtain all swap rate data used in this step from the Bloomberg
system.

     Turning next to how we create a "bond" by forming a portfolio of all the
tranches. As discussed earlier, the portfolio consisting of all of the tranches is-
sued in a securitization is economically equivalent to investing in an alternative
single-class pass-through securitization which, in turn, is equivalent from a cash
flow perspective to owning the underlying receivables directly. We first collect
the attachment and detachment points for all the tranches issued by the Ad-
vanta Credit Card Master trust by reading the prospectus supplement of each
series issued by the master trust. Recall that the attachment point represents

                                           15
the percentage of the receivables pool balance that can default before the tranche
experiences first losses, and the detachment point represents the level of credit
card defaults that leads to a total loss of the tranche. In all series issued by the
Advanta Master trust, the A tranches attach at the 21.5805 percent detachment
point of the B tranches, and the B tranches attach at the 8.9918 detachment
point of the C tranches. We note that Advanta issued some D tranches as
equity tranches during our sample period which means that the C tranche tech-
nically has a non-zero attachment point. However, since the tranche thickness
of D tranches was small relative to those of the C tranches, we make the mild
assumption that the equity tranche has the same price and coupon as the C
tranche, and we set the attachment point of the C tranche to zero percent.
     First, at the end of each month during the sample period from August 2000
to December 2010, we match each A tranche with a B and a C tranche that
are closest in expected maturity to the A tranche. To determine which B and
C tranches have the closest maturity, we calculate the number of months to
expected maturity for each tranche. For the small number of cases where the A
tranche matures after the expected maturity date, we use the final maturity date
from the prospectus supplement instead. We then take the minimum absolute
difference in the number of months to maturity across all pairs of A/B tranches
and A/C tranches to form triplets of A, B, and C tranches at the end of each
month. In general, this results in a set of between two and 20 triplets each month.

     Next, we create a single "bond" from each triplet by calculating the weighted
average price and the weighted average coupon rate of the individual A, B, and
C tranches in each triplet where the weights are the respective tranche thick-
nesses. Tranche thickness is just the difference between the detachment and the
attachment point. For the Advanta A, B, and C tranches, these thicknesses are
0.784195, 0.125887, and 0.089918, respectively. To illustrate, at the end of August
2000, the triplet consists of the Series 2000-B A, B, and C tranches with prices
(including accrued interest) of 100.198, 100.1396, and 100.0221, and swapped
coupon rates of 7.0855, 7.4708, and 8.1805 percent, respectively. The A, B, and
C tranches all have 35 months until maturity. Thus, using the attachment and de-
tachment points of the A, B, and C tranches discussed previously, the price of the
Advanta bond is 0.784195 × 100.198+0.125887 × 100.1396+0.089918 × 100.0221 =
100.1748, the fixed coupon rate is 0.784195 × 7.0855 + 0.125887 × 7.4708 +
0.089918 × 8.1805 = 7.2325 percent, and the maturity date is July 21, 2003.
We calculate the yield to maturity of the Advanta bond using standard market
conventions which is 7.145 percent in this example.

     To calculate credit spreads, we use the following intuitive approach. We first
calculate the price and the yield of the Advanta bond as if it were riskfree, and
then we take the difference in yields between the actual Advanta bond and the


                                        16
riskfree Advanta bond to obtain the credit spread. To get the riskfree price, we
discount the fixed monthly coupon cash flows using the Treasury discount curve
which we obtain by bootstrapping the Treasury constant maturity curve provided
by the Federal Reserve. Specifically, our bootstrapping algorithm to estimate the
riskless discount function D(T ) uses the following approach. We collect month-
end values of the constant maturity Treasury (CMT) rates for 1-month, 3-month,
12-month, 2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, 10-year, and 20-year maturities from the
Federal Reserve H.15 release for each month during the sample period. We then
use a standard exponential spline algorithm to bootstrap the discount function
and interpolate it to a vector of monthly horizons ranging from one month out
to 20 years (for more details on this algorithm, see Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis
(2005)). We also take into account that the tranches mature in the middle of
the month by discounting the riskfree price by two weeks using the one-month
discount factor. In the example, the riskfree price is 102.9887 and the riskfree
yield is 6.096. Thus, the credit spread is 7.145 - 6.096 = 1.049 percent (104.9
basis points).

     The next step in calculating time series of month yields and credit spreads
is to take the average yields and credit spreads across all triplets or bonds in
the sample each month. In computing these averages we include only those
triplets with time to maturity greater than or equal to eighteen months. For
the period prior to February 2009, the time to maturity is simply the time until
the expected maturity date of the A tranche in the triplet. For the months of
February, March, and April 2009, we take the following approach (see Section A.4
for details on this period). Specifically, for this three-month period, we assume
that the Advanta bonds will be paid off halfway between expected maturity and
the final maturity date to account for the uncertainty about whether Advanta
would enter early amortization. In May 2009, Advanta announced that early
amortization would commence in June 2009. Thus, starting in May 2009 we
then assume that all bonds have a maturity of 37 months (which matches the
average number of months to maturity in May 2009 in our sample), and we
decrease the number of months to maturity by one each month through the end
of the sample in December 2010. This assumption is roughly in line with market
expectations at the time that senior bondholders would be paid in full as a result
of declining charge-offs in the collateral pool (again, see Section A.4 for details
on this period).
     We next calculate excess returns on Advanta bonds which will then be used
in calibrating the Merton (1974) model. Recall that the Merton (1974) assumes
that the debt in the issuer's capital structure consists of a zero-coupon bond.
To be consistent with the model, we compute the excess return for a hypothet-
ical zero-coupon bond in the following way. First, we assume a representative
three-year maturity for the zero-coupon bond. This closely matches the aver-

                                        17
age maturity of the Advanta bonds during the sample period. Second, for each
month, we compute the price of the zero-coupon bond as of the end of the pre-
vious month and at the end of the current month. The return on the bond
for that month is the simple arithmetic return implied by these two prices. Fi-
nally, we compute the excess return for the bond by subtracting the return on
a corresponding three-year riskless zero-coupon bond from the return for the
Advanta bond. Note that we subtract the return on the riskless bond (rather
than the yield on the riskless bond) in order for the difference to be more cleanly
interpretable as an excess return in the traditional sense.

     To illustrate the procedure, suppose the date is September 30, 2000. The
yield of the Advanta bond at the end of the previous month is 7.14%. The cor-
responding price of a zero-coupon Advanta bond, using 36 months to maturity,
is 80.7076. On September 30, 2009 the yield on Advanta bonds is 6.76% and the
corresponding price using 35 months to maturity is 82.0960. Thus, the return
on the zero-coupon Advanta bond is equal to (82.0960 - 80.7076)/80.7076 =
1.72 percent. Next the prices of riskless zero-coupon bonds at the end of the
previous month and at the end of the current month are 83.553 and 84.388,
respectively. Thus, the return of a risk-free three-year zero coupon bond is
(84.388 - 83.553)/83.553 = 1.00 percent which implies an excess return on the
zero-coupon Advanta bond for the month of September 2000 of 0.72 percent.
The result from this procedure is a time series of monthly returns and excess
returns on Advanta bonds. We use the average excess return of 1.121 percent
over the sample period in calibrating the Merton (1974) model.


A.7 Survey of Private Equity Returns Estimates
This section gives an overview of estimates for the risk and return to private
equity investments in the literature. In presenting these estimates, we follow
Korteweg (2019) who provides an extensive list of private equity risk-adjusted
excess returns (alphas) and (Fama-French three-factor) beta estimates reported
in the literature
     First, we distinguish between studies using fund-level data and those using
deal-level data (e.g., start-up companies in the case of venture capital (VC)). The
reason for this is that fund-level returns and deal-level returns involve distinct
econometric and data issues. Second, we report different estimates for buyout
(BO) deals and venture capital (VC) deals. The main difference between venture
capital and buyout deals is that the investments in VC are minority stakes in
start-up companies, while BO typically purchases all the equity of established
firms (Korteweg (2019)). The reason for this is that research to date has focused
mainly on VC and BO. Third, we report estimates of returns to entrepreneurship
from studies using survey data separately because these data again come with

                                        18
distinct issues and challenges. Table A3 presents summary statistics of average
returns and standard deviations of returns on private equity
     We focus first on studies using fund-level data. From a high level point of
view, challenges with fund level data arise because fund data typically consist
of fund cash flows that occur at irregular times, with reported net asset values
(NAVs) that are often stale and in some cases biased. These issues could be
reasons for the wide range of estimates for risk and returns of BO and VC deals
in fund level data. As shown in Table A3, estimates of average returns on buyout
deals using internal rates of return (IRR) range from about 8.60 percent for the
1990­2010 period (Gupta and van Nieuwerburgh (2018)) to as high as 21.83 per-
cent over the 1981­1994 period (Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003)). Estimates
of annualized return volatilties for buyout deals using fund-level data range from
around 10.10 percent for the 1990­2010 period (Gupta and van Nieuwerburgh
(2018)) to as high as 44.45 percent for the 1980­2007 period (Ewens, Jones and
Rhodes-Kropf (2013)). We note that since fund-level returns are estimated net
of fees, they are lower bounds for expected returns to portfolio companies.
     We turn next to studies using deal-level data. We note first that most papers
using deal-level data have considered VC only, as start-up company returns have
traditionally been more readily available (Korteweg (2019)). From a high level
point of view, challenges with deal-level data arise because deal data are valua-
tions that are observed at the time of investment or when a portfolio company is
successfully sold or goes public, but failures are often missing. These issues can
lead to success bias, especially in VC, which could be among the reasons for the
wide range of estimates for risk and returns in deal-level data. As shown in Table
A3, estimates of average returns (IRR) range from about 7.00 percent for the
1987­2005 period (Korteweg and Nagel (2016)) to as high as 56.10 percent over
the 1991­2008 period (Cochrane (2005)). Estimates of the annualized volatil-
ity of venture capital returns in deal-level data range from about 9.27 percent
(Stafford (2017)) to to as high as 107 percent (Cochrane (2005)).
     Finally, we focus on returns to entrepreneurship estimated from survey data.
One challenge with survey data is that it is self-reported. For instance, a num-
ber of recent papers, raise concerns about the reliability of self-reported en-
trepreneurial income data (see, Tedds (2010), Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2014), and
Astebro and Chen (2014)) which could be among the reasons for the different
esimates for risk and return to entrepreneurship from survey data. As shown in
Table A3, Astebro and Chen (2014) report average returns to entrepreneurship as
high as 42.00 percent for the 1980­1996 period using the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (although their estimate is based on a number of assumptions). By
contrast, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) report average returns to en-
trepreneurship of about 15.80 percent for the 1989­1998 period and Kartashova


                                       19
(2014) finds average returns of around 16.59 percent over the 1960­2010 period.




                                      20
               INTERNET APPENDIX REFERENCES


Acharya, Viral V., Oliver F. Gottschalg, Moritz Hahn, and Conor Kehoe, 2013,
Corporate Governance and Value Creation: Evidence from Private Equity, Re-
view of Financial Studies 26, 368­402.
Ang, Andrew, Bingxu Chen, William N. Goetzmann, and Ludovic Phalippou,
2018, Estimating Private Equity Returns from Limited Partner Cash Flows,
Journal of Finance 73, 1751­1783.
Anson, Mark, 2007, Performance Measurement in Private Equity: Another Look,
Journal of Private Equity 10, 7­21.
Astebro, Thomas, and Jing Chen, 2014, The entrepreneurial earnings puzzle:
Mismeasurement or real?, Journal of Business Venturing 29, 88­105.
Axelson, Ulf, Morten Sorensen, and Per Stromberg, 2014, Alpha and beta of
buyout deals: A jump CAPM for long-term illiquid investments, Working Paper,
London School of Economics (LSE).

Barr, Colin, 2009, The credit card company everybody hates, Fortune.com, May
18, 2009, available at: https://archive.fortune.com/2009/05/18/news/cards.
advanta.fortune/index.htm (accessed: 24 June 2020)
Barber, Brad M., and Ayako Yasuda, 2017, Interim fund performance and fundr-
aising in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 172­194.

Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities, Journal of Political Economy 81, 637­654.
Boyer, Brian, Taylor D. Nadauld, Keith P. Vorkink, and Michael S. Weisbach,
2018, Private Equity Indices Based on Secondary Market Transactions, NBER
Working Paper 25207.

Brown, Gregory W., Oleg R. Gredil, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2019, Do private
equity funds manipulate reported returns?, Journal of Financial Economics 132,
267­297.
Buchner, Axel, and R¨
                    udiger Stucke, 2014, The Systematic Risk of Private Equity,
Working Paper, University of Passau/University of Oxford.

Chen, Peng, Gary T. Baierl, and Paul D. Kaplan, 2002, Venture Capital and its
Role in Strategic Asset Allocation, Journal of Portfolio Management 28, 83­89.
Cochrane, John H., 2005, The risk and return of venture capital, Journal of
Financial Economics 75, 3­52.

                                      21
Congressional Research Service, 2019, Small Business Credit Markets and Se-
lected Policy Issues, Congression Research Service Report R45878, August 20,
2019.
Driessen, Joost, Tse-Chun Lin, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, A New Method
to Estimate Risk and Return of Nontraded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case
of Private Equity Funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47,
511­535.
Ewens, Michael, Charles M. Jones, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, The Price
of Diversifiable Risk in Venture Capital and Private Equity, Review of Financial
Studies 26, 1854­1889.
Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner, 2015, The disintermediation of
financial markets: Direct investing in private equity, Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 116, 160­178.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 2010, Material Loss Review of
Advanta Bank Corp., Drapper, Utah, Office of Material Loss Reviews Report
No. MLR-11-002, October 2010.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020a, The U.S. Treasury
Floating Rate Note Puzzle: Is there a Premium for Mark-to-Market Stability?,
Journal of Financial Economics 137, 637­658.
Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis A. Longstaff, 2020b, The Market Risk Pre-
mium for Unsecured Consumer Credit: Evidence from Credit Card Securitiza-
tions, Working Paper, University of California Los Angeles.
Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private Equity
Performance and Liquidity Risk, Journal of Finance 67, 2341­2373.
Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 1997, Risk and Reward in Private Equity In-
vestments: The Challenge of Performance Assessment, Journal of Private Equity
1, 5­12.

Gredil, Oleg, Morten Sorensen, and William Waller, 2019, Evaluating private
equity performance using stochastic discount factors, Working Paper, Tulane
University/Copenhagen Business School.
Groh, Alexander Peter, and Oliver Gottschalg, 2011, The effect of leverage on
the cost of capital of US buyouts, Journal of Banking & Finance 35, 2099­2110.

Gupta, Arpit, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2018, Valuing Private Equity Invest-
ments Strip by Strip, Working Paper, Columbia University.



                                      22
Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity
Performance: What Do We Know?, Journal of Finance 69, 1851­1882.
Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ruediger Stucke, 2018,
Financial intermediation in private equity: How well do funds of funds perform?,
Journal of Financial Economics 129, 287­305.
Higson, Chris, and R¨
                    udiger Stucke, 2012, The Performance of Private Equity,
Working Paper, London Business School/University of Oxford.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley, 2014, Are Household Surveys Like
Tax Forms? Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed, Review
of Economics and Statistics 96, 19-33.
Hwang, Min, John M. Quigley, Susan E. Woodward, 2005, An Index For Venture
Capital, 1987-2003, Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 4, 1­43.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Roman Kr¨   aussl, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2015, Risk and
Expected Returns of Private Equity Investments: Evidence Based on Market
Prices, Review of Financial Studies 28, 3269­3302.
Kaplan, Steven N., 1989, The effects of management buyouts on operating per-
formance and value, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 217­254.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Performance:
Returns, Persistence, and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791­1823.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2015, Private Equity Performance: A
Survey, Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 597­614.
Kartashova, Katya, 2014, Private Equity Premium Puzzle Revisited, American
Economic Review 104, 3297­3334.
Korteweg, Arthur, 2019, Risk Adjustment in Private Equity Returns, Annual
Review of Financial Economics 11, 131­152.
Korteweg, Arthur, and Stefan Nagel, 2016, Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Ven-
ture Capital, Journal of Finance 71, 1437­1470.
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2010, Risk and Return Characteris-
tics of Venture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies, Review of Financial
Studies 23, 3738­3772.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, The cash flow, return
and risk characteristics of private equity, NBER Working Paper 9454.
Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield

                                      23
Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default
Swap Market, Journal of Finance 60, 2213­2253.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of
interest rates, Journal of Finance, 29, 449­70.

McCourt, Maurice, 2018, Estimating Skill in Private Equity Performance Using
Market Data, Working Paper, University of Melbourne.
McKenzie, Michael D., and William H. Janeway, 2011, Venture capital funds and
the public equity market, Accounting & Finance 51, 764­786.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002, The Returns to
Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?, American Eco-
nomic Review 92, 745­778.
Mueller, Elisabeth, 2011, Returns to Private Equity - Idiosyncratic Risk Does
Matter!, Review of Finance 15, 545­574.

Peng, Liang, 2001, Building A Venture Capital Index, Working Paper, Yale
School of Management.
Peters, Ryan H., 2018, Volatility and Venture Capital, Working Paper, Tulane
University.

Phalippou, Ludovic, 2014, Performance of Buyout Funds Revisited?, Review of
Finance 18, 189­218.
Phalippou, Ludovic, and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009, The Performance of Private
Equity Funds, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1747­1776.

Poon, Herman C. and Harry Kohl, 2016, Global Credit Card ABS Rating Crite-
ria, Fitch Ratings, July 21, 2016.
Robb, Alicia M., and David T. Robinson, 2014, The Capital Structure Decisions
of New Firms, Review of Financial Studies 27, 153­179.
Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2016, Cyclicality, performance measure-
ment, and cash flow liquidity in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics
122, 521­543.
Small Business Credit Survey, 2016, Report on Employer Firms, published April
2017, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas,
Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, San
Francisco.
Sorensen, Morten, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2015, The Public Market Equivalent

                                      24
and Private Equity Performance, Financial Analysts Journal 71, 43­50.
Sorensen, Morten, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2014, Valuing Private Equity,
Review of Financial Studies 27, 1977­2021.

Tedds, Lindsay M., 2010, Estimating the Income Reporting Function for the
Self-Employed, Empirical Economics 38, 669-687.
Wille, David, Adam J. Hoffer, and Stephen Matteo Miller, 2017, Small-business
financing after the financial crisis lessons from the literature, Journal of En-
trepreneurship and Public Policy, 6(3), 315­339.

Woodward, Susan E., 2009, Measuring Risk for Venture Capital and Private
Equity Portfolios, Working Paper, Sandy Hill Economics, Palo Alto, CA.




                                      25
                                                                   Table A1
Data Definitions and Sources. This table summarizes the datasets used in this study. Frequency shows at what intervals the data are available.
Description and Source show the data source and its definition. The data are for the period from August 2000 through December 2010.

           Data                                            Frequency          Description and Source

 1         Treasury CMT Data                               Daily              Constant maturity Treasury rates from the Federal Reserve H.15
                                                                              Selected Interest Rates Release for tenors of 1, 3, 6 months and 1,
                                                                              2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20 years.
 2         Discount Function                               Daily              Discount function out to 20 years bootstrapped from Treasury CMT
                                                                              Data as described in Liu, Longstaff, Mandell (2006).
 3         Libor Interest Rate Swap Spreads                Daily              Three-month Libor into fixed interest rate swap rates. Cash flows
                                                                              on the fixed leg are semiannual, and the floating leg pays three-
                                                                              month Libor each quarter. Data from the Bloomberg system for
                                                                              tenors of 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 months, and 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 20
                                                                              years.
 4         Libor Basis Swap Spreads                        Daily              Three-month Libor into One-month Libor interest rate basis swap
                                                                              rates. Cash flows on the fixed leg are at quarterly frequency, and the
                                                                              floating leg pays one-month Libor reset monthly each quarter. Data
                                                                              from the Bloomberg system for tenors of 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 months, and
                                                                              2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 15, 20 years.
 5         Libor                                           Daily              Three-month USD London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) from
                                                                              the Bloomberg system.
 6         Treasury Bill Rate                              Daily              The three-month Treasury bill rate from the Bloomberg system.
 7         Fama-French 5 Factors                           Daily              Fama-French 5 Factors and riskfree rate from Kenneth French's
                                                                              website.
 8         U.S. Treasury Bond Returns                      Daily              The Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Treasury Total Return Index. Data
                                                                              from the Bloomberg system.
 9         AAA Spread                                      Monthly            The spread between yields on AAA corporate bonds and the 10-year
                                                                              Treasury rate. Data from the Bloomberg system.
 10        BBB Spread                                      Monthly            The spread between yields on BBB corporate bonds and the 10-year
                                                                              Treasury rate. Data from the Bloomberg system.
 11        High-Yield Spread                               Monthly            The spread between yields on high-yield (non-investment-grade)
                                                                              corporate bonds and the 10-year Treasury rate. Data from the
                                                                              Bloomberg system.
 12        Monthly Payment Rate                            Monthly            Monthly payment rates (MPR) of the credit card master trusts from
                                                                              the Bloomberg system. The monthly payment rate is the ratio
                                                                              of total cash flows collected each month divided by the portfolio
                                                                              balance, expressed as a percentage.
 13        Credit Card ABS Tranche Prices                  Monthly            Prices of individual A, B, and C tranches of the credit card securi-
                                                                              tizations in the sample. Data from the Bloomberg system.
                                                  Table A1 -- Continued
     Data                                           Frequency     Description and Source

14   Portfolio Yield                                Monthly       Monthly portfolio yields of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                                  Bloomberg system and 10-D filings with the SEC. The portfolio
                                                                  yield is the annualized percentage gross return on the portfolio.
15   Excess Spread                                  Monthly       Monthly excess spreads of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                                  Bloomberg system and 10-D filings with the SEC. The excess
                                                                  spread is the annualized percentage net return on the portfolio.
16   Charge-off Rate                                Monthly       Monthly charge-off rates of the credit card master trusts from the
                                                                  Bloomberg system and 10-D filings with the SEC. The charge-off
                                                                  rate is the one-month annualized percentage rate of charge-offs on
                                                                  the portfolio.
17   Risk Retention Ratio                           Monthly       Required minimum issuer risk retention ratio for the credit card
                                                                  securitization portfolio. Data collected from 424-B5 filings.
18   Attachment and Detachment Points               Monthly       The average attachment and detachment points for individual
                                                                  tranches, expressed as percentages of the total notional amount
                                                                  of the securitization. Data collected from 424-B5 filings.
19   Consumer Credit Card Spread                    Monthly       The credit spread measure on consumer credit card debt from
                                                                  Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020b).
20   Non-corporate leverage                         Monthly       The average annual ratio of total liabilities to total assets for non-
                                                                  financial non-corporate businesses. Data from the Federal Reserve
                                                                  Z.1 Release for the Financial Accounts of the United States.
21   Corporate leverage                             Monthly       The average annual ratio of total liabilities to total assets for non-
                                                                  financial corporate businesses. Data from the Federal Reserve Z.1
                                                                  Release for the Financial Accounts of the United States.
22   Household leverage                             Monthly       The average annual ratio of total liabilities to total non-financial
                                                                  assets for households and non-profit organizations. Data from
                                                                  the Federal Reserve Z.1 Release for the Financial Accounts of the
                                                                  United States.
23   Charge-off Rate on Consumer Loans              Monthly       The annualized charge-off rate on consumer loans (net of recover-
                                                                  ies) from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
                                                                  (US), retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
24   Charge-off Rate on Single-Family Mortgages     Monthly       The annualized charge-off rate on single-family mortgages (net of
                                                                  recoveries) from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
                                                                  System (US), retrieved from FRED.
25   Charge-off Rate on Commercial Real Estate      Monthly       The annualized charge-off rate on commercial real estate loans
                                                                  (net of recoveries) from the Board of Governors of the Federal
                                                                  Reserve System (US), retrieved from FRED.
26   Charge-off Rate on Business Loans              Monthly       The annualized charge-off rate on business loans (net of recoveries)
                                                                  from the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve System.
                              Table A1 -- Continued
     Data                       Frequency     Description and Source

27   Industrial Production      Monthly       The U.S. industrial production index from the Board of Gover-
                                              nors of the Federal Reserve System, obtained from the Bloomberg
                                              system.
28   Inflation                  Monthly       The U.S. non-seasonally-adjusted Consumer Price Index of All
                                              Urban Consumers (CPI-U) published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor
                                              Statistics.
29   Jobless Claims             Monthly       The monthly average of the Conference Boards weekly initial job-
                                              less claims index, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
30   Consumer Sentiment         Monthly       The University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment index, obtained
                                              from the Bloomberg system.
31   Consumer Confidence        Monthly       The Conference Boards Consumer Confidence index, obtained
                                              from the Bloomberg system.
32   Business Confidence        Monthly       The Conference Boards Business Confidence index, obtained from
                                              the Bloomberg system.
33   Economic Confidence        Monthly       The Conference Boards Business Confidence index of leading in-
                                              dicators, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
34   VIX                        Monthly       The CBOE Volatility Index of option-implied volatilties from S&P
                                              500 index options, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
35   MOVE                       Monthly       The ICE MOVE index of U.S. interest rate volatility implied by
                                              one-month over-the-counter options on 2-year, 5-year, 10-year and
                                              30-year Treasuries.
36   Stock Market Return        Monthly       Monthly returns on the CRSP Value Weighted Index, obtained
                                              from WRDS.
37   Treasury Market Return     Monthly       Monthly returns on the Bloomberg Barclays U.S. Treasury total
                                              return index, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
38   Housing Market Return      Monthly       Monthly percentage changes of the S&P Case-Shiller Housing
                                              Price Index, obtained from the Bloomberg system.
                                       Table A2

Summary Statistics for Business Credit and Consumer Credit Cardholders. This table
reports summary statistics of Advanta business credit cardholders and consumer credit cardholders.
Data for Advanta are from the Advanta Business Card Master Trust. Consumer credit cardholder
data are from American Express Credit Account Master Trust, Chase Issuance Trust and Chase
Master Trust, and First National Master Note Trust. Values reported in percent. Percentages are
based on the total dollar amount of credit card receivables in the credit card master trusts.


                                                Advanta Business             Consumer
                                                    Credit Cards           Credit Cards


        Credit Limits

        0.01 to 5,000                                         7.31                  4.16
        5,000 to 10,000                                      16.36                 14.34
        10,000 to 15,000                                     21.32                 20.20
        15,000 to 20,000                                     22.11                 18.70
        20,000 to 25,000                                     11.65                 18.70
        Over 25,000                                          21.26                 23.90
        Total                                              100.00                 100.00


        Account Balances

        Less than 0.00                                      -0.10                 -0.14
        0.00                                                 0.00                  0.00
        0.01 to 5,000                                       26.61                 15.35
        5,000 to 10,000                                     26.88                 25.82
        10,000 to 20,000                                    25.69                 38.91
        20,000 to 25,000                                    10.52                 10.00
        Over 25,000 to 50,000                               10.40                 10.06
        Total                                              100.00                 100.00



        FICO Scores

        No FICO Score                                        0.31                   0.00
        Less than 600                                        9.34                   5.73
        600 to 660                                           7.37                  12.36
        661 to 719                                          35.17                  37.26
        720 and Higher                                      47.80                  44.65
        Total                                              100.00                 100.00
                                                                  Table A3

Estimates of Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment. This table presents estimates of returns to entrepreneurial investment from the literature.
The columns titled E [dS/S ] and SD[dS/S ] show average returns and standard deviations of returns, respectively, estimated over the periods in the
column titled Sample Period. The categories Fund-level Data and Deal-level Data are based on Korteweg (2019). Fund-level Data are portfolios of
individual deals, typically organized as 10-year limited partnerships, and Deal-level data are from individual deals. The sources include those from
Table 1 in Korteweg (2019). Fund-level estimates are net of fees. The superscript  denotes that expected returns are implied from market betas,
using a market risk premium of 8% and a riskfree rate of 4%. The superscript  denotes that expected return estimates are internal rates of return.


   Source                                       Sample Period      E [dS/S ]    SD [dS/S ]    Notes


   Fund-level Data

   Ang et al. (2018)                                1994­2008         17.00         26.00     Buyout Index
                                                    1994­2008         15.00         11.00     Buyout Index (Cambridge Associates)
                                                    1994­2008         14.00         29.00     Buyout Index (LPX)
                                                    1994­2008         17.00         31.00     Venture capital index
                                                    1994­2008         18.00         26.00     Venture capital index (Cambridge Associates)
                                                    1994­2008         11.00         37.00     Venture capital index (LPX)
   Anson (2007)                                     1985­2005         15.40            -      Venture capital
   Barber & Yasuda (2017)                           1993­2009         11.10            -      Buyout
                                                    1993­2009          7.00            -      Venture capital
   Boyer et al. (2018)                              2006­2017         20.00         40.00     Secondary market transactions-based index
                                                    2006­2017         13.00          9.00     NAV-based index
   Brown, Gredil & Kaplan (2019)                    1969­2016         13.80         18.70     Buyout
                                                    1969­2016         15.00         48.90     Venture capital
   Buchner & Stucke (2014)                          1980­2001         24.80            -      Buyout
                                                    1980­2001         26.20            -      Venture capital
   Chen, Baierl & Kaplan (2002)                     1960­1999         45.00        115.60     Venture capital
   Driessen, Lin & Phalippou (2012)                 1980­1993         18.00            -      Venture capital
                                                    1980­1993         14.00            -      Buyout
   Ewens, Jones & Rhodes-Kropf (2013)               1980­2007         13.61         30.69     Venture capital
                                                    1980­2007         13.84         44.45     Buyout
   Fang, Ivashina & Lerner (2015)                   1991­1999         20.67            -      Venture capital
                                                    1991­2010          5.67            -      Venture capital
                                                    2000­2010          3.89            -      Venture capital
   Gompers & Lerner(1997)                           1974­1989         18.88          5.10     Venture capital
                                                    1983­1989         34.56          5.68     Venture capital
                                                    1983­1989         27.36          9.19     Early-stage venture capital
                                                    1983­1989         18.08          5.80     Balanced venture capital
                                                    1983­1989         12.56          3.73     Later-stage venture capital
                                                           Table A3 -- Continued

Estimates of Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment. This table presents estimates of expected returns and return volatilities to entrepreneurial
investment from the literature. This table presents estimates of returns to entrepreneurial investment from the literature. The columns titled E [dS/S ]
and SD[dS/S ] show average returns and standard deviations of returns, respectively, estimated over the periods in the column titled Sample Period.
The categories Fund-level Data and Deal-level Data are based on Korteweg (2019). Fund-level Data are portfolios of individual deals, typically
organized as 10-year limited partnerships, and Deal-level data are from individual deals. The sources include those from Table 1 in Korteweg (2019).
Fund-level estimates are net of fees. The superscript  denotes that expected returns are implied from market betas, using a market risk premium of
8% and a riskfree rate of 4%. The superscript  denotes that expected return estimates are internal rates of return.


     Source                                        Sample Period        E [dS/S ]      SD [dS/S ]      Notes


     Fund-level Data

     Gredil, Sorensen & Waller (2018)                   1979­2008           45.00              -       Venture capital
                                                        1979­2008           15.00              -       Buyout
     Gupta & van Nieuwerburgh (2018)                    1990­2010            8.60           10.10      Buyout
                                                        1990­2010            3.30           20.40      Venture capital
     Harris et al. (2018)                               1987­2007            7.60              -       Venture capital (Burgiss database)
                                                        1987­2007            9.10              -       Venture capital (Preqin database)
     Harris, Jenkinson & Kaplan(2014)                   1984­2008           14.20              -       Buyout
                                                        1984­2008           16.80              -       Venture capital
     Higson & Stucke (2012)                             1990­1999           10.40              -       Venture capital
                                                        2000­2008            6.90              -       Venture capital
     Jegadeesh, Kr¨
                  aussl & Pollet (2015)                 1997­2008           13.60              -       Venture capital (funds-of-funds)
                                                        1997­2008           11.70              -       Venture capital (partnerships)
     Kaplan & Schoar (2005)                             1980­1994           17.00           34.00      Venture capital
                                                        1980­1994           19.00           27.00      Buyout
     Korteweg & Nagel (2016)                            1979­2008            7.00           35.00      Venture capital
     Lerner et al. (2018)                               1987­2017            9.00              -       Venture capital
     Ljungqvist & Richardson (2003)                     1981­1993           14.08           26.88      Venture capital
                                                        1981­1994           21.83           20.33      Buyout
     McCourt (2018)                                     1995­2015           15.30              -       Venture capital
     McKenzie & Janeway (2011)                          1980­2007           47.00           72.00      Venture capital
     Peters (2018)                                      1990­2011           15.80              -       Venture capital
     Phalippou & Gottschalg (2009)                      1980­1993           15.20              -       Buyout and venture capital
     Phalippou (2014)                                   1993­2010           20.70              -       Buyout
     Robinson & Sensoy (2016)                           1984­2009            9.00           26.00      Venture capital
                                                        1984­2009            8.00           43.00      Venture capital
     Woodward (2009)                                    1996­2008           22.10              -       Venture capital
                                                         Table A3 -- Continued

Estimates of Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment. This table presents estimates of returns to entrepreneurial investment from the literature.
The columns titled E [dS/S ] and SD[dS/S ] show average returns and standard deviations of returns, respectively, estimated over the periods in the
column titled Sample Period. The categories Fund-level Data and Deal-level Data are based on Korteweg (2019). Fund-level Data are portfolios of
individual deals, typically organized as 10-year limited partnerships, and Deal-level data are from individual deals. The sources include those from
Table 1 in Korteweg (2019). Fund-level estimates are net of fees. The superscript  denotes that expected returns are implied from market betas,
using a market risk premium of 8% and a riskfree rate of 4%. The superscript  denotes that expected return estimates are internal rates of return.


    Source                                            Sample Period       E [dS/S ]     SD [dS/S ]      Notes


    Deal-level Data

    Acharya et al. (2013)                                 1991­2008          56.10           46.60      Venture   capital
    Axelson, Sorensen & Stromberg (2014)                  1994­2007          12.10              -       Venture   capital
    Cochrane (2005)                                       1987­2000          59.00          107.00      Venture   capital
    Franzoni, Nowak & Phalippou (2012)                    1975­2006          18.00              -       Venture   capital
    Groh & Gottschalg (2011)                              1984­2004           9.07           25.25      Venture   capital
    Hwang, Quigley & Woodward (2005)                      1987­2003           8.48           27.40      Venture   capital
    Kaplan (1989)                                         1980­1985          45.90           23.75      Venture   capital
    Korteweg & Nagel (2016)                               1987­2005           7.00           35.00      Venture   capital
    Korteweg & Sorensen (2010)                            1987­2005          29.70              -       Venture   capital
    Peng (2001)                                           1987­1998          41.36           27.80      Venture   capital
    Stafford (2017)                                       1986­2016          13.20            9.27      Venture   capital


    Survey-Based

    Astebro & Chen (2014)                                 1980­1996          42.00              -       Panel Study of Income Dynamics
    Kartashova (2014)                                     1960­2010          16.59            9.28      Survey of Consumer Finances
    Moskowitz & Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)                  1989­1998          15.80              -       Survey of Consumer Finances
    Mueller (2010)                                        1989­2001          49.80              -       Survey of Consumer Finances
