                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AUTO DEALER LOAN INTERMEDIATION:
                 CONSUMER BEHAVIOR AND COMPETITIVE EFFECTS

                                      Andreas Grunewald
                                      Jonathan A. Lanning
                                         David C. Low
                                          Tobias Salz

                                      Working Paper 28136
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28136


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020


The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System,
the United States, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Andreas Grunewald and Tobias
Salz thank the Institute for Social and Economic Research and Policy at Columbia University and
the Russel Sage Foundation for financial support. We thank Brian Bucks, Glenn Ellison, Matt
Gentzkow, Kate Ho, Éva Nagypál, Michael Riordan, Mike Whinston, Maximilian Voigt, and
audiences at Berkeley, BRIQ Bonn Structural Behavioral Conference, Boston College, IO
workshop at CREST, CFPB, University of Cologne, University of Copenhagen, DICE
Duesseldorf, EIEF Junior Conference, Frankfurt School, German Economist Abroad Conference,
Goethe University Frankfurt, Harvard, University of Mainz, University of Marburg, University of
Minnesota, University of Konstanz, NYU, University of Oregon, University of Pennsylvania,
Penn State, Solvay Brussels School / Ecare, Stanford, Toulouse School of Economics, and Yale
for helpful comments and suggestions. Guy Aridor, Jasper Clarkberg, Thi Mai Anh Nguyen, and
Yining Zhu provided outstanding research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andreas Grunewald, Jonathan A. Lanning, David C. Low, and Tobias Salz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Auto Dealer Loan Intermediation: Consumer Behavior and Competitive Effects
Andreas Grunewald, Jonathan A. Lanning, David C. Low, and Tobias Salz
NBER Working Paper No. 28136
November 2020
JEL No. G41,G51,L0,L13,L5,L62

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the intermediation of auto loans through auto dealers using new and
comprehensive administrative data. The arrangements between auto dealers and lenders
incentivize dealers to increase loan prices. We leverage details of the corresponding contracts to
demonstrate that many consumers are less responsive to finance charges than to vehicle charges.
Taking this behavior into account, we estimate an equilibrium model of dealer price setting and
lender competition. We explore counterfactuals where dealers have no discretion to price loans
and final rates are set by lenders instead. We find large gains in consumer surplus from such a
policy.

Andreas Grunewald                                     David C. Low
Frankfurt School of Finance and Management            CFPB
Adickesallee 32-34                                    1700 G St. NW
Frankfurt, Hess 60322                                 Washington, DC 20002
Germany                                               david.low@cfpb.gov
gruni06@googlemail.com
                                                      Tobias Salz
Jonathan A. Lanning                                   MIT Deparatment of Economics
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                       77 Massachusetts Avenue, E52-404
2018 W Churchill St                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
Chicago, IL 60647                                     and NBER
jonlanning@gmail.com                                  tsalz@mit.edu
1       Introduction

In retail financial markets consumers make infrequent, high-stakes decisions about complex
products. Often, such decisions are made in negotiations with professional intermediaries,
brokers, or sales agents who are incentivized to extract revenue from consumers. A key
question is therefore to what extent the pricing discretion of these agents can harm consumers.
In particular, the dispersion in markups enabled by such discretion likely reflects differences
in consumers' knowledge about the terms of financial products and their ability to assess
prices correctly. While regulations, such as the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, are meant to
curb certain sources of price dispersion, in practice different consumers may achieve very
different outcomes in such markets.
   In this context, the market for financed vehicles has received considerable attention from
regulators and consumer advocacy groups. Auto dealers act as intermediaries between lenders
and consumers for the financing of the car. Specifically, lenders suggest loan prices but al-
low dealers to increase them; dealers often do so and are compensated with a share of the
resulting profit through incentive contracts. Dealer loan intermediation is of outsize impor-
tance for American consumers as they hold more than $1 trillion in auto debt, and more than
eighty percent of auto loans are obtained "indirectly" through dealers.1 Several regulators,
including the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB), and the U.K.'s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) have stated that the arrangements
between lenders and dealers can harm consumers.2 In particular, if some consumers respond
less to loan price markups than to financially-equivalent vehicle price markups, dealers can
tailor "price bundles" to extract more revenue from consumers who are less responsive to
loan prices. Understanding the market for financed vehicles therefore requires understand-
ing how lenders incentivize dealers to price loans and how these incentives affect dealer and
consumer behavior.
   This paper uses new and comprehensive administrative data to study the agreements be-
tween dealers and lenders and how they affect the market for financed vehicles. First we show
that consumers are substantially more sensitive to changes in car prices than loan prices. To
this end, we leverage the incentive structure under which dealers make those decisions, which
we observe in our data. The intuition for our approach is simple: dealers keep nearly all profit
from car price markups, but share profits from loan price markups with lenders. Thus, if a
consumer is equally responsive to car and loan markups, a dealer maximizes profit by charg-
ing the highest car price that consumer will accept and setting the loan markup to zero. Con-
      1 For an estimate of total auto loan debt outstanding, see https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/d

ata/pdf/HHDC 2019Q4.pdf. We estimate the percent of auto loans obtained indirectly in Appendix D.3; see also Davis (2012). The
affordability of auto loans is increasingly a concern. See, for example, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-seven-year-auto-loan-americas-m
iddle-class-cant-afford-their-cars-11569941215 and https://www.npr.org/2019/10/31/773409100/the-7-year-car-loan-watch-your-wallet.
      2 See CFPB (2016), FCA (2019), Reynolds and Cox (2020) and Sullivan et al. (2020).




                                                                   1
versely, if consumers are sufficiently unresponsive to loan markups, then dealers should mark
up loans even though they keep only a fraction of the profits that loan markups generate. Loan
markups therefore contain information about consumers' sensitivity to loan prices relative to
vehicle prices. This argument requires only mild assumptions about consumer preferences
and market structure. Furthermore, since we observe the markup on every loan in our data,
we can derive consumer-specific estimates of the wedge between the responsiveness to loan
and vehicle prices.
   We find that, on average, consumers behave as if they would pay a dollar more in finance
charges to reduce the vehicle price by $0.86. Hence, consumers respond substantially more
to vehicle prices than to loan prices. We also find that on average consumers act as if they
perceive finance charges to be at least $380 less than actual finance charges. Since we obtain
these measures at the consumer level, we can study the heterogeneity in this wedge. We
find that there are large differences across consumers. Consumers in the 10th percentile are
willing to pay a dollar in finance charges to reduce the vehicle price by just 77 cents, but at
the 90th percentile consumers are essentially indifferent between finance and vehicle charges.
   We consider several potential explanations for our findings, including time discounting and
credit constraints, vehicle taxes, loan prepayment, and repeated dealer-lender interactions.
These factors cannot account for our results either qualitatively or quantitatively. However,
our findings are consistent with evidence that several regulators such as the FTC, the FCA,
and the CFPB have collected indicating that most consumers do not fully understand that loan
terms are negotiable or do not correctly assess loan prices (Center for Responsible Lending
et al., 2012, CFPB, 2016, FCA, 2019, Reynolds and Cox, 2020, Sullivan et al., 2020).3 Our
results are also consistent with the literature on add-on pricing, which argues that firms can
charge higher prices on less transparent dimensions of a product (Lal and Matutes, 1994,
Verboven, 1999, Ellison, 2005).
   In the second part of this project, we explore the equilibrium implications of dealer dis-
cretion, taking into account our estimates for consumer behavior from the previous part. We
assume that dealers play a differentiated-product pricing game (Berry et al., 1995) by setting
both prices and interest rates strategically to compete for consumers. Lenders compete in
interest rate auctions for the business of dealers. We use the model to explore the quantitative
effects of two counterfactuals.
   In our first counterfactual, we recompute equilibria under the assumption that consumers
respond equally to car and loan prices. This counterfactual delineates how the consumer
behavior that we document is reflected in the market equilibrium. We find that total prices
     3 Consumers   may fail to minimize total expenses for a number of reasons. They might lack financial literacy in general (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2014), the car price might be more salient to them (Chetty et al., 2009, Koszegi and Szeidl, 2012, Bordalo et al., 2013), dealers
might exploit the complexity of financial contracts to shroud or obfuscate crucial information (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006, Ellison and
Ellison, 2009), or consumers might neglect some dimensions of the price because their capacity to process information is limited (Sims,
2006, Mackowiak et al., 2018).



                                                                    2
would be slightly more than half a percent lower and consumer surplus 4.26 percent higher.
One important insight from this counterfactual is that eliminating the wedge in consumer re-
sponsiveness makes the entire market more competitive. If consumers are equally responsive
to car and loan prices, dealers have no incentive to mark up loans and so only compete over
vehicle prices. Since consumer demand is elastic with respect to vehicle prices, total prices
fall and consumer surplus rises.
   Second, in our main counterfactual, we compute the market equilibrium when dealers
are prohibited from marking up loans. This counterfactual closely approximates policies
that regulators have considered or enacted. For example, the FCA has announced that it
will ban dealer markups beginning in 2021.4 In this counterfactual, lenders fully determine
loan prices, but they cannot price discriminate as effectively as dealers can because dealers
interact directly with consumers. As in the first counterfactual, eliminating dealer markups
increases the competitiveness of the market. If dealers have discretion to price both the loan
and the car, they can tailor the bundle of prices to specific consumer types. This leads to
high interest rates for consumers that are less responsive to loan charges and low interest
rates for consumers that are more responsive to loan charges. Under such targeted interest
rates, consumer demand is on average less elastic to increases in prices. In contrast, without
discretion over interest rates, dealers cannot evade competition with tailored price bundles.
As a consequence, consumer surplus increases by between 3.24% and 5.63%. Interestingly,
we find that consumer surplus increases in this counterfactual irrespective of whether the
wedge reflects suboptimal consumer behavior or actual preferences.
   Our work contributes to the literature on retail financial markets and to the literature on
auto markets. A common theme of closely related papers is that intermediaries market prod-
ucts to consumers who are either financially unsophisticated, face substantial search costs,
or are unaware of sellers' conflict of interest (Woodward and Hall, 2010, Allen et al., 2014,
Guiso et al., 2018, Egan, 2018, Egan et al., 2019, Robles-Garcia, 2019, Benetton et al., 2019,
Bhattacharya et al., 2019). Our findings imply that policies which simplify the decision prob-
lem of consumers in markets for complex goods may benefit consumers. More specifically,
we show that eliminating intermediaries' price discretion can increase consumer welfare. Our
results suggest that the detrimental effects of intermediation on consumer surplus might be
particularly severe in markets where the intermediary is also the seller of the base good.
  There are a number of other papers that connect the literatures on cars and loans. In
the subprime market, many consumers are liquidity-constrained (Adams et al., 2009) and
sensitive to monthly payments (Attanasio et al., 2008, Argyle et al., 2018). In part because
     4 See https://www.bbc.com/news/business-53567495. In the U.S. in 2013, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau issued guidance

urging auto lenders to consider alternatives to the current system, including eliminating dealer markup, in order to avoid violations of the
Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In 2018, this guidance was rescinded. See https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f /201303 cfpb march -Auto-F
inance-Bulletin.pdf. In one survey in the U.S., 93% of respondents favored requiring dealers to disclose the lowest interest rate borrowers
qualified for (Center for Responsible Lending et al. (2012)).



                                                                     3
of binding credit and liquidity constraints for subprime consumers, loan performance can be
improved by down payment requirements (Einav et al., 2012), credit scoring (Einav et al.,
2013), and post-default wage garnishment (Brown and Jansen, 2019). Our study focuses on
prime borrowers with negligible default risk. The necessity to account for default risk of risky
consumers opens the door to contract-specific pricing even for consumers that actually pose
no risk. Our work suggests that this leads to loan price heterogeneity even in subpopulations
with minimal default risk, harming these consumers on average.
   This paper also contributes more broadly to the literatures on auto markets. While dealer
revenues from auto-loan intermediation are substantial (Davis, 2012), the literature on com-
petition in auto markets has largely abstracted from dealer loan intermediation and the im-
plied joint pricing of cars and loans (Berry et al., 1995, Morton et al., 2001, 2003, Gavazza
et al., 2014, Nurski and Verboven, 2016, Murry, 2017, Biglaiser et al., 2019).5 We com-
plement these studies by accounting for the strategic considerations that arise from the joint
pricing of cars and car loans. Accounting for joint pricing not only contributes to our un-
derstanding of dealer competition in the auto market but is also essential to evaluating how
dealer markups affect market outcomes.
   There is a growing literature estimating empirical models with some form of suboptimal
consumer decision-making.6 When relying only on observational data, this type of work
faces a major challenge when identifying parameters that control the deviations from more
standard models. In particular, it is often not clear how such parameters are separately identi-
fied from those that capture true preferences. Several studies in the literature have overcome
this challenge in the context of health insurance plans (Handel, 2013, Abaluck and Gruber,
2011), cell phone plans (Grubb and Osborne, 2015), electricity providers (Hortac       ¸ su et al.,
2017), and extended warranties (Abito and Salant, 2017). We complement this research by
showing that, in the prime car market, many consumers do not minimize the cost of financed
vehicles. Moreover, previous studies either leverage some form of exogenous variation or
auxiliary data in addition to prices and quantities. In our case, we instead leverage the incen-
tive structure that the supply side faces to derive insights about the demand side. An important
advantage of our approach is that it does not require specifying the exact functional form of
consumer preferences, nor does it require assumptions about the exact structure of the mar-
ket. Our quantitative results on consumer responsiveness to financial charges are therefore
less prone to model misspecification.
   Finally, there are several papers at the intersection of financial decision-making and behav-
ioral economics that establish mechanisms for our results by documenting that consumers
make flawed decisions in retail financial markets. For a recent survey of this literature see
     5 Davis(2012) estimates that franchise dealerships selling to private consumers generate more than half of their profit through their
Finance and Insurance departments.
     6 Overviews on structural work in behavioral economics in general and within the field of industrial organization can be found in

DellaVigna (2018) and Grubb (2015), respectively.



                                                                    4
Madrian et al. (forthcoming).7 We contribute to this literature by showing that consumers are
less sensitive to loan prices than to car prices. To the extent that this wedge in sensitivities is
driven by suboptimal financial decision-making, we also demonstrate how market outcomes
depend on such anomalies. For example, auto loans are a major factor behind the overall
increase in household debt (Mian and Sufi, 2016, Schlagenhauf and Ricketts, 2016). Our
results suggest that some of the expansion in auto loan credit may be driven by a combination
of the failure of car buyers to minimize total costs and dealers' corresponding incentive to
charge markups. Hence, our results may also be of broader interest to the household finance
literature.



2       Institutional Details

Car prices and loan terms are negotiated between dealers and customers, so actual prices
and interest rates often differ substantially from advertised ones. Typically, a sales agent and
the consumer negotiate vehicle specifics, e.g., trim level, options, and an initial price quote.8
Then, the consumer arranges financing with the dealer's "Finance and Insurance" (F&I) de-
partment at which stage they may negotiate loan terms and the final car price.9 To get rate
quotes, the F&I agent typically submits information on the customer and vehicle into at least
one of three major systems: DealerTrack, RouteOne, and/or Credit Union Direct Lending.
Dealers may select specific lenders from which to solicit bids, or send the application to all
lenders; DealerTrack advertises access to more than 1,500 lenders. Dealers appear to work
with significantly fewer lenders than they potentially have access to. On average, dealers ap-
pear to maintain active relationships with about 4.35 lenders and are likely to request quotes
from several of them for any given deal.
  Each solicited lender submits a buy rate, which is the minimal interest rate at which it is
willing to make the loan.10 For prime borrowers, this process happens very quickly.11 The
dealer may then add a markup to the buy rate. "Markdowns", in which the dealer pays a fixed
      7 For example, present bias has been used to explain why consumers are willing to hold high-interest debt (Ausubel, 1991) and

why some consumers with substantial illiquid assets borrow at high interest rates (Laibson et al., 2015, Stango et al., 2017) use RAND's
American Life Panel to relate various behavioral anomalies to each other and to financial decision making.
      8 Sales agents are often paid based on commission and sales targets. The commission is often a function of the sale (e.g. a "flat"

commission) and / or the simple profit to the dealer. The sales targets are often discontinuous, and can result in direct bonuses and / or
increases in the commission percent earned.
      9 F&I agents are compensated by the dealer via a commission (or commission-like) mechanism based on the profit generated by F&I

products, including loan markups.
     10 Technically, the dealer originates the loan and then sells it to the lender. The "buy rate" is then the lowest interest rate at which the

lender will buy the loan from the dealer. Dealers know the buy rate in advance and sell the loan almost instantly, so for all practical purposes
the lender originates the loan.
     11 Super prime quotes (e.g. credit score 740+) are often fully automated and virtually instantaneous. "High prime" deals (e.g. credit

score 700+) are sometimes automated and are usually handled quickly. One bank that "manually" underwrites prime loans targets a decision
time of two minutes. "Near/low prime" deals (e.g. credit score 620+) often require manual pricing and / or underwriting and therefore take
longer. Subprime (e.g. credit score < 620) quotes are often available from only a few lenders and often require phone calls, and so take
even longer.


                                                                       5
fee to decrease the contract rate below the lender's buy rate, are allowed by most lenders but
occur rarely. Most lenders allow markups of at most 200-250 basis points, but markups are
otherwise discretionary. Lender-imposed caps on markups arose after a series of class-action
lawsuits against auto lenders that settled between 2003 and 2006. Before, many markups
were even higher (see Cohen, 2012). The additional revenue generated by markups is split
between dealers and lenders according to pre-specified contracts. The dealer's share of the
markup revenue is included in a one-time, upfront payment that lenders give to dealers for
making the loan called the "dealer reserve".
   Since dealers only act as intermediaries for financing, loans are generally transfered di-
rectly to the balance sheet of the lender.12 Loans present both default risk and prepayment
risk. For prime consumers, default risk is minimal (less than one percent). Default risk is
much higher for subprime consumers, and so in the subprime market contracts often disci-
pline markups and split default risk between dealers and lenders. In both the subprime and
prime markets, prepayment risk is substantial. Dealers typically assume all prepayment risk
for the first three to six months. If the loan is prepaid during this time period, the dealer often
returns the entire dealer reserve to the lender. Lenders assume all prepayment risk after this
time period.
  We estimate that at least 80 percent of auto loans are "indirect", i.e. obtained through auto
dealers as described above (see Section D.3 for details). However, consumers can also get
loan quotes directly from lenders. They can obtain these quotes either before negotiating with
the dealer or afterward. If the consumer finances the vehicle directly, the dealer receives no
revenue from the financing.



3      Data and Descriptive Evidence

This section first describes the datasets and then provides descriptive evidence on markups.
We pay special attention to the agreements between lenders and dealers and to the dealer
reserve that results from these agreements.


3.1      Data

This project uses three different datasets. First, and most importantly, we use a new admin-
istrative dataset of auto loans from various financial institutions. The data records car, loan,
and buyer characteristics and includes several million transactions from 2010 to 2014. We
    12 Banks  do sometimes sell loans on the secondary market, but this is rare. Captive finance companies (finance companies owned by
car manufacturers) and Buy-Here-Pay-Here dealerships (which finance sales themselves) do so much more frequently, but neither kind of
lender is in our data.




                                                                  6
observe the make and models of cars, whether they were new or used, their mileage and
model year, and in some cases the price of add-ons. In terms of buyer characteristics, we ob-
serve a buyer's zip code, income, and credit score. For each transaction, we also observe the
encrypted numeric identifier of the lender. There are several lenders in our data and an aver-
age of over 7,000 dealers per lender. The loan characteristics we observe include the interest
rate, the term length, the down payment, and the trade-in value for the old car.13 Crucially,
we observe the buy rate, the markup, and the dealer reserve. Recall that the buy rate is the
rate at which the lender is willing to finance the transaction. The markup is the discretionary
interest that the dealer adds to the buy rate, and the dealer reserve is the payment that the
dealer obtains from the lender for originating and marking up the loan.
   The administrative data provides detailed information on observed transactions, but it
does not cover the entire market. We therefore use complementary commercial data from
AutoCount R , from which we can observe market shares of lenders and dealers for the ma-
jority of states in the U.S.14 These data also record whether dealers are franchised (i.e., asso-
ciated with car manufacturers) or independent. However, it does not include information on
buy rates or markups.
   The third dataset we use is the CFPB's Consumer Credit Panel (CCP). The CCP is a longi-
tudinal, nationally-representative sample of approximately five million de-identified records
from one of the three nationwide consumer reporting agencies. The CCP also does not con-
tain data on buy rates or markups, nor does it include data on the vehicle securing the loan.
We mainly use it to study loan performance after origination.
   The subprime auto loan market is more complex than the prime market in a number of
ways, the most important of which is default risk. To abstract from these concerns, we restrict
attention everywhere in the paper to "prime" consumers, i.e,. those with credit scores above
720. Because we frequently use model fixed effects and need them to be reliable, we drop
observations from models that appear less than 50 times in the data. Price, loan amount,
income, and down payment are winsorized by model at the 99.9 percent level.
   Because our administrative dataset does not come from the universe of auto lenders, it is
not nationally representative. To examine how similar our dataset is to the national market,
Table A12 presents summary statistics of several variables from our data and from the 2011
commercial data. Our administrative data appear broadly comparable to nationally represen-
tative data.
    13 Additionally, we observe whether loans are "subvented", i.e., subsidized by car manufacturers to increase vehicle demand. Subvented

loans are typically from captives, but non-captive lenders do sometimes have agreements with car manufacturers to extend subvented loans.
    14 In the 2011 data, banks, captives, credit unions, finance companies, and Buy-Here-Pay-Here companies respectively had 46.1 percent,

26 percent, 14.1 percent, 9 percent, and 4.8 percent of the market.




                                                                    7
                                               Figure 1: Markup Revenues and Dealer Reserve




                             2000   1500
                      Dealer Reserve, $
                    500    1000
                             0




                                           0         500    1000      1500     2000                           2500
                                                      Revenue Generated by Markup, $

Note: The figure is a binscatter plot. The x-axis is the revenue generated by dealer markup over the lifetime of the loan, and the y-axis is
dealer reserve. The graph shows that the relationship is nearly linear.




3.2          Contracts Between Lenders and Dealers

We now use the administrative data to study the relationships between dealers and lenders.
Markup revenue is shared between the dealer and the lender according to a contractually-
specified formula. Figure 1 plots dealer reserve against loan markup revenue in a binscatter
plot. On average, dealers receive a fixed payment of $70 per loan plus about 75 percent of
markup revenue. The dealer share of markup revenue varies slightly from lender to lender
with a coefficient of variation of 0.079.15 Adjustments of those terms across dealers and
geographic regions appear to be rare. Two points are worth emphasizing. First, contracts
are almost linear.16 Hence, dealers receive a pre-specified amount of every dollar of extra
revenue they generate through loan markups. Second, the slope is well below one. A dealer
therefore receives only a fraction of markup revenue. We build on these observations in our
model in Section 4.
    15 For  one lender we directly observe the dealers' share. It varies somewhat across observations, so we take the median dealer share for
this lender for the calculation of the coefficient of variation.
     16 If we do not pool lenders but instead plot the same graph for lenders separately, contracts are still nearly linear. To protect the

confidentiality of lenders in our data, we cannot show these graphs.




                                                                     8
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics of Markup and Dealer Reserve

                                 Credit Score                         Income                  Car Price
                                Mean     Std Dev                  Mean Std Dev              Mean Std Dev
          Markup (%-points)
         1st Quartile   1.20                       0.83           1.20         0.82          1.24          0.87
         2nd Quartile   1.14                       0.82           1.13         0.81          1.13          0.82
         3rd Quartile   1.09                       0.82           1.09         0.81          1.08          0.80
         4th Quartile   1.08                       0.81           1.08         0.80          1.09          0.77

         Margin over Buy Rate
         1st Quartile  0.39                        0.32           0.42         0.32          0.39          0.33
         2nd Quartile  0.42                        0.33           0.40         0.32          0.43          0.34
         3rd Quartile  0.43                        0.36           0.40         0.32          0.43          0.35
         4th Quartile  0.45                        0.37           0.43         0.35          0.46          0.36

          Dealer Reserve
         1st Quartile             694               556           581           453           386           293
         2nd Quartile             652               529           611           475           554           370
         3rd Quartile             601               489           637           508           661           445
         4th Quartile             585               470           754           661           950           708
         Note: Summary statistics of markups (upper panel), margins (middle panel), and dealer reserve (lower panel),
         by credit score, income, and vehicle price quartile. Margin refers to markup as a fraction of the buy rate.



3.2.1   Markups and Dealer Compensation

In our data 77.8 percent of loans are marked up and 0.7 percent of loans are marked down.
The average markup in the dataset is 1.08 percentage points, which is substantial at approx-
imately 43 percent of the buy rate. While markups are common for all types of buyers, their
size varies systematically with buyer observables. Table 1 shows how markup and dealer
reserve vary with the buyer's credit score, income, and the price of the vehicle. Markups are
higher for buyers with low credit scores. As a consequence, dealer reserve is also higher on
average for buyers with low credit scores. Markups are also higher for low-income buyers.
However, dealer reserve is lower for low income buyers, because they typically buy cheaper
cars with smaller loans that generate less revenue for a given markup.
  The results from Table 1 also inform the model below. In particular, the descriptive evi-
dence suggests that dealers often mark up loans even though they must share the resulting
profit with lenders. This is true regardless of buyer income, risk characteristics, and vehicle
segment.



                                                              9
4       Measuring The Wedge in Price Responsiveness

Building on the institutional details described above, we now outline our empirical strategy to
quantify consumer sensitivity to changes in finance charges relative to the vehicle price. Our
estimates of this section are also an input to the full equilibrium model in Section 6. Our basic
identification argument is the following. Dealers share a substantial fraction of loan markup
revenue with lenders, but keep all vehicle markup revenue. If customers are indifferent be-
tween loan charges and vehicle charges, dealers should extract all possible revenue from the
consumer by maximizing the price of the car, which would let them keep all the profit. If
instead dealers set positive markups, it must be be true that consumers are less sensitive to
loan charges than to vehicle charges.17
   This basic insight allows us to estimate consumers' relative price sensitivity under very
mild assumptions on the dealers' pricing problem. We specify neither the exact market struc-
ture under which dealers compete nor a particular model of consumer behavior that gives rise
to this wedge in price sensitivities. Our approach is therefore reminiscent of recent structural
work that does not require a full specification of the model (Pakes et al., 2015). It also shares
certain advantages with the sufficient statistics approach (Chetty, 2009) in that it is less prone
to errors due to model misspecification.
  This section develops the identification in a one-period model. Section 5 argues that alter-
native explanations for our findings that assume standard optimal consumer decision-making
are implausible. It shows that time preferences and credit constraints (Section 5.1)18 , prepay-
ment risk (Sections 5.2 and long-term relationships between dealers and lenders (Section 5.3)
do not account for our results.


4.1       One-period model

Denote the buy rate for consumer i by bi and one plus the sales tax rate by i . The car
dealer has a linear markup revenue sharing agreement with the lender (see Section 3.2). This
agreement is characterized by slope  and intercept , both of which are lender-specific. The
dealer chooses the vehicle price pi and the loan interest rate ri  bi , taking as given the cost
to the dealer of supplying the vehicle ci , the consumer's down payment i  0 and the total
utility that must be delivered to the consumer u  ¯ i . Note that we assume i to be exogenous;
we discuss this assumption in Section 5.1. We are agnostic regarding how u   ¯ i is determined.19
     17 This argument implicitly assumes that dealers perceive the pricing of the car and the loan as a joint maximization problem. Argyle

et al. (2018), Argyle et al. (2019), and Brown and Jansen (2019) provide strong evidence that loan and vehicle prices are jointly determined.
In Appendix D.2, we provide further evidence that they are jointly determined using subvented loans in our data.
     18 The basic intuition for why time preferences do not matter is that auto loans fully amortize, so the allocation of total charges between

finance charges and car charges does not affect payments in any way.
     19 If the dealer makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the consumer, and the consumer can make no credible commitments, then u       ¯ i is the
value of the consumer's outside option. If u  ¯ i is determined by Nash bargaining, it may be as high as the maximum utility the dealer can


                                                                       10
                    ¯ i < 0 and |u
We only impose that u            ¯ i | > i .
   The consumer can accept the dealer's offer but still get a loan directly from a lender with
interest rate r L > 0. To get a loan directly, the consumer must search for one. r L has a
continuously differentiable density function gi (·) with compact support. The search cost is
si  0.20
   Our approach allows us to impose only mild assumptions on how loan and car charges
affect consumers' utility. We assume that the corresponding disutility is additive in the two
components and given by pi + Mi ( x), where x is the amount of loan charges and Mi ( x) 
C2  i. If Mi ( x) = x the consumer treats financial and vehicle costs identically. If Mi ( x) x
for some x, the consumer treats the two dimensions differently.

Assumption 1. Consumer utility is additive in the disutility of vehicle charges p and the
disutility of finance charges Mi ( x), where Mi ( x)  C2 .

   Importantly, we impose no further structure on Mi ( x). Therefore, our model nests many
others that create explicit microfoundations for Mi (·).21 The dealer's maximization problem
is given by:

               max pi + (i · pi - i ) · (ri - bi ) ·  - ci +                                                                              (1)
                 ri , pi

                  s.t. - i · pi - Mi ((i · pi - i ) · ri )  u
                                                            ¯i

                           - Mi ((i · pi - i ) · ri )  -                Mi ((i · pi - i ) · r L ) · gi (r L )dr L - si ,

                           ri  bi , pi  0

   To understand the basic intuition of our argument, first consider the case of Mi ( x) = x. In
this case, the optimal policy for the dealer is a corner solution. If the incentives provided by
the lender are not too high formally,  < (1+b   1
                                                 i )·i
                                                       , the dealer sets the interest rate as low as
possible (ri = bi ). The reason is that the consumer dislikes loan and vehicle price markups
equally, but the dealer prefers vehicle price markups because he keeps a greater share of the
revenue they generate. Note that the  above which dealers may mark up loans is strictly
below one. This is because a higher car price increases the size of the loan and therefore
finance charges, which dealers share with lenders. Thus, dealers do not keep all the revenue
they generate from vehicle price markups.

Proposition 1. Suppose Mi ( x) = x and  <                                1
                                                                      (1+bi )·i
                                                                                .   Then any solution to the maximization
problem in (1) features ri = bi .
deliver to the consumer while earning nonnegative profits.
     20 This formulation is also compatible with a model where people search multiple times.
     21 For our argument we implicitly assume that the dealer is aware of the consumer's utility function M (·). However, our estimation
                                                                                                                i
procedure does not rely on this assumption. If the dealer does not know Mi (·) but has a point belief about it, our estimates reveal this point
belief.


                                                                     11
   We relegate all proofs to Appendix A. Proposition 1 has an important implication: if
Mi ( x) = x, the dealer does not mark up loans with  < (1+b     1
                                                                 i )·i
                                                                       . This inequality holds for
97.5 percent of observations in our data, and so the substantial markups documented in Table
1 are incompatible with Mi ( x) = x, i.e. equal consumer sensitivity to loan price and car price.
   Using the size of markups in the data we are then able to quantify the extent to which
finance and vehicle charges are treated differently.

Proposition 2. For any optimal offer (ri , pi ) with ri > bi , pi > 0 it holds that
                                                                


                                                                                 · i
                                              Mi (ri (i pi - i ))                         ,            (2)
                                                                            1 -  · i · bi
where (2) holds with equality if only the first constraint in (1) is binding at the optimum.

   Proposition 2 allows us to use the prices set by the dealer to infer consumers' sensitivity
to additional charges at the equilibrium contract. We observe all variables on the right hand
side in (2), as well as the argument ri · (i · p i - i ) of function Mi (·). Therefore, the data pro-
vide individual-specific estimates of the marginal disutility Mi (·) at observed finance charges.
Furthermore, Mi (ri · (i · p i - i )) has a transparent economic interpretation: it is the marginal
disutility in dollars that a consumer associates with an increase in the loan price. If Mi (·) is
smaller than one, for example, the consumer is less sensitive to an increase in the loan price
than to an equal increase in the car price. Whether Equation 2 holds with equality for any
given consumer depends on unobservables. Hence, the right hand side of Equation (2) can
be interpreted as a sufficient statistic establishing an upper bound for Mi (·) at the observed
finance charges.
   Equation 2 may not hold with equality because of the second constraint in the dealer's
optimization problem. When this constraint binds, it is because the dealer cannot charge a
higher interest rate without causing the consumer to obtain the loan directly from a lender,
even though the consumer would otherwise agree to pay a higher interest rate in exchange for
a lower vehicle price. In these cases, our estimates for Mi (·) are greater than the actual Mi (·).
This situation may arise because our model does not allow dealers to condition the price of
the vehicle on whether or not the consumer also obtains financing from the dealer. If it did,
the second constraint in the dealer's problem would never bind, and our estimates for Mi (·)
would be tight.22
   Our Mi (·) estimates measure consumers' marginal valuation of finance charges. However,
each marginal valuation is estimated at the specific financial charges in the data. As a result,
two individuals with the same finance charges and the same estimated Mi (·) may still differ
in Mi (·). To obtain estimates comparable across individuals, we next calculate bounds on the
difference between actual finance charges and those that rationalize the consumers' choices.
   22 Anecdotally,   dealers often do condition the price of the vehicle on the source of financing.


                                                                     12
Proposition 3. Suppose (ri , pi ) and pi > 0 is an optimal offer.
                                       



   (i) If Mi ( x)  1  x and ri  bi it holds that

   (i · pi - i ) · (ri - bi ) - Mi (ri · (i · pi - i )) - Mi (bi · (i · pi - i ))
                                                                         


                                                      (i · pi - i ) · (ri - bi ) · [1 - i ·  · (1 + bi )] = Bi
                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                               (3)


   (ii) If Mi ( x) > 0  x and ri > bi , it holds that

                                                                                                         · i
      (i · pi - i ) · ri - Mi (ri · (i · pi - i ))  (i · pi - i ) · ri · 1 -
                                                                     
                                                                                                                     i .
                                                                                                                  = BO                (4)
                                                                                                     1 -  · i b i

   Proposition 3 establishes two different lower bounds. Both can be estimated directly from
our data. Part (i) of Proposition 3 derives an individual-specific lower bound BiM for the
difference between the costs of a markup and the disutility that a consumer associates with
these costs. Intuitively, this result leverages the fact that dealers choose the markups seen in
the data rather than setting them to zero. This behavior can only be optimal if consumers'
sensitivity to markups is not too high. Part (ii) of Proposition 3 derives a lower bound BO    i
for the difference between overall finance charges and those that rationalize the observed
markup.23 For this result, we have to make the additional assumption that Mi (·) is weakly
convex. If Mi (·) is convex, our estimates of Mi (·) in combination with the observable amount
of finance charges provide an upper bound on Mi (·) at the observed finance charges.
   While the two estimated bounds are highly correlated and the underlying ideas are similar,
we still consider them to be important complements. BiM is derived under milder assumptions,
but only considers finance charges due to markups. Convexity of Mi (·) is a stronger assump-
tion but allows us to consider all finance charges. BO i is also important from the dealer's
perspective as it characterizes the extent to which the dealer can profit from differences in
price sensitivities.


4.2       Results

We now estimate the measures of consumer price sensitivities given by Propositions 2 and 3.
To simplify the analysis, we first use loan term lengths to convert annual buy rates and annual
interest rates in the data to two-period interest rates. We use these two-period interest rates
through the rest of this paper.24
    23 Note  that both BiM and BOi are measured in dollars over the life of the loan. Interest rates were very low during the sample period
and measuring these bounds in their present discounted value at the time of the car sale would yield very similar numbers. We consider
consumers' discount rates in Section 5.1.
     24 Finance charges are equal to the monthly payment times the loan term in months, minus the loan amount. The two-period interest

rate is then finance charges over the loan amount.



                                                                   13
   Note that we can only estimate Mi (·) and BO  i for the approximately 77.8 percent of our
sample with positive markup; there are several potential explanations for zero markups (e.g.,
the consumer has a good outside option or low loan search costs, or the consumer is indif-
ferent between vehicle and finance charges) that we cannot disentangle. However, we can
estimate BiM for the whole sample as it is zero for observations with zero markup.

                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics of Estimates

                            Measure           Mean         p10       p25        p50       p75        p90
                            Mi (·)             0.86       0.77       0.80      0.86       0.91      0.95
                            BO
                             i ($)             380        106        187       324        511       722
                            BiM ($)             96          0         17        72        145       228
                            Note: Selected summary statistics of consumers' sensitivity to finance charges.
                            For Mi (·) and BO                                                       M
                                              i , statistics condition on a positive markup, while Bi are de-
                            rived for the full sample.


  Our procedure yields individual-specific estimates. For each contract in our data, we obtain
a specific Mi (·), BiM , and BO
                              i estimate by applying equation (2), (3), and (4), respectively.
Recall that our sample is restricted to consumers with a credit score above 720 to ensure
that our results are not driven by default risk. Table 2 summarizes our estimates, revealing
substantial variation in the wedge between car and loan price sensitivities. In particular, the
mean Mi (·) is only 0.86. This finding implies that, at the margin, the average consumer would
be willing to pay a dollar more in finance charges to reduce the price of the car by 86 cents.
For consumers at the 10th percentile, this value drops to 77 cents.25
   Figure 2 shows the distributions of the two lower bounds BiM and BO     i . Three points are
worth noting. First, the bounds are substantial. On average, marked-up consumers act as if
the disutility of finance charges is at least $380 less than actual finance charges. Similarly,
on average consumers act as if the disutility of markup costs is at least $96 less than actual
markup costs. These estimates correspond to approximately 20.3 percent of total finance
charges and about 19.2 percent of markup charges. Second, we estimate BiM to be equal to
zero for consumers with zero markup and negative for the few consumers with marked-down
loans. Third, there is significant heterogeneity in the bounds. The bound on the difference
between finance charges and the disutility of finance charges at the 90th percentile is seven
times larger than at the 10th percentile.
   Our estimates also allow us to explore the average curvature of the function Mi (·). Specif-
ically, we can investigate the effect of higher finance charges on our estimates of Mi (·). Fi-
nance charges are obviously endogenous to Mi (·). However, the buy rate offered by the lender
     25 Table A13 presents our average estimates for B M and M (·) for the 20 most common models in our data, showing that there is some
                                                      i       i
variation across different models.




                                                                  14
                                              Figure 2: Histogram of Estimated Bounds

                      0.25
Percent of Observations




                                                                         Percent of Observations
                                                                                               0.04

                      0.20
                                                                                               0.03
                      0.15
                                                                                               0.02
                      0.10

                                                                                               0.01
                      0.05


                      0.00                                                                     0.00
                             0          200         400            600                                0   250    500    750    1000   1250   1500
                                 Bound BM, (Markup Only)                                                        Bound BO, (Overall)


Note: The left panel plots the distribution of BiM , the bound on the difference between markup charges and consumers' sensitivity to markup
charges. The right panel plots the distribution of BO   i , the bound on the difference between finance charges and consumers' sensitivity to
finance charges.



is strongly correlated with finance charges. Moreover, our data include virtually all the infor-
mation the lender has. Conditional on this information, the buy rate is therefore exogenous to
any unobservable consumer characteristics such as the consumer's utility function Mi (·) and
so is a valid instrument. The results of the corresponding 2SLS regression are summarized in
Table A10 in Appendix D.1. The estimated shape suggests that Mi (·) is on average a convex
function. Hence, consumers respond more if more is at stake. This finding is reminiscent
of recent work studying attention allocation (Bordalo et al., 2012, 2013, K  oszegi and Szeidl,
2012). A common theme of this work is that consumers pay more attention to dimensions
with more pronounced differences across products.
   So far we have imposed only minimal assumptions on Mi ( x). For the rest of this paper,
we have to impose more structure on Mi ( x) for two reasons. First, we study heterogeneity
in our estimated bounds across consumers, which, as we discuss below, requires additional
assumptions to be informative. Second, in our counterfactual policy experiments finance
charges might change and we therefore need to take a stance on precisely how Mi (·) changes
as x changes. We therefore assume the following functional form:


                                                          Mi ( x) = x - i · log( x),                                                         (5)
where i specifies the size of the wedge of consumer i. A larger i corresponds to a larger
wedge (Figure A4 depicts an example of the functional form). This functional form has
two important advantages. First, it is consistent with the evidence above on the curvature of
Mi (·). In particular, it generates a marginal wedge in sensitivities that is large for small x but
converges to 0 as x increases. Second, it enables us to study the heterogeneity in the bounds
BOi . Theoretically, studying heterogeneity in bounds has one potential caveat: the difference


                                                                     15
between these bounds and the objects they bound could be correlated with observables. As we
explain in more detail in Section D.1, we can eliminate this concern if we impose the utility
function in Equation (5). The results in this section show that under the above functional
form an ordering of BOi always corresponds to an ordering of the underlying wedge.




5      Explanations for Differential Price Responsiveness

Above we show that consumers are less responsive to changes in loan prices than vehicle
prices. In this section, we discuss potential explanations for this finding. We can rule out
liquidity constraints, prepayment risk, and dealer-lender relationships as explanations for our
findings. Instead, the most plausible explanation for our results is that the wedge does not
reflect consumer preferences but rather suboptimal decision making: consumers seem to ei-
ther systematically underestimate financial charges or are under the incorrect impression that
interest rates are non-negotiable. However, in our quantitative policy experiments (Section
9) we show that consumers are harmed by dealer loan intermediation regardless of the spe-
cific mechanism that underlies the wedge and even if the wedge reflects actual consumer
preferences.


5.1      Time Structure

It may appear intuitive that in a multi-period model consumers who are impatient or liquidity-
constrained are willing to pay higher interest rates, and that this could partly explain our
results. However, this intuition is largely incorrect, because auto loans have fixed monthly
payments that fully amortize. If the down payment is fixed, an increase in the total price
                                                                                            1
of a financed vehicle by $1 for a loan lasting T months increases monthly payments by T       .
This is true whether the $1 total increase comes from an increase in the price of the vehicle
or the loan. Thus, there is a one-to-one mapping between monthly payments and the total
price that does not depend on the specific allocation of charges. More formally, Section
B.1.1 develops a model with consumer preferences defined over multiple periods. In this
multi-period model, we show that our estimates for Mi (·), BO   i and Bi are not affected by
                                                                        M

intertemporal considerations if down payments do not depend on the allocation of charges
between the price of the car and the loan.26
  If a higher car price would lead to a larger required down payment, however, intertemporal
considerations could affect our results because impatient or constrained consumers might be
more willing to pay a higher interest rate in order to reduce the car price and hence the down
    26 Down payments do not depend on the allocation of charges if, for example, the down payment is determined before the price is

determined, is zero, or is chosen by the consumer (which is common for prime auto loans).




                                                               16
payment. Our discussions with industry experts suggest that down payments for prime con-
sumers are generally not determined in this way. This is not surprising since collateral value
­ not the consumer-specific price markup ­ influences both the consumer's future default de-
cisions and the creditor's loss given default. Empirically, our estimates of Mi (·) and BO
                                                                                         i vary
little with the size of the down payment. In particular, our estimates for consumers with zero
and negative down payments are similar to those for other consumers (see Figure A2 in the
appendix).27 Thus consumer impatience or credit constraints cannot explain our results.


5.2         Prepayment Risk

Prepayment risk could appear to explain consumers' relative insensitivity to finance charges
documented in Section 4.2. Intuitively, consumers who are likely to prepay their loan may
appear less sensitive to finance charges because they expect not to pay them. In practice,
the potential effect of prepayment on our results is more subtle. Contracts between dealers
and lenders include a "clawback" period, typically the first three to six months of the loan,
during which the dealer bears prepayment risk. If the consumer prepays during the clawback
period, the dealer refunds the entire dealer reserve to the lender. We show in Section B.2
that this "early" prepayment risk should bias the estimated bounds BO          M
                                                                       i and Bi downwards.
Early prepayment makes loan markups less valuable to dealers and so even harder to explain.
However, if the consumer prepays after the clawback period, the dealer keeps the entire dealer
reserve, and so late prepayment should bias our estimates upwards.28
   To analyze the issue empirically, we create a proxy for prepayment risk by running a logit
regression predicting prepayment in the Consumer Credit Panel (CCP).29 Table A7 provides
estimates from the supervisory data of the relationship between our bounds and estimated
prepayment risk from the CCP, using a regression with a large number of controls. The
conditional correlation between prepayment risk and our wedge estimates is negative. Hence,
                                                                                       30
we estimate lower BO            M
                      i 's and Bi 's for consumers with higher prepayment risk.           There are
several potential explanations for this result. First, the theoretical effects of early prepayment
risk may dominate those of late prepayment.31 Another potential explanation with substantial
    27 To   further address this point, in Section B.1.2 we recompute Mi (·) under the (evidently counterfactual) assumption that dealers
require a down payment that is a fixed percentage of the car price. The results are summarized in Table A1. Recall that we are restricting
our sample to individuals with credit scores above 720. Hence, the sample consists of individuals that are unlikely to be either impatient
or credit constrained and therefore should have reasonably high discount factors. Our results show quantitatively that even if the down
payment were a fixed fraction of the price, our estimates would barely change for discount factors above 0.90.
     28 In a sample of prime auto loans in the CCP with loan term length greater than two years, 5.7 percent were prepaid within the first

120 days and 27.0 percent were prepaid after 120 days but before two years.
     29 The regression uses credit score, log loan amount, loan length, and state fixed effects to predict "late" prepayment (after 120 days but

before two years). Coefficients are reported in Table A2. This is clearly a limited subset of the information available to both the borrower
and the dealer, and yet it is remarkably predictive. 18.3 percent of those in the bottom decile of predicted risk prepay late, while 42.6 percent
in the top decile do.
     30 As shown in Table A7, when we separate prepayment risk into early prepayment risk and late prepayment risk, we still estimate

lower BO            M
         i 's and Bi 's for consumers with higher late prepayment risk.
     31 Early prepayment risk and late prepayment risk are highly correlated, and it seems likely that dealers cannot predict them separately.




                                                                      17
empirical support is that, instead of considering the cost of a financed vehicle through the life
of a loan, many consumers care about monthly payments (Argyle et al., 2019) and so do
not care about prepayment. If both consumers and dealers do not care about prepayment,
then prepayment risk does not affect our results, as in our main model. If consumers do
not care about prepayment but dealers do, then dealers should be less willing to mark up
loans for customers with a high chance of prepayment, and so our estimated bounds BO       i and
  M
Bi are biased downward. This could explain the negative conditional correlation between
prepayment risk and these estimated bounds.


5.3       Dynamic Relationships between Lenders and Dealers

Lenders and dealers interact repeatedly, so dealers may mark up loans to increase lenders'
profits in exchange for favorable treatment on later deals, such as financing for a subprime
consumer who might otherwise not qualify for a loan. Section B.4 explores whether markups
are higher for loans originated by lenders that finance a higher portion of a dealer's sales.
We find that markups for lenders that finance more than 20 percent of a dealer's sales are
only three basis points higher than markups for lenders that finance less than one percent of a
dealer's sales. Relative to the average markup in our data of 108 basis points, this statistical
effect is negligible.


5.4       Suboptimal Decision Making

The most plausible explanation for our results seems to be that consumers are either finan-
cially unsophisticated or misperceive the nature of the negotiation process. Surveys have
found that most respondents are not aware that dealer markups occur, that most respondents
think that dealer markups are illegal, and that respondents who were told or believed that their
dealer found them the best rate in fact obtained particularly high interest rates (Center for Re-
sponsible Lending et al., 2012). In a recent study, the FTC found that few consumers were
aware that interest rates are negotiable (Reynolds and Cox, 2020, Sullivan et al., 2020). In
a similar vein, the CFPB found that "many consumers did not fully explore their options for
auto loans, and did not shop around and negotiate as much for the financing as they did for the
vehicle itself" (CFPB, 2016). In response to similar concerns the U.K.'s Financial Conduct
Authority has announced that it will ban dealer markups in 2021 in part because "consumers
are not being provided with the right information about [auto loan] commissions at the right
time" (FCA, 2019).32 The evidence collected by regulators is consistent with the view of
The correlation between our measures of early and late prepayment risk in the CCP is .63.
    32 There is also strong evidence from the mortgage market that intermediaries exploit borrowers' confusion to increase prices (Wood-

ward and Hall, 2012), that many borrowers do not believe there is price dispersion even though it is substantial (Alexandrov and Koulayev,
2018), and that mortgage knowledge varies substantially across prospective borrowers, is correlated with other socioeconomic characteris-



                                                                   18
industry professionals. In an expert report, a former finance and insurance manager for an
automotive dealership explained:
   "The standard industry practice is to prepare financing documents so that the customer is
not alerted in any manner that the person with whom he is dealing has the ability to control
the customer's price of credit. [...] This type of pricing system is particularly successful when
used in conjunction with the sale of an automobile, because the credit applicant's attention
is naturally focused on the price of the automobile [...]."33
   Regional variation in our estimates support this explanation. Figure A3 in Appendix D
shows how BiM varies across counties. To proxy for consumer financial sophistication, we
use county-level data on education from the American Community Survey (ACS) and to
proxy for the cost of acquiring information we use tract-level data on internet availability
from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Table A9 shows how the bounds BO            i
and BiM correlate with education and internet availability at the regional level.34 Columns (3)
and (6) in Table A9 show that consumers that live in areas with less education and slower
internet access display larger wedges in price sensitivities.



6       Equilibrium Model

This section describes a full equilibrium model to explore how the wedge between con-
sumers' sensitivities to finance charges and vehicle prices affects outcomes in a competitive
environment. On the demand side we nest our estimates of the wedge in a random-coefficient
logit demand model. On the supply side we use a differentiated-product Bertrand model to
back out dealer costs, and a model of lender competition in the loan interest rate auction to
back out lenders' cost of funds. We first use the model to quantify the effect of the wedge
on consumer behavior and on the pricing strategies of dealers. We then use these estimates
to conduct two counterfactual experiments: one in which consumers treat all charges equally
and one in which dealers cannot mark up loans and instead are required to pass through the
buy rate.
tics, and has a strong relationship with ultimate interest rates obtained (Bhutta et al., 2019).
      33 Expert Report of Edward Ford Jr. in the matter of Addie T. Coleman et al. vs GMAC, U.S. District Court for the Middle District of

Tennessee, August 21, 2003. McDonald, Kevin M., and Kenneth J. Rojc. "Automotive Finance: Shifting Into Regulatory Overdrive." The
Business Lawyer 69.2 (2014): 599-607.
      34 We do not correlate M (·) with observables because it is a marginal measure; two individuals with identical M (·) could have been

observed with different contract terms and so have very different M (·).




                                                                   19
6.1    Consumer Utility and Dealer Market Shares

There is a set of markets M and for every market m  M a set of active dealers Dm . Every
dealer d  Dm offers a specific set of models Jd , which we take to be exogenous. Fur-
thermore, each dealer works with an exogenous set of lenders Ld . Consumers observe all
dealer-model combinations available to them and choose the one that maximizes their utility.
Dealers engage in differentiated-product Bertrand competition, setting both interest rates and
car prices optimally, given consumer tastes, competing dealers' behavior, their marginal cost
of lending, and the revenue sharing agreement with lenders.
   To specify consumer i's indirect utility function, we denote her travel costs to dealer d
by g(d, i). Furthermore, consumer i has marginal utility of money i , which may depend on
income ym measured at the county level. In line with the findings from Section 4.2, consumers
may treat different components of the overall price differently. To parameterize the utility
function Mi (·), we use the utility function introduced in the last section, Mi ( x) = x - i · log( x).
Our estimates of Mi (·) from Section 4 allow us to back out i immediately. Summary statistics
of the corresponding estimates can be found in Table A14.
  Given the state tax rate d , car price p jd and interest rate r jd for a car j at dealer d, con-
sumers act as if the effective overall transaction price p
                                                         ~ jd is:
               ~ jd = d · p jd + (d · p jd -  jd ) · r jd - i · log((d · p jd -  jd ) · r jd )
               p                                                                                   (6)
Besides the travel distance and car price, consumers' indirect utility depends on other ob-
servable loan and car attributes which we collect in the vector z j , which enters according to
coefficient  . Furthermore, there are two types of unobservable taste shocks in the model.
First, the relative attractiveness of purchasing model j at dealer d is captured by a dealer-
model specific scalar variable  jd . Second, every consumer's choice is affected by her i.i.d.
taste shock i jd for a dealer-model combination. Overall, consumer utility is thus given by:


                            ui jd = g(d, i) - i · p
                                                  ~ jd +  · z j +  jd +     i jd ,                 (7)

  where


                           i = 0 + y · ym + i where i  N (0,  ).                                   (8)

  In practice, we collapse g(d, i) at the market level as a population-weighted average over
the travel distances to dealer d from different zip-code centroids so that we have g(d). As is
customary in the literature we refer to mean utility as  jdm = g(d) -  · p~ jd +  · z j +  jd and
denote the vector of those mean utilities for an entire market as m .
  Let pdm and rdm respectively denote the vectors of prices and interest rates that dealer d
charges. Similarly, p-dm and r-dm are the vectors of prices and interest rates of all other

                                                    20
dealers in the market. With this notation we now describe the customers' choices, which
determine the overall market share of a dealer-model combination. For this purpose, we inte-
grate over the unobserved customer type . Exploiting the logit structure of the idiosyncratic
taste shocks, the share of model j at dealer d is given by:
                                                               exp(g(d) - i · p
                                                                              ~ jd +  · z j +  jd )
     jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ) =
    sm                                                                                                   f () · d
                                                      d Dm      k Jd exp(g(d ) - i · p
                                                                                     ~ kd +  · zk + kd )


6.2       Dealer Maximization Problem

Dealers decide on prices for all models that they sell. They also set final interest rates through
discretionary markups. The buy rates that dealers face are determined in equilibrium by the
set of bidders Ld for loans at dealer d. We describe the lender's problem in more detail in
subsection 6.3. Given a down payment  jd and contractual share of markup revenue  jd ,
which are both taken to be exogenous, dealer d s maximization problem is


              max              jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ) · p jd +  jd · ( p jd -  jd ) · (r jd - b jd ) - c jd .
                              sm                                                                                                           (9)
             pdm ,rdm
                        jJd



6.3       Lender Maximization Problem

In modeling the lenders' maximization problem, we make two simplifying assumptions.
First, we assume that there is one second-price auction for each dealer-model combination.
Hence, each of the lenders in Ld associated with dealer d bids once for all the sales of model
 j. In Section D.4 we also show how one can estimate the model if we assume a first-price
auction instead of the second-price auction.35 While the results assuming a first-price and
second-price auction are very similar, in the main text we use a second-price auction for sim-
plicity. Second, we assume  is constant across lenders within a given dealer, which appears
to be a good approximation in our data. Without this assumption we would have to model
an asymmetric auction which would complicate the analysis considerably. Jointly, these two
assumptions allow us to keep the setting tractable.

Assumption 2. Auctions are held at the dealer-model level. All lenders k  Ld are drawing
                                 b
from the same cost distribution rk  Fl (·) and have the same revenue-sharing contract  with
a given dealer d.

   A lender wins the auction and issues the loans for a dealer-model combination if his buy
     35 The first-price auction approach uses the key insight from Guerre et al. (2000) that there is a relationship between the observed

distribution of buy rates and the unobserved distribution of costs. This insight allows us to substitute all unknown terms in the lender's first
order condition with either observed or known objects based on our demand estimation (see Appendix D.4 for details).



                                                                      21
rate is the lowest one submitted. He then issues the loan for the second-lowest buy rate in the
same auction.
   Let Nd be the number of lenders bidding for a contract and rl  Fl (·) the distribution of
wholesale interest rates r, which characterize the lenders' cost of financing a loan. Lenders
anticipate that the dealer markup m jd (b jd ) will depend on the buy rate through the dealer's
downstream decision. Since we assume a second-price auction, it is optimal for the lender to
bid a buy rate such that expected profits are equal to zero.36 Hence, lender k will bid a buy
rate that satisfies:


                     p jd (bkjd ) -  jd · (1 -  jd ) · m jd (bkjd ) + bkjd = p jd (bkjd ) -  jd · rk
                                                                                                   jd .                              (10)

  With a second-price auction, the winning lender receives the buy rate and the associated
markup of the second-lowest bidder who has the second-lowest cost. As the right-hand side of
Equation (10) is observed in the data, we can directly recover the distribution of the second-
lowest order statistic of Fl(2:Nd ) (·). It is well known that each order statistic also identifies the
underlying distribution via:

                                                                                Fl (v)
                                                       Nd !
                               Fl(i:Nd ) (v) =                                           ti-1 (1 - t)Nd -i dt.
                                                 (Nd - i)!(i - 1)!          0

   We use this relationship to uncover lenders' distribution of costs from their second-order
statistic. We perform this estimation and inversion conditional on the customers' state, and
FICO-score bin in increments of 10 points.


6.4       Discussion of Model Specification

While the first part of the paper analyzes car sales at the contract level, this section introduces
an approach that has traditionally been used to study posted-price markets. This modeling
approach deserves some discussion, especially since some of our counterfactual results are
driven by heterogeneity in the relative sensitivity of financial charges to vehicle-price charges.
The modeling choice is made to account for important characteristics of the product we study,
while keeping the setting tractable. In particular, we study a bundle of a retail financial
product and an extremely differentiated durable. While retail financial products are typically
modeled at the contract level (Allen et al., 2013), where contract-specific pricing is taken
into account, car markets have traditionally been treated as posted-price markets. For the
equilibrium model we sacrifice some of the richness of the contract-level data and follow
the latter approach, which allows us to build on established tools capturing the rich space
     36 As our sample contains only prime consumers, we implicitly assume that there is no default risk associated with the loan. Therefore,

the bids of competeing banks also do not contain any additional information on expected profits for each bank.



                                                                    22
of observed and unobserved attributes of cars and also allows us to rely on proven ways
to account for price endogeneity. One alternative model specification that would preserve
the simplicity of the "posted price model" and account for richer heterogeneity in consumer
types, would be to estimate the demand model conditional on subsets of i . This would allow
for within-county differences in prices. While this approach is certainly a feasible alternative
path, we decided against it in the interest of model simplicity. At the same time, the more
than one thousand counties in our data arguably capture much of the heterogeneity in both
demographics and, crucially, in the relative sensitivity to car and financial charges.
  Moreover, we assume that buyers who obtain loans indirectly are distinct from buyers who
obtain loans directly, and the latter are outside our model.37 In practice, the set of buyers who
obtain loans directly includes both consumers who never obtained a rate quote from a dealer,
and those who obtained but rejected a rate quote from a dealer. We expect this latter group to
be quite small; dealers can obtain buy rate quotes from a very large number of lenders very
quickly, so it is unlikely that they will be unable to beat an outside rate quote obtained by a
consumer if they need to.



7      Estimation

To estimate the model, we use data from 30 states, covering 1134 counties.38 We consider
each county to be one market and estimate demand for the 70 most popular models, which
account for the large majority of total sales. The remaining models are assigned to the outside
good. We restrict our estimation to counties that have less than 45 dealers and in which at
least one of the 70 most popular models is sold. After these data restrictions we are left with
917 markets which each include on average 7 dealers and a median of 5 dealers.
   As described in Section 3, the commerical dataset covers the entire auto market in these
thirty states while the supervisory data only cover a fraction of the market. We therefore
define the total market as all new car purchases observed in the commercial data. Since
these data are constructed from records from the states' Departments of Motor Vehicles,
they should be close to comprehensive. However, the commercial data lack information on
dealer reserves and buy rates. To estimate the model we therefore impute buy rates in the
commercial data from a saturated model, which is estimated using the supervisory data (R2
 0.86). Lastly, we use the Google distance API to build a proxy for the travel distance to
each dealer. To generate this proxy, we subdivide each county into zip-code tabulation areas
     37 One example of an empirical model of inter-modal competition is provided in Allen et al. (2014), where consumers can obtain loan

quotes from their home bank or run an auction among non-home lenders. Another example is Salz (2017), in which buyers can search
bilaterally or through brokers.
     38 The data includes the following states: Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois,

Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina,
North Dakota, Ohio, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.



                                                                  23
and then query the travel distance from the centroid of each of those areas to the dealer using
the Google distance matrix API. The overall travel distance to a dealer within a county is the
population-weighted sum of the travel-distances from each of those centroids.
  The price of the vehicle is potentially endogenous to the unobserved dealer-model specific
demand shock  jd . Failure to account for this potential endogeneity will result in biased price
coefficients. We therefore interact  jd with the following set of instruments: the average
miles per hour of other models at the same dealer, the vehicle length of other models at the
same dealer, the mileage of other models at the same dealer, the average travel distance to
other dealers in the same market, the buy rate, and the average price of the same model in
other markets. Except for the buy rate and the distance, these instruments are standard in the
demand estimation literature (Nevo, 2000).
   Following Berry et al. (1995) we use the observed aggregate market shares for a specific
dealer-model combination, sm m to compute a contraction mapping that recovers mean
utilities.39 We then regress those mean utilities on product attributes to uncover the linear
parameters of the mapping (Nevo, 2000). Using  jdm we can compute  jd =  jdm -  x · x.
Equation (11) provides the moment condition for estimation.


                                                G() =                     jd () · z jd                                            (11)
                                                             dMd jJd

    We then solve the following minimization problem:


                                                 arg min G() · W · G().                                                           (12)
                                                          

 For W we use the optimal GMM weights from a first stage estimation of a standard logit
model without random coefficients.



8       Estimation Results

8.1       Demand Results

Table 3 shows the coefficients from the demand model along with standard errors. The price
interaction terms show that buyers with lower income are more price-elastic. The signs of
most coefficients line up with intuition and the previous literature. The coefficients on horse-
power and vehicle length are both positive but decreasing in income. However, the coeffi-
cient on miles per gallon is negative but increasing in income, suggesting that higher income
    39 Unlike  the nested logit model in Berry (1994), the random coefficient model does not allow for an analytic inversion. The mapping
iterates on the following equation: mh+1 =  h + log( s ) - log s^ h ,  .
                                             m        m



                                                                  24
households place greater value on fuel efficiency. Consumers dislike travel distance to the
dealer.

                                           Table 3: Demand Model Coefficients

                 Variable                                                     Coefficient          Standard Error
                 Price                                                             -0.09                   0.0002
                 Horsepower                                                        0.21                    0.0021
                 Vehicle Length                                                    0.83                    0.0114
                 MPG                                                               -1.78                   0.0728
                 Distance to Dealer                                                -0.89                   0.0004
                 Income × Price                                                    0.89                    0.0321
                 Income × Horsepower                                               -2.56                   0.3204
                 Income × MPG                                                      18.08                   9.6959
                 Income × Car Length                                               -8.07                   1.6898
                 Standard Deviation Random Coefficient                             0.10                   < 0.0001
                 Note: The table shows the main coefficient estimates and the standard errors from the model. Standard
                 errors are rounded to second digit after the comma. Travel time is in log-minutes and prices are in dollars.
                 Income is measured in units of standard deviations.


   The coefficients are difficult to interpret directly because of the interaction terms. To pro-
vide some intuition for the magnitudes of our estimates, we now discuss the average elastici-
ties implied by our coefficient estimates.
   Our model estimates consumers' price elasticities for the overall transaction price includ-
ing the car price and all finance charges. Over all market-dealer-model combinations we
obtain about 35,000 different price elasticities, with an average of -3.73. The own-price elas-
ticities of the fifteen different makes that are included in the demand model vary from -5.4
for GMC to -2.5 for Hyundai (see Table A15 in Appendix D).40 Our total price elasticities
are close to previous estimates in the literature. Nurski and Verboven (2016), for example,
find an average price elasticity of -3.14 for the Belgian market and Murry (2017) estimates
an average own-price elasticity of -4.9 for the US market. Note that it is intuitive that we
estimate demand to be slightly less elastic. Our estimates are relative to the overall price,
including finance charges, while previous papers consider the car price alone. As increases
in the car price are often accompanied by increases in the size of the loan and hence finance
charges, ignoring finance charges should lead to lower estimates for demand elasticities.
  At an average of -0.16 consumers appear not to be too sensitive to changes in distance to
different dealer locations.41
    40 Theses  elasticities are computed as averages over all models within a make.
    41 Murry   (2017) also documents distance elasticities using the distance in miles instead of average travel times as a measure for the
disutility associated with traveling to a dealership. He finds that buyers are more elastic to distance with estimated elasticities ranging from
-1.1 to -1.8. This might be a result of a different subset of markets that Murry (2017) focuses on.



                                                                      25
8.2       Dealer Cost

In order to conduct the counterfactual experiments, we use the first-order conditions from the
dealer's pricing problem to recover dealer costs. We also estimate the parameter , which
determines the contractually-specified transfer (as a function of the markup) that dealer d
receives from a lender when selling a car of model j. A dealer maximizes her profits with
regard to both interest rate and car price. Let kd be the down payment for model k at dealer
d. We obtain a set of 2 × |Jd | first-order conditions, which are shown in the following two
sets of equations.
                                                                                   sm
                                                                                    kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
    jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
   sm                                  · (1 +  jd · (r jd - b jd )) +                                             ·
                                                                            kJd
                                                                                                p jd

                                                 pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ) - ckd = 0  j  Jd (13)



                                                                           sm
                                                                            kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
    jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ) ·  jd · ( p jd -  jd ) +
   sm                                                                                                     ·
                                                                    kJd
                                                                                        p jd

                                                 pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ) - ckd = 0  j  Jd (14)

   In Appendix C we show how one can combine this set of equations to recover the cost of
dealers. The cost estimates that we obtain from this procedure are shown in Table 4. We
estimate an average cost of $17,600, ranging from $7,600 in the 10th percentile to $27,600
in the 90th percentile. The average markup is estimated at 25% and the implied average
Lerner index is 0.294.42
                             Table 4: Lerner Index, and Cost, Summary Statistics

                         Variable              Mean          P10        P25         P50        P75         P90
                         Lerner Index           0.294      0.102        0.147      0.228      0.383       0.606
                         Cost ($ 1000)           17.6       7.6          11.9      17.5        23.6       27.6
                         Note: The table shows summary statistics for the Lerner index across all estimated mar-
                         kets. In each market we weight the index according to the market shares of the respective
                         model.




8.3       Lender Cost Estimates

Lenders compete with other lenders that have an established relationship with the dealer. The
mean and median number of lenders through which a dealer extends loans is 4.35 and 4,
    42 TheLerner index is equal to the price of a good minus its marginal cost, normalized by the price of the good. It is often used as a
measure of market power, with values near 0 indicating a competitive market and values near 1 indicating a concentrated market.


                                                                   26
respectively. If we do not count lenders that originate less than five percent of a dealer's
loans, those numbers drop to 3.35 and 3, respectively. On average, we estimate lenders' cost

                                       Table 5: Lender Cost, Buyrate, Interest Rate

                                   Variable             Mean         P10     P25       P50       P75       P90
                                   Lender Cost           12.1        5.4      7.4      10.5     15.5      21.2
                                   Buy Rate               8.7        5.5      6.5       7.8      9.7      12.7
                                   Interest Rate          13         6.9      9.5      12.3     15.7      19.7
                                   Note: The table shows the lender cost, buy-rate, interest rate. All quantities
                                   are two-period interest rates expressed in percent.


of funds to be 12.1%. A complete overview of our lender cost estimates, buy rates and interest
rates is given in Table 5. Figure 3 depicts the estimated lender cost distribution together with
the observed distributions of interest rates and buy rates. Note that the distribution of buy
rates (except for very small values) stochastically dominates the distribution of lender costs.
Lenders anticipate dealer markups and are therefore willing to offer buy rates below cost.

                             Figure 3: CDFs of interest rates, buy rates, and lender costs.

                      1.00



                      0.75
          CDF Value




                      0.50



                      0.25
                                                                                              Buy rate
                                                                                              Interest Rate
                                                                                              Lender Cost
                      0.00
                             0.0                      0.1                        0.2                          0.3
                                                               Rate Value
         Note: This graph shows the CDFs of the interest rate, buy rate, and lender cost distributions.




9    Counterfactual Experiments

We present results from two different counterfactual experiments. We start by investigating
the market equilibrium under the assumption that buyer utility is equally responsive to finance
charges and vehicle charges, that is i = 0 i. We refer to this as the No Wedge counterfac-
tual. While this simulation does not directly reflect any feasible policy, it delineates how the
wedge in consumer preferences affects overall market outcomes. In a second counterfactual,

                                                                        27
we remove dealers' ability to mark up loans. The FCA has announced this policy will be
enacted in the U.K. in 2021; it is perhaps the most obvious policy to counteract the potential
adverse effects of dealer loan intermediation. Without dealer loan markups, lenders set the
final interest rates for consumers and dealers only determine the price of the car. We refer to
this as the no discretion counterfactual.
     We compare outcomes under these counterfactual experiments to the outcomes from our
estimated model, which we refer to as Baseline. Our main outcome measures will be the
effects on prices, consumer surplus, and producer surplus. To simplify the presentation of
our results and to make interest rates comparable across contracts with different term lengths,
we calculate total finance charges and show the implied two-period interest rate. We also
compute two different measures for consumer surplus. First, we assume that the estimated
^ i 's accurately reflect consumer preferences and compute average consumer surplus for all
scenarios under    ^ i . Second, we compare consumer surplus across scenarios under the pater-
nalistic welfare criterion that true preferences are given by i = 0 i. The latter measure of
consumer surplus is correct if consumers actually prefer to minimize total costs but fail to do
so because, for example, they believe that interest rates are non-negotiable.


9.1   No Wedge Counterfactual

The first counterfactual investigates the market equilibrium if all consumers are indifferent
between vehicle and finance charges. Comparing the estimated results from Baseline to the
counterfactual results under No Wedge allows us to analyze how the wedge in preferences
changes the market equilibrium. As in the previous sections, lenders compete to provide
loans in a second-price auction.
   In No Wedge total prices are on average $170 lower than in Baseline, a reduction of
0.55%. This overall effect is due to opposing changes in the two prices. On the one hand,
dealers increase average car prices from $27,071 to $27,524. On the other hand, final interest
rates decrease. In No Wedge dealers do not mark up loans since consumers fully respond to
finance charges. Lenders anticipate this behavior and so set higher buy rates than in Baseline,
but competition among lenders prevents buy rates (which are final interest rates without dealer
markups) from rising to the level of final interest rates in Baseline. As a result, two-period
interest rates fall from 12.61% to 9.99%.




                                              28
                                                         Table 6: Overview Counterfactual Results

                                                                                No                            No                            no discretion
                                                              Baseline         Wedge           %          Discretion             %          Compensated                %


     Panel A: Market Variables
     Average Total Price, p · (1 + r) ($)                       30,688         30,518         -0.55           30,406            -0.92             30,171              -1.68
     Average Car Price, p ($)                                   27,071         27,524          1.67           27,862            2.92              27,072                0
     Average Interest Rate (%)                                   12.61          9.99         -20.76            9.15             -27.4              11.7               -7.22
     Median Interest Rate (%)                                    11.16          8.84         -21.79            8.73            -20.87              11.24              0.63

     Panel B: Consumer Surplus
     Total Cons. Surplus, ^ (Billion $)                         41.54           42.23          1.67            41.79            0.62               43.23               4.08
29




     Total Cons. Surplus,  = 0 (Billion $)                      36.97           38.55          4.26            38.17            3.24               39.05               5.63

     Panel C: Profits
     Total Dealer Profits (Billion $)                            3.61            3.19        -11.58             3.48            -3.67               3.53              -2.15
     Total Lender Profits (Billion $)                            6.62            6.6          -0.3              5.57           -15.85               5.48             -17.21
     Note: This table shows results for the three different counterfactual scenarios. In scenario no wedge we set  = 0, which means that consumers treat all financial
     charges equally. In scenario no dealer discretion lenders set interest rates directly and dealers compete downstream in prices taking them as given. In scenario
     no dealer discretion compensated we compensate dealers for their lost revenue share through an increase in fixed payments from lenders to reduce a double
     marginalization effect. In all scenarios we compute consumer surplus under the assumption that the wedge reflects sup-optimal consumer decision maing ( = 0) and
     under the assumption that the wedge reflects true preferences ( =   ^ ). The first three rows (Total Price, Car Price, Interest Rate) are averages across all markets. The
     last four rows (Consumer Surplus and Dealer/Lender Profits) are totals over all markets.
   Due to the drop in total prices, under the paternalistic welfare criterion, consumer surplus
increases by 4.26%. Hence, eliminating the wedge in price sensitivities amplifies the com-
petitiveness of the market. To study this force in more detail, we compare demand elasticities
under baseline and No Wedge. For this purpose, we compute elasticities at the prices and
interest rates in Baseline. For comparability, it is necessary to take into account that dealers
split increases in the total price differently in the two scenarios. While dealers in Baseline
distribute total price increases across finance and car charges, in No Wedge they only in-
crease car prices. The corresponding demand elasticity is -3.7 under baseline and -4.08
under no wedge, a 10% decrease in demand elasticity. Partly, this result arises because fi-
nance charges depend also on vehicle prices, since an increase in the price of a vehicle leads
to increase in the loan amount. So making consumers more responsive to finance charges
also makes them more responsive to vehicle prices.
  Importantly, even if consumer utility is determined by    ^ i -- i.e. the wedge reflects con-
sumer preferences -- consumer surplus increases by 1.67%. It may seem counterintuitive
that consumers with preferences given by    ^ benefit if dealers acted as if their preferences
were given by  = 0 instead. One good way to understand this result is an analogy between
 in (6) and the price coefficient i in (7). Clearly, consumers would prefer firms to com-
pete as if their i were higher (in absolute value) than it actually is, because if they did the
market would be more competitive and prices would be lower. Just as increasing i would,
decreasing  makes the market more competitive and decreases total prices.
   The analogy between  and i is, however, not perfect. If consumers act as if  = 0 when
in fact  =  ^ , total prices are lower but the components of total prices are allocated subopti-
mally. The finding that lower total prices more than compensate consumers for suboptimally
allocated prices is a quantitative result. Thus the no wedge counterfactual increases con-
sumer surplus, even if consumer utility is determined by  ^ i . This result is important to under-
stand why consumer surplus also increases in the no discretion counterfactual, regardless
of whether we measure it assuming  =        ^ or  = 0.
  As we have pointed out, there is substantial heterogeneity in the wedge across consumers.
This heterogeneity maps to heterogeneous price effects of the counterfactual. Figure 4 shows
the change in total price by  quantile. The counterfactual total price change is largest for
consumers who previously had the highest . The counterfactual leads to a price increase of
about $130 for consumers with  in the bottom quartile, whereas for consumers in the highest
quartile total prices decrease by more than $400.
   These findings illustrate how dealers compete for heterogeneous consumers in our posted-
price setting. They offer low car prices to increase their market share, but only because they
anticipate substantial loan markup profit from consumers with large . no wedge eliminates
this cross subsidization, benefiting consumers with larger  and harming those with low .


                                               30
                           Figure 4: Price Effects of the No Wedge Scenario -decile.


                                                100


                      Total Price Change ($)
                                                  0
                                               -100
                                               -200
                                               -300
                                               -400
                                               -500
                                                      1        2              3                       4
                                                          Quartile of Consumer Wedge

Note: The figure shows the estimated price effect of the No Wedge counterfactual by  quartile. In the counterfactual, prices fall more for
consumers with larger wedges.




   The increase in consumer price elasticity lowers dealers' profits. Since total prices de-
crease, aggregate dealer surplus falls from $3.61 billion to $3.19 billion, an 11.58% reduc-
tion. Hence, dealer profits would fall substantially if consumers were to treat finance charges
and vehicle charges identically.


9.2       No Dealer Discretion Counterfactual

Next, in our key counterfactual, we explore what happens if dealers have no discretion to set
interest rates. In this counterfactual, lenders set final interest rates directly and dealers take
them as given. In line with the previous sections, we assume that lenders participate in a
second-price auction to issue loans, i.e. interest rates are equal to the second-lowest bid of Nd
bids, where Nd is the number of lenders that work with dealer d. To account for how contracts
between dealers and lenders may change in the long term without dealer loan markups, we
run two versions of this counterfactual. In the first, dealers receive no other payments from
lenders to compensate for the loss of dealer loan markup. In the second, lenders pay dealers
a fixed amount that fully compensates them for the loss of dealer loan markup. These two
versions of the counterfactual provide bounds for intermediate cases in which dealers receive
partial fixed compensation from lenders. We begin by describing the first version of the
counterfactual in which dealers are not compensated.
   Eliminating dealer discretion over loan prices has three important effects. First there is
an effect on competition, in line with the No Wedge counterfactual. If dealers cannot ad-
just interest rates, they have to compete for customers only through car prices. Therefore
they cannot attenuate competition by tailoring price bundles to specific consumer types. This

                                                                   31
effectively makes consumers more price-elastic and therefore reduces total prices. Note how-
ever, that the mechanism is slightly different between the two counterfactuals. In No Wedge
consumers are actually more price-elastic because their responsiveness to finance charges
changes. In no discretion consumers do not change but are still effectively more price-
elastic because dealers cannot tailor price bundles to consumer behavior. Conducting the
same comparison of elasticities as in Section 9.1, we find that consumers are about 10%
more price-elastic in No Discretion than in Baseline.
  Second, there is an information effect. In the model, lenders have less information about
consumers than dealers do and so they cannot price discriminate as effectively across con-
sumer types. To test empirically how much information lenders have about consumer wedges,
we estimate a fully-saturated regression model of markups, using virtually all information
that lenders have. The adjusted R2 is 0.11 (see Table 7). This finding suggests that lenders
have very little information about markups and therefore consumer wedges.43
   Since we assume that lenders compete in a second-price auction, our model makes the
extreme prediction that lenders base their bids only on cost-relevant consumer observables.
Consumer wedges do not affect lender costs, so lenders would not price discriminate at all.
This implicit assumption is in line with the evidence above that lenders have almost no in-
formation about consumer wedges, but it may be plausible that if dealer markups were elimi-
nated lenders would attempt to collect more data to price discriminate themselves. However,
lenders are not able to observe or interact with consumers directly, making it harder to gain
access to the same soft information that dealers have. In practice, the Equal Credit Op-
portunity Act and other government regulations place strong restrictions on the information
lenders can use to price loans. Overall, no discretion is best understood as a scenario in
which lenders are permitted from using such additional information.
   The information effect is illustrated by Figure 5, which shows a scatter plot together with
a bin-scatter plot of interest rates against the wedge parameter . Average interest rates
increase with consumer wedges in Baseline, but there is almost no relationship between the
two variables in no discretion. Thus the effects of the counterfactual are heterogeneous. As
in No Wedge, high- consumers benefit more than low- consumers if dealer discretion is
banned.
  There is also a third effect of eliminating dealer loan price discretion that results from the
change in dealers' vertical incentives. In baseline, both dealers and lenders profit from dealer
loan markups which effectively aligns their incentives. However, in no discretion, lenders
prefer that consumer surplus be extracted through high loan prices while dealers prefer that
    43 Our  counterfactual might underestimate the importance of the information effect since we collapse consumer types at the county
level whereas dealers can in practice tailor prices even more finely grained. Thus, consumers might on average benefit even more from
banning dealer price discretion than suggested by our counterfactual simulations. As we pointed out in our model discussion, one way to
capture richer dealer pricing would be to condition the demand model on subsets of .




                                                                 32
 Table 7: Regressions of observables on markup (new cars only)

                                                Loan               Loan               Loan
                                               Markup             Markup             Markup
Log Monthly Income                            -0.0158            -0.0242            -0.0176
                                               (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)
Log Car Price                                  0.166               0.397              0.357
                                               (0.006)             (0.007)            (0.007)
Credit score, 100 points                      -0.0989            -0.0840            -0.0860
                                               (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.003)
Mileage, Tens of Thousands                     0.0228             0.0286             0.0217
                                                (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.006)
Log Loan Amount                                -0.133             -0.241             -0.223
                                                (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.004)
Buy Rate                                      -0.0980             0.000952          -0.000826
                                               (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)
Model Fixed Effects                                Yes                Yes                Yes
Term Fixed Effects                                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Month-Year Fixed Effects                           Yes                Yes                Yes
Lender Fixed Effects                               No                 Yes                Yes
Zip Fixed Effects                                  No                 No                 Yes
Adjusted R2                                       .049                .08                .11
Note: The table shows three different regressions of dealer markup on customer observables that
are available to the lender at the time of the buy rate auction. Even though these regressions are
very saturated, only a small percent of the variation in markups can be explained by the independent
variables.




                                                33
        Figure 5: Scatter and Binscatter Plot of Interest Rate Change against -estimate




Note: The binscatter plot shows the Interest Rate in Baseline and no discretion against . The gray dots are the scatter points and the
white diamonds the binscatter points.




it be extracted through high car prices. Therefore, lenders increase buy rates from 8.7% in
Baseline to 9.15% in No Discretion. Dealers then maximize their profits taking these buy
rates (which, without dealer markups, are also the final interest rates) as given. This new
mismatch between dealer and lender incentives thus leads to higher total transaction prices
than if dealers set both prices. All else equal, this effect, which is reminiscent of double
marginalization, decreases consumer welfare relative to the baseline model.
   We find that the information and competition effect outweigh the double marginalization
effect. Results are presented in Table 6. no discretion leads to a decrease in the average total
price of $283, a 0.92% decrease. As a result, consumer surplus increases. Even if we measure
consumer welfare according to      ^ , consumer surplus increases by 0.62%. Hence, the increase
in the competitiveness of the market is strong enough such that consumers benefit even if
the wedge represents their true preferences. If we adopt the paternalistic welfare criterion,
consumer welfare increases by 3.24%. While the effect on consumer surplus is on average
positive, it varies substantially across different subgroups of the population. Consumers with
^ above the median experience a price decrease of $384 whereas prices for individuals with
a  ^ below the median decrease only by $182. For consumers that are equally responsive
to finance and car charges, the policy may even lead to an increase in prices--total prices
increase by $310 for consumers with an estimated        ^ in the lowest quartile. The size of the
wedge is correlated with the level of education as well as consumers' income (see Section 5.4
and Table A9). Hence, eliminating dealer discretion to price loans, also leads to redistributive
effects. While consumers with lower income and less education benefit on average, highly
educated consumers may in fact suffer from the policy.
   While no discretion assumed that contractual agreements between dealers and lenders

                                                                 34
are equivalent to those in Baseline, without dealer markups dealer-lender contracts might ad-
just to compensate dealers in other ways for intermediating loans. To illustrate how changes
in the agreements between lenders and dealers might affect our results, we also run the second
version of this counterfactual, which we call No Discretion compensated. This counter-
factual is identical to no discretion except for the fact that dealers receive an additional
fixed payment by lenders for every loan they originate. To derive an upper bound for how
readjustments of contracts may affect equilibrium prices, we assume that this payment on
average fully compensates dealers under the old equilibrium prices, which amounts to a $615
fixed payment per loan. Under this assumption, the effects on consumer surplus are consider-
ably stronger (see also Table 6). Consumer surplus would then increases by 4.08 percent and
5.63 percent with respect to the non-paternalistic and paternalistic welfare criterion, respec-
tively. In particular, this payment counteracts the quantity distortion as it induces dealers to
pass through some of this compensation to consumers in order to increase market share.



10     Conclusion

In this paper we evaluate a key institution at the heart of a key retail financial market, which
is the ability of dealers to directly price intermediated auto loans. Our analysis uses novel
comprehensive administrative data with detailed information on the arrangements between
lenders and dealers. Our analysis follows two steps. First we construct a measure of con-
sumers' differential responsiveness to loan and vehicle charges. Our measure only requires
that dealers set interest rate markups optimally but makes otherwise few assumptions on
conduct or consumer behavior. Instead, the estimation strategy exploits the incentives that
dealers face when they set interest rates. We find that consumers are significantly less re-
sponsive to finance charges than to car prices. Our analysis suggests that this wedge arises
due to suboptimal consumer behavior.
   We then study the equilibrium implication of dealers' loan price discretion by taking it
away in a counterfactual. For this purpose we use our first-stage estimates of consumers'
wedges in a differentiated-product model with Bertrand competition among dealers. In addi-
tion, we recover lender costs so we can model the interest rates set by lenders in this counter-
factual. Removing dealers' discretion to price loans in the model benefits consumers. This
result holds whether the wedge actually reflects true consumer preferences or suboptimal
choices. The key mechanism is that, without loan markups, dealers compete only on car
prices. Consumer demand is more elastic to car prices, so prices fall and consumers benefit.
   Our results highlight a broader issue in retail financial markets. To allow for risk adjust-
ment, many financial and insurance markets feature contract-specific pricing. However this
allows sellers to price attributes besides risk, to the disadvantage of some consumers. Al-


                                              35
though the Equal Credit Opportunity Act limits the attributes that can formally be used to
price loans, in practice these limits may be less useful in situations in which buyers and sell-
ers negotiate. Our results suggest that there is wide dispersion in consumer responsiveness to
interest rates and that many consumers leave money on the table. Dealers are able to use this
dispersion to their advantage.
   While the considerable size of the auto market makes it a worthy subject of investigation
in and of itself, there are many other markets in which products are sold along with financial
contracts. For example, durables are often offered with extended warranties and installment
plans and flights are sold with travel insurance. How the intermediation of financial contracts
by sales agents affects consumer choices and welfare is therefore of broad interest. Our
results indicate that this "dual role" of sales agents can hurt consumers by attenuating price
competition in the respective markets.




                                              36
References
Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2011). Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: evidence
  from plan choice in the medicare part d program. American Economic Review, 101 (4),
  1180­1210.

Abito, J. M. and Salant, Y. (2017). The Effect of Product Misperception on Economic
  Outcomes: Evidence from the Extended Warranty Market. Tech. rep., mimeo, University
  of Pennsylvania.

Adams, W., Einav, L. and Levin, J. (2009). Liquidity constraints and imperfect information
 in subprime lending. The American Economic Review, 99 (1), 49­84.

Alexandrov, A. and Koulayev, S. (2018). No shopping in the u.s. mortgage market: Di-
  rect and strategic effects of providing information. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
  Office of Research Working Paper, 2017 (1).

Allen, J., Clark, R. and Houde, J.-F. (2013). The Effect of Mergers in Search Market:
  Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage Industry. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

---, --- and --- (2014). Price dispersion in mortgage markets. The Journal of Industrial Eco-
   nomics, 62 (3), 377­416.

Argyle, B., Nadauld, T. and Palmer, C. (2019). Monthly payment targeting and the
  demand for maturity. Working Paper.

---, ---, --- and Pratt, R. (2018). The capitalization of consumer financing into durable goods
   prices. Working Paper.

Attanasio, O., Goldberg, P. and Kyriazidou, E. (2008). Credit constraints in the market
  for consumer durables: Evidence from micro data on car loans. International Economic
  Review, 49 (2), 401­436.

Ausubel, L. M. (1991). The failure of competition in the credit card market. The American
  Economic Review, pp. 50­81.

Benetton, M., Gavazza, A. and Surico, P. (2019). Mortgage Pricing and Monetary Pol-
  icy. Tech. rep., working paper.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J. and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 841­890.

Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The
  RAND Journal of Economics, pp. 242­262.

                                              37
Bhattacharya, V., Illanes, G. and Padi, M. (2019). Fiduciary duty and the market for
  financial advice. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bhutta, N., Fuster, A. and Hizmo, A. (2019). Paying too much? price dispersion in the
  us mortgage market. Working Paper.

Biglaiser, G., Li, F., Murry, C. and Zhou, Y. (2019). Intermediaries and product quality
  in used car markets. Available at SSRN 3003562.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer, A. (2012). Salience theory of choice under risk.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3), 1243­1285.

---, --- and --- (2013). Salience and consumer choice. Journal of Political Economy, 121 (5),
   803­843.

Brown, J. and Jansen, M. (2019). Consumer protection laws in auto lending. Working
  Paper.

Center for Responsible Lending, C. f. A. R., Consumer Federation of Amer-
  ica, Safety, N. C. L. C., National Association of Consumer Advocates and
  of La Raza, N. C. (2012). Comments to the federal trade commission: Motor vehicle
  roundtables - project number p104811.

CFPB (2016). Consumer voices on automobile financing.

Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and
  reduced-form methods. Annu. Rev. Econ., 1 (1), 451­488.

---, Looney, A. and Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence. Ameri-
   can economic review, 99 (4), 1145­77.

Cohen, M. A. (2012). Imperfect competition in auto lending: Subjective markup, racial
  disparity, and class action litigation. Review of Law and Economics, 8 (1), 21­58.

Collard-Wexler, A., Gowrisankaran, G. and Lee, R. S. (2014). "nash-in-nash" bar-
  gaining: a microfoundation for applied work.

Davis, D. (2012). Auto loans: The state of lending in America and its impact on U.S. house-
 holds. mimeo: Center for Responsible Lending.

DellaVigna, S. (2018). Structural behavioral economics. mimeo.

Egan, M. (2018). Brokers vs. retail investors: Conflicting interests and dominated products.
  Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.


                                             38
---, Matvos, G. and Seru, A. (2019). The market for financial adviser misconduct. Journal
   of Political Economy, 127 (1), 233­295.

Einav, L., Jenkins, M. and Levin, J. (2012). Contract pricing in consumer credit markets.
  Econometrica, 80 (4), 1387­1432.

---, --- and --- (2013). The impact of credit scoring on consumer lending. The RAND Journal
   of Economics, 44 (2), 249­274.

Ellison, G. (2005). A model of add-on pricing. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  120 (2), 585­637.

--- and Ellison, S. F. (2009). Search, obfuscation, and price elasticities on the internet.
   Econometrica, 77 (2), 427­452.

FCA (2019). Motor finance discretionary commission models and consumer credit commis-
  sion disclosure. Consultation Paper CP19/28.

Gabaix, X. and Laibson, D. (2006). Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information
 suppression in competitive markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2), 505­
 540.

Gavazza, A., Lizzeri, A. and Roketskiy, N. (2014). A quantitative analysis of the used-car
 market. American Economic Review, 104 (11), 3668­3700.

Gaynor, M. and Town, R. J. (2011). Competition in health care markets. In Handbook of
 health economics, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 499­637.

Grubb, M. D. (2015). Behavioral consumers in industrial organization: An overview. Re-
  view of Industrial Organization, 47 (3), 247­258.

--- and Osborne, M. (2015). Cellular service demand: Biased beliefs, learning, and bill
   shock. American Economic Review, 105 (1), 234­71.

Guerre, E., Perrigne, I. and Vuong, Q. (2000). Optimal nonparametric estimation of first-
  price auctions. Econometrica, 68 (3), 525­574.

Guiso, L., Pozzi, A., Tsoy, A., Gambacorta, L. and Mistrulli, P. E. (2018). The cost
  of steering in financial markets: Evidence from the mortgage market. Available at SSRN
  2951042.

Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When
 nudging hurts. American Economic Review, 103 (7), 2643­82.



                                            39
Horn, H. and Wolinsky, A. (1988). Bilateral monopolies and incentives for merger. The
 RAND Journal of Economics, pp. 408­419.

Hortacsu, A., Madanizadeh, S. A. and Puller, S. L. (2017). Power to choose? an anal-
 ysis of consumer inertia in the residential electricity market. American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 9 (4), 192­226.

Koszegi, B. and Szeidl, A. (2012). A model of focusing in economic choice. The Quarterly
 journal of economics, 128 (1), 53­104.

Laibson, D., Maxted, P., Repetto, A. and Tobacman, J. (2015). Estimating discount
  functions with consumption choices over the lifecycle.

Lal, R. and Matutes, C. (1994). Retail pricing and advertising strategies. Journal of Busi-
  ness, pp. 345­370.

Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O. (2014). The economic importance of financial literacy: The-
  ory and evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 52 (1), 5­44.

Mackowiak, B., Matejka, F. and Wiederholt, M. (2018). Rational inattention: A disci-
 plined behavioral model. Working Paper.

Madrian, B. C., Beshears, J., J.Choi, J. and Laibson, D. (forthcoming). Behavioral
 Economics and Household Finance, Elsevier.

Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2016). Household debt and defaults from 2000 to 2010: The credit
 supply view. evidence and innovation in housing law and policy, p. 257.

Morton, F. S., Zettelmeyer, F. and Silva-Risso, J. (2001). Internet car retailing. The
 Journal of Industrial Economics, 49 (4), 501­519.

---, --- and --- (2003). Consumer information and discrimination: Does the internet affect
   the pricing of new cars to women and minorities? Quantitative marketing and Economics,
   1 (1), 65­92.

Murry, C. (2017). Advertising in vertical relationships: An equilibrium model of the auto-
 mobile industry.

Nevo, A. (2000). A practitioner's guide to estimation of random-coefficients logit models of
  demand. Journal of economics & management strategy, 9 (4), 513­548.

Nurski, L. and Verboven, F. (2016). Exclusive dealing as a barrier to entry? evidence from
  automobiles. The Review of Economic Studies, 83 (3), 1156­1188.



                                            40
Pakes, A., Porter, J., Ho, K. and Ishii, J. (2015). Moment inequalities and their applica-
  tion. Econometrica, 83 (1), 315­334.

Reynolds, C. E. and Cox, S. E. (2020). Buckle up: Navigating auto sales and financing.

Robles-Garcia, C. (2019). Competition and incentives in mortgage markets: The role of
  brokers. Working Paper.

Salz, T. (2017). Intermediation and competition in search markets: An empirical case study.

Schlagenhauf, D. and Ricketts, L. (2016). The quarterly debt monitor: Trends in con-
  sumer debts in st. louis, little rock, louisville, memphis­and beyond. In the Balance.

Sims, C. (2006). Rational inattention: Beyond the linear-quadratic case. The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96 (2), 158­163.

Stango, V., Yoong, J. and Zinman, J. (2017). Quicksand or Bedrock for Behavioral Eco-
  nomics? Assessing Foundational Empirical Questions. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Sullivan, M. W., Jones, M. T. and Reynolds, C. L. (2020). The auto buyer study:
  Lessons from in-depth consumer interviews and related research.

Verboven, F. (1999). Product line rivalry and market segmentation-with an application to
  automobile optional engine pricing. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 47 (4), 399­425.

Woodward, S. E. and Hall, R. E. (2010). Consumer confusion in the mortgage market:
 Evidence of less than a perfectly transparent and competitive market. American Economic
 Review, 100 (2), 511­15.

--- and --- (2012). Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal shopping effort: Theory
   and mortgage-market evidence. American Economic Review, 102 (7), 3249­3276.




                                            41
                                                   Appendix

A       Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1

To solve the maximization problem in (1), ignore the second constraint and the constraint that pi  0
such that it becomes:

                                       max pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - ci
                                       ri , pi

                                       s.t. - i pi - (i pi - i )ri  u
                                                                    ¯i

                                                 ri  bi .

Any solution to this problem clearly fulfills its constraint with equality. Therefore, we can rewrite this
problem to be:
                         ri i - u¯i   ri i - u
                                             ¯i
                max -               +           - i (ri - bi ) +  - ci                   ri  bi
                  ri    (1 + ri )i     1 + ri
The derivative with respect to ri is:
                               i + u ¯i      i + u¯i                     i + u
                                                                             ¯i
                                          +            · (ri - bi ) ·  -        0
                             (1 + ri ) i (1 + ri )
                                      2              2                   1 + ri
                                  1
                                      + (ri - bi ) - (1 + ri )  0
                                  i
                              1  (1 + bi ) · i

Whenever the last equation is fulfilled, the derivative is negative such that the optimal solution features
ri = bi , which corresponds to a zero markup. Also note that the derived price is positive because
 ¯ i |  i is assumed for all i. Hence, the constraint pi  0 is fulfilled. Finally, consider the second
|u
constraint. It will be fulfilled if:

                                   -bi (i pi - i )  -(i pi - i )E[r L ] - si ,

which is trivially fulfilled for bi  E[r L ]. If in contrast, bi > E[r L ], we get that the second constraint is
fulfilled if:
                                                 si           1
                                        p               + i
                                            ri - E[r ]L       i
                                           ri i - u¯i         si           1
                                                                       + i
                                          (1 + ri )i     ri - E[r ]L        i
                                                              ¯
                                                              u i +  i
                                          si  E[r L ] - bi              .                                  (15)
                                                              1 + bi


                                                            42
As long as (15) holds, we will thus get that ri = bi for any optimal offer by the dealer. Finally,
suppose that there is an optimal offer featuring ri > bi and (15) being not satisfied such that we have:
                         ¯ i +i
si < (E[r L ] - bi )     u
                         1+bi     . From the proof of Proposition 2, we know that for any solution with ri > bi
the first constraint will be binding. Then from the arguments above it can not be the case that only
the first constraint is binding, because ri = bi would be optimal. Hence, both constraints have to be
binding. Then, we get
                                                ri i - u¯i          si          1
                                           pi =            =                + i
                                               (1 + ri )i               L
                                                               ri - E[r ]        i
                                                     ri - E[r L ]
                                             si = -               (i + u
                                                                       ¯ i)
                                                        1 + ri
                                                                         ¯ i +i                          ri -E[r L ]
This however, is a contradiction to si < E[r L ] - bi                    u
                                                                         1+bi            ¯ i | > i and
                                                                                   , as |u                  1+ri       is increasing in ri .
As a consequence, even if (15) does not hold, there cannot be an optimal offer featuring ri > bi , which
concludes the proof.



Proof of Proposition 2

First note that the optimal solution to the maximization problem in (1) will, in this case, satisfy at
least one of its constraints with equality. Otherwise the dealer could increase pi and thereby increase
profits. In the first step of the proof we argue that if the second constraint is binding at the optimum
the first one is also binding. For this purpose, suppose in contradiction that there exists an optimal
solution (ri > bi , pi > 0) such that only the second constraint binds. Then (ri , pi ) is a maximizer of:
                                                                                



   max L = pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - ci +
   pi ,ri

                                                       µ Mi (ri (i pi - i )) -              Mi ((i pi - i )i r L )gi (r L )dr L - si

Leading to the following first order conditions:
            dL
                 = 1 + i (ri - bi ) + µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri -     Mi ((i pi - i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L = 0
            d pi
            dL
                 = (i pi - i ) + µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(i pi - i ) = 0
            dri
Since both of these hold in equilibrium we get
                                  1 + i (ri - bi )                                             
                                                                                   =
    M (ri (i pi - i ))i ri -           Mi ((i pi -   i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L       Mi (ri (i pi - i ))

   Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(1 + i (ri - bi )) = ( Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri -                       Mi ((i pi - i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L )

   Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(1 - i bi ) = -                 Mi ((i pi - i )r L )r L i gi (r L )dr L


                                                                   43
The last equality cannot be fulfilled since the left hand side is positive but the right hand side is
negative, which establishes the contradiction.

  Using the insights from the first step, there are only two possibilities left, either both constraints are
binding or only the first one is. Suppose only the first one is binding such that the optimal solution to
the maximization problem in (1) maximizes:

                                   max pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - ci
                                    pi ,ri

                                     s.t. - i pi - Mi ((i pi - i )ri ) = u
                                                                         ¯i

                                             ri > bi , pi  0

The corresponding Lagrange function is given by:

               max L = pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - c + µ (¯
                                                              ui + i pi + Mi (ri (i pi - i ))) ,
               pi ,ri

leading to the following first order conditions:
                         dL
                              = 1 + i (ri - bi ) + µ i + Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri = 0
                         d pi
                         dL
                              = (i pi - i ) + µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(i pi - i ) = 0
                         dri
Since both of these hold in equilibrium we get:
                                    1 + i (ri - bi )                  
                                                            =
                                i + Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri   Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
                                                             i
                                 Mi (ri (i pi - i )) =
                                                         1 - i bi
In particular, any solution to the problem in which only the first constraint is binding will satisfy this
equation. Next suppose that both constraints are binding. In this case, the corresponding Lagrange
function is:

                        L = pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - c

                         +µ      Mi ((i pi - i )r L )gi (r L )dr L + si - Mi (ri (i pi - i ))

                         +  (-u
                              ¯ i - i pi - Mi (ri (i pi - i )))

Then from the Kuhn-Tucker Theorem, we know that there exists  > 0 and µ > 0 such that the
following two equations are fulfilled:
         dL
              = 1 + i (ri - bi ) + µ          Mi ((i pi - i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L - Mi (ri (i pi - i ))ri i
         d pi
         +  -i - Mi ((i pi - i )ri )i ri = 0
         dL
             = (i pi - i ) - µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(i pi - i ) -  Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(i pi - i ) = 0
         dri

                                                          44
From the second equation, we get:
                                                  - µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
                                                                          =
                                                   Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
Substituting this into the first equation yields:

           1 + i (ri - bi ) + µ           Mi ((i pi - i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L - Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri

              - µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
           +                           -i - Mi ((i pi - i )ri )ri i = 0
               Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
                                                                      - µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
            1 - i bi + µ Mi ((i pi - i )r L )i r L gi (r L )dr L - i                          =0
                                                                        Mi (ri (i pi - i ))
                     i bi + M (ri (  i
                                    i pi -i )) - 1
           µ=                    i

              i + Mi ((i pi - i )r L )r L i gi (r L )dr L
                                           i 
since µ is positive i bi +         Mi (ri (i pi -i ))   - 1 > 0 holds, which is equivalent to the statement that
                          i 
Mi (ri (i pi - i )) <   1-i bi .




Proof of Proposition 3

For the first part assume that Mi ( x)  1  x. Let ri > bi , pi > 0 be the optimal offer. Denote by p
                                                                                                   ~i
the price that is optimal for the dealer given that he offers ri = bi . Note first that p
                                                                                        ~ i > pi holds. In
particular, both constraints in (1) have to be slack if ri = bi and pi = pi . Thus, the dealer can profit
                                     ~ i > p
from increasing the price and we get p      i . As a consequence, the first constraint in (1) will also be
binding at bi , p
                ~ i . To see this, recall that the first constraint is binding at ri , pi due to Proposition 2. We
therefore get:

                    ¯ i + i p 
                    u         i = - Mi ((i p - i )ri )  -
                                            
                                                                     Mi ((i pi - i )r )gi (r )dr - si .
                                                                                     L      L   L


   ~ i > p
As p      i,

 ¯ i + i p
 u            ¯ i + i p
         ~i > u        i -          Mi ((i pi - i )r )gi (r )dr - si  -
                                                    L      L   L
                                                                                             ~ i - i )r L )gi (r L )dr L - si .
                                                                                      Mi ((i p

                                                                                ~ i and p
Thus the second constraint is slack and the first one has to be binding. Hence, p        i are given by:

                                             - i p
                                                 ~ i - Mi ((i p
                                                              ~ i - i )bi ) = u
                                                                              ¯i

                                             - i pi - Mi ((i p - i )ri ) = u
                                                              
                                                                           ¯ i.

The optimal offer has to imply a weakly higher profit than offering ri = bi . Hence,

               pi + (i p - i )(ri - bi ) +  - ci  p
                                                  ~ i +  - ci
                                
                                                                                                                           (16)
                     ¯ i - Mi ((i
                    -u              p   - i )ri )                                   ¯ i - Mi ((i p
                                                                                   -u            ~ i - i )bi )
                                                        + (i pi - i )(r - bi ) 
                                                                       
                                i                                                              i
                  Mi (( pi - i )ri ) - Mi (( p
                                             ~ i - i )bi )  i (i pi - i )(ri - bi )
                                                                           




                                                                45
           ~ i  p
Using that p     i , we therefore get that:

        (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - Mi ((i pi - i )ri ) - M ((i pi - i )bi )
                                                             


         = (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - Mi ((i pi - i )ri ) - M ((i p
                                           
                                                               ~ i - i )bi )

         + Mi ((i p
                  ~ i - i )bi ) - M ((i pi - i )bi )

          (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - i (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - Mi ((i p
                                                 
                                                                   ~ i - i )bi ) - M ((i pi - i )bi )

          (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - i (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) - ((i p
                                                 
                                                                ~ i - i )bi - (i pi - i )bi )

         = (i pi - i )ri - (i p
                              ~ i - i )bi - i (i pi - i )(r - bi ),
                                                           
                                                                                                           (17)

where the last inequality follows from the fact that M ( x)  1  x. Moreover, (16) implies that:

                          pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - ci  p
                                                              ~ i +  - ci
                                            


                           bi [i pi - i + i (i pi - i )(ri - bi )]  [i p
                                                         
                                                                       ~ i - i ]bi

Substituting this into (17) yields:

            (i pi - i )ri - (i pi - i )bi - ( Mi ((i pi - i )ri ) - Mi ((i pi - i )bi ))
                                                                            


             (i pi - i )ri - bi [i pi - i + i (i pi - i )(ri - bi )] - i (i pi - i )(ri - bi )
                                                                                      


            = (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) [1 - i bi  - i ] ,

which concludes the proof of the first part of the proposition. Part (ii) of the proposition follows from
Proposition 2 and the assumed convexity of M . In particular, convexity implies that:

                         M ((i pi - i )ri ) - Mi (0)  Mi ((i pi - i )ri )(i pi - i )ri
                                                                             

                               i 
                                      (i p i -i )ri
                            1 - i bi
Which implies that a lower bound for the finance charges that agents do not respond to is given by:

                                                            i 
  (i pi - i )ri - Mi ((i pi - i )ri )  (i pi - i )ri -
                                           
                                                                  (i pi - i )ri =
                                                         1 - i bi
                                                                                                       i 
                                                                                (i pi - i )ri 1 -
                                                                                                    1 - i bi



B     Explanations for Differential Price Responsiveness

B.1     Time Structure

In this section, we argue that the time structure of payments is unlikely to explain our results. For
this purpose, we first show that a model with multiple periods would yield the same estimates for

                                                       46
consumers' differential price responsiveness. Second, we show how our estimates would change if car
dealers were to require a fixed fraction of the car price as the down payment.


B.1.1     A Multi-Period Model with Exogenous Down Payment

In this subsection, we assume that consumer preferences are defined over T periods, where T is the
loan term in months. We still maintain Assumption 1 from Section 4.1 that consumer utility is additive
in the disutility of the car price p and the disutility of finance charges Mi ( x). We further assume that
the within-period utility function is stable over time and that utility is additive across periods, which
are both standard assumptions in multi-period models.

  Suppose consumer i has down payment i and discounts utility from month t by i
                                                                              t . We allow t to
                                                                                           i

vary with i and t in an arbitrary way. Since auto loans fully amortize, consumer i's total loan payments
will be
                                      ri (1 + r)T
                               T·                  (i pi - i )  (1 + r
                                                                     ^i )(i pi - i ),
                                    (1 + ri )T - 1
which equals T times the monthly loan payment. r
                                               ^ denotes the fraction of the loan amount that is due
in interest rate charges over the term of the loan, which is equivalent to the two-period interest rate
that we use in the main part of the paper.

  First, consider Proposition 1. If Mi ( x) = x, then consumer utility is given by:
                         T
                                                             T       
                            i                                      i
              u = -i -       t
                                (1 + r
                                     ^i )(i pi - i ) = -i -        t
                                                                      · (1 + r^i )(i pi - i )
                                                                     
                                                                     
                            T                                     T
                                                                     
                        t=1                                  t=1

Hence, consumer utility is the same as in the one-period model except for multiplication by a constant
and the addition of an exogenous variable. Therefore, we can redefine the utility of the outside option
such that the maximization problem is identical to the one in Section 4.1. In particular, the dealer's
marginal incentives to allocate charges to the vehicle or the loan do not change and none of the relevant
calculations are affected. Therefore Proposition 1 holds in this multi-period model.

  The same argument also holds for the proof of Proposition 2. In our multi-period model, consumer
utility is given by:
               T
                                                                 T      
                    i                                                 i
  u = -i -           t
                       (i pi - i ) + Mi ((i pi - i )^
                                                    ri ) = -i -       t
                                                                         · (i pi - i ) + Mi ((i pi - i )^
                                                                        
                                                                                                        ri )
                                                                        
                    T                                                T
                                                                        
              t=1                                                t=1

Hence, consumer utility again is the same as in the one-period model except for multiplication by a
constant and the addition of an exogenous variable. We can therefore redefine the outside option and
end up with the same maximization problem for the dealer. Therefore, since our estimates for Mi (·),

                                                        47
BO        M                  ¯ i , they are not affected by intertemporal considerations if the down
 i , and Bi do not depend on u
payment is independent of the allocation of charges. Section B.1.2 examines our estimates if a larger
car price causes a larger down payment.


B.1.2       Multi-Period Model with Down Payment as Fixed Fraction of Price

If a larger car price causes a larger down payment, intertemporal preferences could affect our results.
Suppose, for example, the down payment is a fixed percentage of the car price. In this case, impatient
or credit-constrained consumers may prefer to pay more for the loan to reduce the car price and
hence the down payment. Figure A1 shows the distribution of down payments as a fraction of the
car price. This figure, together with our discussions with industry experts, reveal that down payments
for prime consumers are generally not determined in this way.44 Variation of the relative size of the
down payment is large and a marginal increase in the car price does not appear to increase the down
payment.

                 Figure A1: Distribution of Down Payment as a Fraction of Car Price
                             15
                             10
                       Percent
                             5
                             0




                                  -.5                        0                          .5                         1
                                           Down payment as a fraction of price

Note: The figure shows the distribution of down payment as a fraction of the car price. The down payment is the price of the car minus the
loan amount. Down payments can be negative if upfront fees, vehicle add-ons, or other costs are included in the loan. The figure shows that
consumers in our data do not appear to be required to provide a specific fraction of the car price as a down payment.


    44 Down   payment requirements are often nonbinding for prime consumers. When they are nonzero, they are typically related to the
collateral value, not its price, because collateral value is what affects both the consumer's default decision and what the lender can recover
if the consumer does default.




                                                                     48
   Still, we break down our estimates by the size of the down payment in Table A2. We find a consid-
erable wedge between car and loan price sensitivities across the entire distribution of down payments.
In particular, the wedge is substantial for zero and negative down payments, for which time prefer-
ences cannot explain any of our estimates. The median BO
                                                       i for consumers in the 10th to 25th percentile
of the down payment distribution is $630 while it is $563 for consumers between the 75th and 90th
percentile. Overall, these results show that intertemporal preferences and credit constraints cannot
explain the substantial dealer markups in our data.

   To further address this point, we recompute Mi (·) under the (evidently counterfactual) assumption
that dealers require a down payment that is a fixed percentage of the car price, conditional on various
discount factors for the consumer.45 The results are summarized in Table A1. Recall that we are
restricting our sample to individuals with credit scores above 720. Hence, the sample consists of
individuals that are unlikely to be either impatient or credit constrained and therefore should have
reasonably high discount factors. Our results show quantitatively that even if the down payment were
a fixed fraction of the price, our estimates would barely change for discount factors above 0.90.

                          Table A1: Estimates if Down Payments Are a Fraction of
                          the Car Price

                                                        Mean          p10        p25       p50        p75        p90

                          M with  = 1                    0.80        0.64       0.69       0.84       0.89       0.93
                          M with  = 0.98                 0.80        0.64       0.69       0.84       0.89       0.92
                          M with  = 0.95                 0.81        0.66       0.70       0.85       0.91       0.94
                          M with  = 0.90                 0.84        0.67       0.73       0.86       0.94       0.98
                          M with  = 0.6                  1.08        0.73       0.87       1.03       1.27       1.51
                          Note: Table shows percentiles of the distribution of estimated M , assuming that down
                          payments are a fixed fraction of the car price and loan term length varies as in the data, but
                          all consumers have an annual discount factor equal to the given value of .



   The estimates in Table A1 are derived as follows. We make all the assumptions on preferences
across time made in Section B.1.1. To derive a specific formula for M we can take to the data, we
further assume consumers discount the future at exponential rate . We assume that the down payment
t is given by i pt , where   (0, 1) is an exogenous fraction. Moreover, we assume that the down
payment is due immediately while all other payments are financed by a fully amortizing loan.
    45 In   doing so we first compute the fraction of the price that is equal to the observed down payment. We then assume that the dealer
would require this fraction for any car price.



                                                                       49
    Figure A2: 10th , 50th , and 90th Percentiles of M , BO        M
                                                          i , and Bi by Down Payment Tercile




                                 1
                                 .8
                                 .6
                                 .4
                                 .2
                                 0




                                               P10                   P50                   P90

                                                     Down Payment <=0               Bottom Tercile
                                                     Middle Tercile                 Top Tercile
                                 800
                                 600
                                 400
                                 200
                                 0




                                               P10                   P50                   P90

                                                     Down Payment <=0               Bottom Tercile
                                                     Middle Tercile                 Top Tercile
                                 250
                                 200
                                 150
                                 100
                                 50
                                 0




                                               P10                   P50                   P90

                                                     Down Payment <=0               Bottom Tercile
                                                     Middle Tercile                 Top Tercile



Note: For different downpayment catagories the figure shows the 10th , 50th , and 90th percentiles of M , BO        M
                                                                                                           i , and Bi in the upper, middle,
and lower panel, respectively. The first down payment category consists of observations with zero or negative down payments. The
other three down payment categories are terciles of down payment relative to the price of the vehicle, for observations with positive down
payments. M and BO
                 i are only defined for the 77.8 percent of observations with positive markups. The figure shows that the distribution of
our estimates vary little with down payment.




                                                                   50
                                                                            ri       r   T
                                                                                 1+ 12
                                                                                     i
                                                     ^i =
  Denote by T the term of the loan in months, and by r                      12
                                                                                 r   T        T - 1 the fraction of the payment
                                                                             1+ 12
                                                                                 i       -1
that is due to finance charges if the yearly interest rate is ri . Consumer utility is then given by:

                   T
                         j
  u = -i pi -              (1 - )i pi + Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                                                       ^i ) =
                   j=1
                         T
                                                                           - T +1
                                                               - i pi -           (1 - )i pi + Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                                                                                                              ^i )
                                                                          (1 - )T

The car dealer's optimization problem then becomes:

                         max pi + (1 - )i pi (^    ^ i ) +  - ci
                                              ri - b
                         ^i , pi
                         r

                                                 - T +1
                          s.t. - i pi -                 (1 - )i pi + Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                                                                                    ^i )  u
                                                                                          ¯
                                                (1 - )T
                                   - Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                                                    ^i )  -                         ^ L )g(r L ) - si ,
                                                                     Mi ((1 - )i pi r

                                   ri , pi  0

With the same arguments as above, we can concentrate on the case where the first constraint is binding,
but the second not. The Lagrangian is then given by:

                                                                         - T +1
  L = pi + (1 - )i pi (^    ^ i ) +  - ci + µ u
                       ri - b                 ¯ + i pi +                        (1 - )i pi + Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                                                                                                            ^i ) .
                                                                        (1 - )T

The derivatives are given by:

      dL                      - T +1
           = (1 - )i pi  + µ          M ((1 - )i pi r
                                                    ^i )i pi (1 - )
      dr^i                   (1 - )T i
      dL                                       - T +1
           = 1 + (1 - )(^
                        ri - bi )i  + µ i +              i (1 - ) + Mi ((1 - ) pi i r
                                                                                    ^i )i r
                                                                                          ^i (1 - ) .
      d pi                                    (1 - )T

Since both have to equal to zero simultaneously, we get:

                                                       1 + (1 - )(^
                                                                  ri - bi )i 
                                   =
  -T +1                                      -T +1
  (1-)T Mi ((1 -    ) p i i r
                            ^i )       i +   (1-)T   i (1 - ) + Mi ((1 - )i pi r   ri (1 - )i
                                                                               ^i )^
      - T +1                                                                                                        - T +1
                Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                               ^i ) [1 + (1 - )i (^
                                                  ri - bi ) - (1 - )i r
                                                                      ^i ] =  i  + (1 - )i
      (1 - )T                                                                                                      (1 - )T
                                                        T +1
                                   i   + (1 - )  -
                                                (1-)T
   Mi ((1 - )i pi r
                  ^i ) =
                                   -T +1
                                   (1-)T   1 - i (1 - )b
                                                       ^i


B.2     Early Prepayment Risk

Consumers often prepay auto loans, either by trading in their vehicle for a new one, by prepaying
in cash, or (less commonly) through refinancing. The potential effects of prepayment on our results

                                                                51
depends on when it occurs. Contracts between dealers and lenders include a "clawback" period,
typically the first three to six months of the loan, during which the dealer bears prepayment risk. If
the consumer prepays during the clawback period, the dealer refunds the entire dealer reserve to the
lender. Otherwise, the dealer keeps the dealer reserve. We define "early" prepayment as prepayment
that occurs during the clawback period and "late" prepayment as prepayment that occurs after it.

  First, we explore the role of early prepayment. Early prepayment is not uncommon; in a sample of
prime auto loans in the CCP, 5.7 percent are prepaid within the first 120 days. To account for this, we
add to our baseline model an early prepayment probability (1 - ). Hence, the dealer's maximization
problem becomes:

                     max pi + (i pi - i ) · (ri - bi ) ·  ·  - c                                    (18)
                     ri , pi

                      s.t. - i · pi -  · Mi ((i pi - i ) · ri )  -u
                                                                  ¯i

                               -  · Mi ((i pi - i ) · ri )  - · Mi ((i pi - i ) · riE ) - si ,

                               ri , pi  0

This problem can be solved along the same lines as the one in Proposition 2. On the one hand, the
consumer is now less sensitive to interest rates so the dealer has a stronger incentive to mark up the
loan. On the other hand, the dealer values markups less because he may not keep the dealer reserve.
The following corollary shows that the latter effect dominates. As a consequence, our estimates for
Mi (·) are upper bounds because they do not account for early prepayment risk.

Corollary 1. Suppose that consumer i repays the loan early with probability 1-. Then, the statements
from Proposition 2 hold true with the only change that:

                                                                   · i
                                   Mi (ri · (i · pi - i ))                     .
                                                              1 -  · i ·  · bi

Proof. With the same arguments developed in the proof of Proposition 2, we know that either only
the first one or both constraints are binding at the optimum. If only the first constraint is binding, we
get the following Lagrange function:

           max L = pi + (i pi - i )(ri - bi ) +  - c + µ (¯
                                                          ui + i pi +  Mi (ri (i pi - i )))
            pi ,ri

Leading to the following first order conditions:

                      dL
                           = 1 + i (ri - bi ) + µ i +  Mi (ri (i pi - i ))i ri = 0
                      d pi
                      dL
                           = (i pi - i ) + µ Mi (ri (i pi - i ))(i pi - i ) = 0
                      dri

                                                        52
Since both of these hold in equilibrium we get:
                                1 + i (ri - bi )                     
                                                          =
                            i +  Mi (ri (i pi -  i )) i i
                                                       r    M  ( r  ( p -  ))
                                                              i i i i     i
                                                          i 
                             Mi (ri (i pi - i )) =
                                         
                                                      1 - i bi
If both constraints are binding, we can again use the same arguments as in the proof of Proposition 2
to show that:
                                                               i 
                                    Mi (ri (i pi - i )) <
                                                            1 - i bi




B.3     Late Prepayment Risk

Lenders bear all prepayment risk after the end of the clawback period. If borrowers consider late
prepayment when buying a car and if dealers can screen "late" prepayers from "early" prepayers, then
the logic outlined in B.2 does not hold, and borrowers may appear less sensitive to finance charges
because they expect not to pay them. Late prepayment risk is substantial and so this is an important
concern; 27.0 percent of prime auto loans (with term greater than two years) in the CCP are prepaid
after 120 days but before two years.

  To create a proxy for late prepayment risk, we run a logit regression predicting late prepayment
in the CCP, using credit score, log loan amount, loan length, and state fixed effects. Coefficients are
reported in Table A2. This is clearly a limited subset of the information available to both the borrower
and the dealer, and yet it is remarkably predictive. 18.3 percent of those in the bottom decile of
predicted risk prepay late, while 42.6 percent in the top decile do.

  While these variables are highly predictive of late prepayment and readibly observable to lenders,
recall that lenders do not condition  on them. This is the first indication that borrowers with pre-
dictably higher prepayment risk do not pay higher markups.

  Still, because lenders do not condition  on this information set, borrowers with predictably higher
prepayment risk may agree to higher markups because the effective cost is lower. Tables A3, A4, A5
and A6 provide percentiles of markup, Mi (·), BO      M
                                               i and Bi , respectively, conditional on percentiles of
predicted late prepayment risk. Table A7 provides estimates from a regression with a large number
of controls. The conditional correlation between observable late prepayment risk and our wedge
estimates is negative. Hence, we estimate lower BO         M
                                                 i 's and Bi 's for consumers with higher prepayment
risk. This is strong evidence that late prepayment risk does not drive our results.

                                                   53
                          Table A2: Logit Regression of Prepayment Risk

                                             Prepayment Early Prepayment                           Late Prepayment

 730  Credit score  749                       -0.000224                     0.0155                       -0.00338
                                                (0.013)                     (0.028)                        (0.013)

 750  Credit score  769                         0.00974                    0.134                          -0.0209
                                                (0.013)                     (0.027)                        (0.013)

 770  Credit score  789                        0.0262                      0.247                         -0.0333
                                                (0.013)                     (0.027)                        (0.013)

 790  Credit score  809                        0.0256                      0.370                        -0.0709
                                                (0.013)                     (0.026)                        (0.013)

 810  Credit score  829                       -0.0536                      0.312                         -0.142
                                                (0.013)                     (0.027)                        (0.014)

 830  Credit score  849                        -0.136                      0.258                         -0.219
                                                (0.016)                     (0.032)                        (0.017)

 850  Credit score  869                        -0.249                       0.131                        -0.310
                                                (0.031)                     (0.063)                        (0.033)

 Log loan size                                 -0.340                     -0.283                         -0.294
                                                (0.007)                     (0.013)                        (0.007)

 30  Loan term  41                             -0.911                      -0.0186                       -0.837
                                                (0.065)                     (0.101)                        (0.060)

 42  Loan term  53                             -1.260                     -0.462                         -1.085
                                                (0.065)                     (0.102)                        (0.060)

 54  Loan term  65                             -1.443                      -0.212                        -1.353
                                                (0.064)                     (0.101)                        (0.060)

 66  Loan term  77                             -1.376                      -0.214                        -1.277
                                                (0.065)                     (0.102)                        (0.060)

 78  Loan term  89                             -1.278                     -0.349                         -1.140
                                                (0.067)                     (0.108)                        (0.063)

 90  Loan term  101                            -1.367                       -0.348                       -1.241
                                                (0.165)                     (0.356)                        (0.171)

 102  Loan term  113                           -1.524                           0                         -1.156
                                                (0.546)                        (·)                         (0.545)

 114  Loan term  125                           -1.588                     -1.131                         -1.331
                                                (0.155)                     (0.426)                        (0.157)
Note: Table shows the results from a logit regression. The dependent variable for column (1) is one for consumers that pre-
paid the loan in the first two years. The dependent variable for column (2) is one for consumers that prepaid the loan in the
first 120 days, which is our proxy for prepayment during the clawback period. The dependent variable for column (3) is one
is one for consumers that prepaid the loan after the first 120 days but within the first two years. All regressions condition on
loans of length greater than two years.




                                                             54
 Table A3: Markups by prepayment probability percentile

                                                  Markup Percentile
Prepayment Percentile                     p10       p25    p50       p75      p90

Below 10th                                  0      0.22   1.01         2        2
10th-25th                                   0      0.21   1.25         2        2
25th-50th                                   0      0.25   1.23         2        2
50th-75th                                   0      0.36    1.2         2        2
75th-90th                                   0      0.48   1.19      1.98        2
Above 90th                                  0       0.5   1.16      1.91       2.1
Note: Table shows summary statistics for markups by late prepayment probability per-
centiles. Prepayment rates are estimated using the CCP.




    Table A4: M (·)i by prepayment probability percentile

Prepayment Percentile                     p10       p25    p50       p75       p90

Below 10th                               0.78      0.81   0.87      0.91      0.96
10th-25th                                0.78      0.80   0.85      0.91      0.96
25th-50th                                0.77      0.80   0.85      0.90      0.96
50th-75th                                0.77      0.80   0.86      0.91      0.95
75th-90th                                0.77      0.79   0.86      0.91      0.94
Above 90th                               0.77      0.79   0.87      0.90      0.94
Note: Table shows summary statistics for M (·)i by late prepayment probability per-
centiles. Prepayment rates are estimated using the CCP.




                                          55
               Table A5: BO
                          i by Prepayment probability percentile


                                                                BO
                                                                 i Percentile

Prepayment Percentile                         p10         p25        p50          p75           p90

Below 10th                               107.34      211.51         388.05      607.28        835.87
10th-25th                                103.38      221.04         376.07      559.68        747.19
25th-50th                                108.87      208.68         348.28      523.88        718.63
50th-75th                                108.65      186.61         309.21      481.85        683.92
75th-90th                                 104.7      165.72         274.74      437.95        641.47
Above 90th                                96.23      155.62         262.49      430.58        650.86
Note: Table shows summary statistics for BO
                                          i by late prepayment probability percentiles. Prepayment rates
are estimated using the CCP.




               Table A6: BiM by prepayment probability percentile

                                                                BiM Percentile
    Prepayment Percentile                     p10        p25       p50        p75           p90

    Below 10th                                 0         14.6     73.68     159.61        247.61
    10th-25th                                  0         9.29     71.45     147.04        225.02
    25th-50th                                  0     12.38        72.21     143.88        220.72
    50th-75th                                  0     18.80        72.27     142.47        223.99
    75th-90th                                  0     21.86        70.97     137.76        220.82
    Above 90th                                 0     24.51        71.93     141.61        233.89
    Note: Table shows summary statistics for BiM by late prepayment probability percentiles. Prepay-
    ment rates are estimated using the CCP.




                                                    56
                 Table A7: Regressions of Prepayment Risk on Estimated Bias

                                                                            B iO                              B iM

Log Monthly Income                                              -8.601            -8.642           -1.297           -1.289
                                                                 (0.263)           (0.264)          (0.136)          (0.136)

Credit Score, 100 points                                        -30.91            -30.91           -4.949           -7.254
                                                                 (0.406)           (0.518)          (0.202)          (0.235)

Mileage, Tens of Thousands                                       5.070            5.068            -0.580           -0.547
                                                                 (0.082)           (0.082)          (0.039)          (0.039)

New Car                                                         -4.657            -4.750           -7.500           -7.372
                                                                 (0.415)           (0.415)          (0.235)          (0.236)

Log Loan Amount                                                  390.5            392.3            81.44             83.20
                                                                 (1.208)           (1.214)          (0.407)          (0.415)

Average Years of Education                                      -3.742            -3.733           -1.044           -1.047
                                                                 (0.340)           (0.340)          (0.211)          (0.211)

Internet Access Quality                                         -8.743            -8.716           -8.469           -8.452
                                                                 (1.515)           (1.515)          (0.930)          (0.930)

Estimated Prepayment Probability                                -33.72                             -60.34
                                                                 (5.991)                            (1.739)

Estimated Early Prepayment Probability                                              7.408                            112.0
                                                                                  (21.399)                           (8.704)

Estimated Late Prepayment Probability                                             -20.35                            -73.42
                                                                                   (6.602)                           (1.972)
Note: Lender, model, and state fixed effects also included, but not shown. Standard errors clustered at zip code level. Early pre-
payment is defined as prepayment in the first 120 days. Late prepayment is defined as prepayment after 120 days but within the
first 2 years. Estimated prepayment probabilities in the supervisory data are imputed using coefficient estimates from the CCP.




                                                               57
  One potential explanation for this result is that dealers cannot distinguish late prepayment risk from
early prepayment risk. Indeed, the correlation between our measures of early and late prepayment risk
in the CCP is 0.63. In this case, our finding that higher prepayment risk predicts higher Mi (·) estimates
suggests that the early prepayment result in Section B.2 quantitatively dominates the opposing effect
from late prepayment. In this case, ignoring prepayment biases against out results in Section 7.

  Another possibility with substantial empirical support is that, instead of considering the cost of a
financed vehicle through the life of a loan, consumers instead care about monthly payments (Argyle
et al. (2019)). Because there is a one-to-one mapping between monthly payment and the total cost of
a loan if it is paid on schedule, this model is equivalent to ours if we ignore prepayment risk.



B.4     Dynamic Relationships between Lenders and Dealers

The complementary commercial data includes important characteristics of dealer-lender relationships.
This enables us to directly check the extent to which markups are higher in dealer-lender relationships
that are more intense or that have lasted longer.

  We proxy the intensity of the relationship between dealer i and lender j by the fraction f of loans
intermediated by dealer i that are from lender j. Table A8 shows the results from an OLS regres-
sion where markups are the dependent variable and f is the independent variable of interest. Impor-
tantly, the regression includes dealer fixed effects, so that the estimates reveal if dealers choose higher
markups when working with preferred lenders. We find that the intensity of a dealer-lender relation-
ship has virtually no predictive effect for the markup. Markups for lenders that finance more than
20 percent of a dealer's sales are only three basis points points higher than markups for lenders that
finance less than one percent of a dealer's sales. Recall that the average markup in our data is 108
basis points. Even for lenders that finance less than five loans a year for a given dealer, we find that
markups are on average 106 basis points. It is therefore implausible that dealers' markup decisions
arise from their relationships with lenders.



B.5     Suboptimal Decision Making

This section shows how regional variation in our estimates provides suggestive evidence that the lim-
ited financial sophistication of some consumers drives our results.




                                                    58
                                 Table A8: Dealer-Lender Relationships and Markups

                                                                   Markups                                            M (·)

Lender finances 5 - 20% of sales                        0.0435                 0.0405                -0.00123                  -0.00126
                                                       (0.00331)              (0.00332)               (0.000131)                (0.000131)

Lender finances > 20% of sales                          0.0126                 0.00773                 0.000122                 0.0000675
                                                       (0.00411)              (0.00411)               (0.000162)                (0.000163)

Credit Score                                         -0.000843              -0.000840              -0.0000805                -0.0000803
                                                      (0.0000298)           (0.0000297)            (0.000000883)             (0.000000883)

Log Monthly Income                                     -0.0260                -0.0261                -0.00186                  -0.00187
                                                       (0.00205)              (0.00205)              (0.0000694)               (0.0000694)

Loan Term                                              0.00174                0.00177                0.000761                  0.000762
                                                      (0.000133)             (0.000133)             (0.00000410)              (0.00000410)

New Car                                                 -0.217                 -0.218                -0.00727                  -0.00727
                                                       (0.00278)              (0.00278)              (0.0000790)               (0.0000789)

Dealer market share 2.5 - 10%                                                 -0.0155                                         -0.000895
                                                                              (0.00382)                                         (0.000111)

Dealer market share > 10%                                                     -0.0453                                         -0.000520
                                                                              (0.00499)                                         (0.000161)

HH index 500 - 1500                                                            -0.00813                                         -0.000300
                                                                              (0.00495)                                         (0.000157)

HH index > 1500                                                                0.00644                                        -0.000897
                                                                              (0.00610)                                         (0.000197)

Constant                                                 1.608                 1.625                    0.777                       0.778
                                                        (0.0663)               (0.0664)                (0.00269)                    (0.00270)
Note: Lender, month, model, and zip code fixed effects also included, but not shown. Standard errors clustered at zip code level.




                                                                       59
60




                                                                                                                        Residual Values ($)
                                                                                                                           -32.41081200
                                                                                                                           -19.80535300
                                                                                                                           -8.57525060
                                                                                                                           0.04975422
                                                                                                                           7.29776720
                                                                                                                           14.64996200
                                                                                                                           24.22098400
                                                                                                                           37.13279000
                                                                                                                           54.11133600



     Figure A3: This map shows the residual of bound BM (the bound due to markups) after removing lender fixed effects. To eliminate
     lender-specific variation, we plot residual variation in BiM after removing lender fixed effects. A county is lightly colored on the map if
     car buyers in that county exhibit larger wedges in sensitivities compared to buyers in other counties with loans from the same lender.
Table A9:      Estimated Effect of Transaction and Regional Characteristics on Estimated
Bounds

                                                                     BO
                                                                      i                                BiM
                                                            (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)

         Log Monthly Income                             -9.277           -8.688           -1.847             -1.528
                                                         (0.262)          (0.261)           (0.135)          (0.135)

         Credit Score, 100 points                       -29.99           -30.02           -3.576             -3.588
                                                         (0.386)          (0.386)           (0.197)          (0.198)

         Mileage, Tens of Thousands                     5.054             5.014           -0.602             -0.625
                                                         (0.081)          (0.081)           (0.039)          (0.039)

         New Car                                        -4.931           -4.915           -8.058             -8.058
                                                         (0.411)          (0.411)           (0.232)          (0.232)

         Log Loan Amount                                393.8             393.4            87.72             87.51
                                                         (0.951)          (0.950)           (0.324)          (0.324)

         Average Years of Education                                      -3.734                              -1.028
                                                                          (0.336)                            (0.208)

         Internet Access Quality                                         -8.425                              -8.531
                                                                          (1.469)                            (0.895)
         Note: Table shows estimates from an OLS regression. Columns (1) and (3) control for transaction-specific
         observables. Columns (2) and (4) include county-level data from the ACS and tract-level data from the FCC.
         Lender, model, and state fixed effects also included, but not shown. Standard errors clustered at zip code level.
         BiM estimates are available for all loans in our sample. BO
                                                                   i is estimated only for loans with positive markups. We
         measure education by the percentage of county inhabitants with a college degree. The ACS also provides the
         percent of county residents with a high school degree. Our results also hold if we use this proxy for education
         or both proxies simultaneously.




                                                               61
C       Cost Recovery from First Order Conditions of Dealers

This appendix chapter shows how dealer cost can be recovered from the dealer first order pricing
conditions once the demand system is estimated. Recall that:



                                            ~ jd = p jd + p jd · r jd - i · log( p jd · r jd ).
                                            p

  Dealer d's problem is:



              max                  ( pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ) - ckd ) · sm
                                                                                       kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ).
          { pkd ,rkd } jJd
                             kJd

  The FOCs for each j  Jd are:


   jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )(1 +  jd (r jd - b jd ))
  sm
                                      sm
                                       kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
                         +                                                  · ( pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ) - ckd ) = 0
                             kJd
                                                    p jd




   jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ) ·  jd · ( p jd -  jd )
  sm
                                     sm
                                      kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
                        +                                                · ( pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ) - ckd ) = 0.
                             kJd
                                                  r jd


  Note that car prices affect shares only through perceived prices. Similarly, interest rates affect
shares only through perceived prices. That is,


                   sm
                    kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )               sm
                                                                 kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )                         i
                                                           =                                            · 1 + r jd -
                                     p jd                                      p
                                                                               ~ jd                                    p jd

  and


                      sm
                       kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )                 kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
                                                                    sm                                               i
                                                               =                                          · p jd -
                                       r jd                                      p
                                                                                 ~ jd                                r jd

  Substituting these into the FOCs for j and rearranging give
                                              1 +  jd (r jd - b jd )          jd · ( p jd -  jd )
                                                               i        =                 i         .
                                                 1 + r jd -    p jd              p jd -   r jd




                                                                       62
This in turn gives
                                                                   i
                                                        p jd -     r jd
                        jd =                                                                          .
                                                           i                                   i
                               ( p jd -  jd ) 1 + r jd -   p jd   - (r jd - b jd ) p jd -      r jd

After obtaining { jd } jJd , we can use the FOCs in interest rates to obtain costs (from a linear system):

                                                                           sm
                                                                            kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
                                                                                                            · ckd   (19)
                                                                   kJd
                                                                                        p
                                                                                        ~ jd
                              sm
                               kd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm )
          =                                                       · ( pkd + kd · ( pkd - kd ) · (rkd - bkd ))       (20)
                       kJd
                                         p
                                         ~ jd

                                                        jd (pdm , rdm ; p-dm , r-dm ) ·  jd · ( p jd -  jd )
                                                       sm
                                                   +                                    i                       .   (21)
                                                                               p jd -   r jd

Let  denote the matrix of the derivatives of shares in perceived prices and let c denote the vector of
costs of dealder d for different models. Let  denote the "adjusted revenue" vector. Finally, collect the
last additive term, or "adjusted share", from each j's equation into a, we have

                                                c =  + -1 · a.



D      Additional Facts, Graphs and Figures

D.1     Parametrization of Consumer Utility Function M (·)

This section discusses our parametrization of the utility function M (·). First, we show evidence from
a 2SLS regression suggesting that the curvature of M (·) is on average convex. Specifically, we can in-
vestigate the effect of higher finance charges on our estimates of Mi (·). Finance charges are obviously
endogenous to Mi (·). However, the buy rate offered by the lender is strongly correlated with finance
charges. Moreover, our data include virtually all information the lender has. Conditional on this in-
formation, the buy rate is therefore exogenous to any unobservable consumer characteristics such as
the consumer's utility function Mi (·) and so is a valid instrument. The results of the corresponding
2SLS regression are summarized in Table A10. The estimated shape suggests that Mi (·) is on average
a convex function. Hence, consumers respond more if more is at stake.

  Second, we show that our parametrization indeed allows us to study how the bounds BO
                                                                                     i vary across
the population. In particular, given the parametrization we choose, the ordering of bounds corresponds
to an ordering of the underlying wedge.



                                                        63
                               Table A10: IV Regression of M on Finance Charges

                  Finance Charges, in thousands, instrumented by buy rate                                     0.00512
                                                                                                                 (0.000)

                  Credit Score, 100 points                                                                    -0.00801
                                                                                                                 (0.000)

                  Log Monthly Income                                                                          -0.00261
                                                                                                                 (0.000)
                  Note: A regression of markup on log applicant income, log price, credit score bins (of width 20), mileage,
                  log loan amount, and state, lender, model, and new car fixed effects yields an R2 of .07. This goes up to .11
                  when using zip code fixed effects instead of state fixed effects, or .10 if restricting the regression to non-
                  negative markups no higher than 2.5 (the 99th percentile in the data). We interpret this as evidence that
                  lenders cannot predict markups.



Assumption 3. Suppose for every consumer i that: (i) the dealer can condition the price of the car
on the source of financing, and (ii) Mi (·) can be written as Mi ( x) = x - h(i ) · ln( x) for some positive,
increasing, and continuously differentiable function h(·).


   As discussed in Section 4, part (i) of Assumption 3 renders the bounds on M (·) tight.46 If M (·)
is as described in part (ii) of Assumption 3, i specifies the size of the wedge between disutilities
for consumer i, with larger i 's corresponding to larger wedges. Figure A4 depicts an example of the
functional form. While the additional structure imposed on M (·) is a caveat, the functional form seems
plausible and is consistent with evidence on the curvature of M (·) presented in Section 7. It generates
a marginal wedge in sensitivities that is large for small amounts of financing but converges to zero as
financing costs increase. This is consistent with models of bounded rationality in which consumers
pay more attention to issues that are more important.47

                                                      i  B j  i   j i, j
Proposition 4. Suppose that Assumption 3 holds. Then BO   O



Proof. We construct M ( x, i ) such that the ordering of BO
                                                          i = [1 - M ( x, i )] x induces an ordering on
i . Hence, i >  j  BO
                    i > B j for all i, j. As a direct consequence of continuity it then must hold
                         O

that i =  j if and only if BO
                            i = B j . Consider the set of observations such that this is true. Hence:
                                 O



                                                          [1 - M ( x, )] x = C
    46 Anecdotal evidence suggests that car prices frequently depend on whether or not the consumer finances the car through the dealership.
    47 For   papers that explore the behavioral implications of limited attention and the determinants of attention allocation see Koszegi and
Szeidl (2012), Bordalo et al. (2012), Bordalo et al. (2013), and Mackowiak et al. (2018)


                                                                       64
Then with changing x,  needs to stay constant:

                                                  d 1 - M ( x, ) - M ( x, ) x
                                                     =                        =0
                                                  dx       xM ( x, )
                                                        1 - M ( x, ) - M ( x, ) x = 0

This is a separable ODE that we can solve in the following way:

                                                                       M ( x, )                1
                                                                                           =
                                                                     1 - M ( x, )              x
                                                                   1-M                     1
                                                                         M =                 dx
                                                                    d                      x
                                                       -ln(1 - M ) = ln( x) + g()
                                                                                           1
                                                                       M =1-
                                                                                         xg()
                                                                  M = x - h()ln( x),

where h() is some arbitrary function of . Hence, every M function that satisfies the above induces
the ordering on the bounds to be also an ordering on the rhos. Note that these functions are convex as
long as h() > 0 and that higher  corresponds to a larger wedges in disutilies if h () > 0.




      Proposition 4 shows that, if Assumption 3 holds, an ordering of the bounds BO
                                                                                  i induces an ordering
of i 's. Hence, if BO
                    i  B j for two consumers i and j then i   j . This implies we can study
                        O


                  i to understand heterogeneity in the difference between financing costs and the
heterogeneity in BO
sensitivity to financing costs.48



D.2           Subvented Loans

Our analysis requires that loan price and vehicle price be jointly determined, so this is worth verifying
in our data. To do so we focus on subvented loans. Recall that vehicle manufacturers subsidize interest
rates on subvented loans, so markups on these loans are typically restricted and often prohibited. As
a consequence, in our data the mean markup for subvented loans is only 0.06 compared to 1.12 for
non-subvented loans. Hence, dealers' profit for these types of sales depends much more on the vehicle
price.
      48 We   can derive a qualitatively similar result for BiM . In particular, there exists a class of utility functions such that an ordering over
BiM   induces an ordering over i 's. Results in Section 5.4 are the same for BM and BO , suggesting that the correlations we document hold
for both classes of utility functions.



                                                                         65
                        Figure A4: Example of Assumed Functional Form For M (·)

                       M ( x)
                        x

                       0.92                                                                 2 (with BO
                                                                                                     2)
                                                                                                1 (with BO
                                                                                                         1)
                       0.83
                       0.71



                       0.43



                                  $2, 000                                        $8, 000        x
Note: This graph shows two examples of the functional form for M (·) that we assume from here on. Note that as finance charges increase,
the ratio of finance charges and the disutility of finance charges converges to one.




   Table A11 shows the estimates from a linear regression model that predicts the effects of subvention
on the price of the car and the loan. We include fixed effects for the lender that issued the loan, the
time the loan was issued, the purchased car model and make, and the buyer's zip code.

   If car and loan prices are chosen independently in competitive markets, we would expect car prices
not to be affected by loan subvention. Columns (1) and (2) suggest that this is not true. Subvention
predicts two changes in prices. Subvented loan prices are on average about $150 lower, but prices for
cars with subvented loans are on average about $850 higher.

   These estimates are not causal and may reflect in part the effect of omitted variables. For example,
cars financed by subvented loans may be more likely to come with valuable add-ons that increase their
prices. Still, Table A11 provides suggestive evidence using our data that car and loan prices are jointly
determined, consistent with results in Argyle et al. (2018), Argyle et al. (2019), and Brown and Jansen
(2019).




                                                                     66
                           Table A11: Predicted Effects on Price and Loan Outcomes

                                                Car Price           Finance Charges                  Overall Charges

             Subvented                             846.4                     -148.1                            780.1
                                                    (2.13)                   (-1.91)                           (1.74)

             Credit Score                         123.7                     -577.1                           -443.1
                                                    (3.21)                  (-57.59)                          (-9.93)

             Log Monthly Income                   0.0759                   0.0108                            0.0924
                                                   (15.97)                   (14.76)                          (16.90)

             Loan Term                            181.3                     970.2                            1166.5
                                                    (8.54)                  (203.27)                          (48.05)
             Note: Bank, month, model, and zip code fixed effects also included, but not shown. Standard errors clustered at zip
             code level.



D.3          Dealer Issued Loans

This section explains our procedure to estimate the fraction of auto loans originated "indirectly", i.e.
through auto dealers. The CCP includes data on hard credit inquiries, and so is one of very few
datasets that covers search behavior outside of online markets. When an auto dealer intermediates a
loan, the process should always begin with a hard credit inquiry so that the dealer can determine the
kind of loan a borrower can qualify for. We take the percent of loans originated within a short window
of at least one hard credit inquiry from a dealer as our proxy for the fraction of indirect loans. If the
CCP included data on all hard credit inquiries, this would be straightforward to estimate. The main
difficulty is that we only observe hard credit inquiries reported to the credit bureau our data is from;
we do not see hard credit inquiries reported to the other two major credit bureaus.

   We can deal with this difficulty if we assume a constant probability Po that a hard credit inquiry is
observed in the CCP.49 Let Pd (i) denote the probability that a loan is originated within a short time
window of i hard credit inquiries from dealers, and let Pdo (i) denote the probability that a loan is
originated within a short time window of i hard credit inquiries from dealers that we observe. Finally,
    49 In   particular, we assume that the probability of observing a given hard credit inquiry from a lender (which we can estimate) is the
same as observing a given hard credit inquiry from a dealer (which we need). This is equivalent to assuming that the credit bureau's
market share for dealer inquiries is the same as its market share for lender inquiries. Unfortunately we cannot test this assumption, but our
conversations with market experts lead us to believe it is reasonable. Dealers have an incentive to pull credit from the same credit bureau as
the lenders they work with, so that they are operating with the same information.



                                                                     67
assume that no more than N dealers perform a hard credit pull on a consumer within the time window.
Then we need to estimate Pd (0), and have the following equation:

                                                           N
                                                                         n i
                                             Pdo (i) =          Pd (n)    P  (1 - Po )n-i                                              (22)
                                                          n=i
                                                                         i o

   First, we set N = 3. The next step is to estimate Pdo (i) and Po . We do that by matching new auto
loans to auto loan inquiries from the company the loan is from (for Po ) and to inquiries from auto
dealers (for Pdo ). We match auto loans to auto loan inquiries if they are for the same consumer and if
the inquiry date is no more than 14 days before or 7 days after the origination date of the auto loan.
We restrict the sample during this step to consumers with credit scores above 680, to minimize the
possibility of one dealer pulling credit records from multiple credit bureaus.50

   For a given guess of the vector Pd (n), Equation 22 yields implied values of the vector Pdo (i). We
take as our estimate of Pd (n) the vector that minimizes the sum of squared deviations between implied
and estimated values of Pdo (i). Using data for the U.S. as a whole, this yields an estimate of Pd (0) =
0.17. This implies that an estimated 83 percent of auto loans are opened a short time before or after
a hard credit inquiry from an auto dealer, which we interpret to mean that roughly 83 percent of auto
loans are indirect. A number of assumptions were required to obtain this estimate, and we do not view
it as precise. However, we do interpret it as strong evidence that the vast majority of auto loans in the
United States are indirect.



D.4        Lender Maximization Problem with first price auction

This section shows how we can use our data to estimate a model in which lenders compete in a first
price auction instead of a second price auction. As in the main part, we make a number of simplifying
assumptions. First, we assume that there is one auction for each model-dealer combination. Hence,
each of the lenders in Ld associated with dealer d bids once for all the sales of model j. Second, we
assume  is constant across dealers and lenders. Empirically there is relatively little variation in  and
allowing for heterogeneity would complicate the analysis considerably. Third, lenders take all buy
rates arising in auctions for other models as given when making their bids for a particular contract.51
    50 Lenders   pay credit bureaus for every inquiry they make, so when deciding on the number of bureaus to pull from, they face a tradeoff
between the cost of an additional pull and the benefit of obtaining more information. Because of the very large sums of money involved,
mortgage lenders nearly always pull from all three major credit bureaus. Auto lenders typically only pull information from one credit bureau
for borrowers who do not appear to be a credit risk, which is why we focus on consumers with good credit scores. Auto dealers have even
less incentive to pull from multiple bureaus than auto lenders do, because auto dealers do not bear default risk.
     51 This simplification is reminiscent of the Nash-in-Nash approach that is frequently used in the analysis of bilateral oligopoly (see

Horn and Wolinsky (1988), Gaynor and Town (2011), Collard-Wexler et al. (2014)). In this literature, the bargains between a particular


                                                                     68
                                                                                 b  F and have
Assumption 4. (i) All lenders k  Ld are drawing from the same cost distribution rk
the same revenue-sharing contract  with a given dealer d. (ii) In each auction (j,d) bidders take the
buy rates arising in auctions for other makes as given.


   The objective function is composed of the market share of the model for which the lenders are
bidding, the loan amount p jd -  jd , the probability of winning the auction, and the profit margin,
which is composed of a share of the markup and a direct payment.

   A lender wins the bid and issues the loans for a dealer-model combination if their buy rate is the
lowest one submitted. Let N be the number of lenders bidding for a contract and rl  F (·) the distri-
bution of wholesale interest rates r, which characterize the lenders' cost of financing a loan. Lenders
anticipate that the likelihood of a sale depends on b jd through the dealer's downstream decision on
all prices and interest rates. Lender k's objective function when bidding for a particular contract is
therefore given by:


        jd (pdm (b jd ), rdm (b jd ); p-dm , r-dm ) · p jd (b jd ) -  jd ·
   max sm         k            k                             k
     bk
      jd
                                                                                       Nd -1
                                                                  1 - F (- 1 k
                                                                         jd (b jd ))           · (1 -  jd ) · m jd (bk
                                                                                                                     jd ) + b jd - r jd .
                                                                                                                             k      k




   For notational convenience we omit some of the function's arguments and denote it by s jd (b). For
the derivation, define  jd (b jd ) = sm
                                      jd (pdm (b jd ), rdm (b jd ); p-dm , r-dm ) · ( p jd (b jd ) -  jd ).

   Lenders anticipate that dealers mark up a specific model by m jd (b jd ). The markup function depends
on observable attributes and unobservable attributes of customers that purchase model j as well as the
other prices and interest rates in the market. Given our demand model, we can simulate m
                                                                                       ^ jd . We apply
the key insight from Guerre et al. (2000) that there is a relationship between the observed distribution
of buy rates and the unobserved distribution of costs. This insight allows us to substitute all unknown
terms in the lender's first order condition with either observed or known objects based on our demand
estimation.

Proposition 5. Lenders' costs can be recovered as:

                                                                                 1 + (1 - ) · m jd (bk
                                                                                                     jd )
                  rk
                   jd   = (1 -  jd ) ·    m jd (bk
                                                 jd )   +   bk
                                                             jd   +                                                                   (23)
                                                                      ~ (bk ) - (Nd - 1) · g(bk ) · (1 - G(bk ))-1
                                                                          jd                  jd            jd


   All expressions on the right hand side are observed or can be constructed from the demand side
estimates. We can therefore back out the cost distribution of lenders in this market.
upstream supplier and a downstream firm take the outcome of all other bargains as given. Similarly, we assume that, when bidding for a
particular contract, a lender takes all buy rates in other auctions as given.


                                                                         69
Proof. The lender's maximization problem is given by:

                                                                    N -1
            max s jd (b) · p jd (bk ) -  jd · 1 - F (- 1
                                                     jd (bk ))             · (1 - ) · m jd (b) + bk - rk
                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                         .
             bk


  Taking the first order condition, we obtain:

                                                         N -1
   (1 - ) · m jd (bk ) + 1 · (bk ) · 1 - F (- 1
                                            jd (bk ))            + (1 - ) · m jd (bk ) + bk - r
                                          N -1                                  1                            N -2
            ·  (bk ) · 1 - F (- 1
                              jd (bk ))          - (bk ) · (N - 1) · f (r)            · 1 - F (- 1
                                                                                               jd (bk ))            =0
                                                                                (bk )

  Which can be simplified to the following equation, using the insight that G(b) = F (- 1
                                                                                      jd (bk )) b
and therefore g(b) =    1
                        (r)   · f (r).


   (1 - ) · m jd (bk ) + 1 · (bk ) · 1 - F (-
                                            jd (bk )) + (1 - ) · m jd (bk ) + bk - rk ·
                                              1                                     l


                                                     (bk ) · 1 - F (-
                                                                    jd (bk )) - (bk ) · ( N - 1) · g(bk ) = 0
                                                                      1


                                                         (bk )
Solving this equation for r and defining ~ (bk ) =
                                                        (bk )    to simplify the exposition we get the following
expression for the lender's financing costs

                                                                 1 + (1 - ) · m jd (bk )
                  rk = (1 - ) · m jd (bk ) + bk +                                                   .
                                                    ~ (bk ) - (N - 1) · g(bk ) · (1 - G(bk ))-1




D.5     Additional Estimations and Figures




                                                        70
Table A12: Summary Statistics in the complementary commercial and
Administrative Data

                               25th Pctile         50th Pctile          75th Pctile         Mean

Monthly Payment
Administrative                       284                 366                  475             402
Commercial                           300                 382                  481             409



Loan Amount
Administrative                      15893              21345                28086           23145
Commercial                          16193              21504                27361           22555



Loan Term
Administrative                       60.0                63.0                72.0             64.1
Commercial                           58.0                60.0                69.0             60.7



Interest Rate
Administrative                       2.99                3.95                4.75             4.08
Commercial                           2.85                3.85                4.95             3.94

Note: Summary statistics are shown for monthly payment, loan amount, loan term, and interest rate in
the administrative data and in the commercial data from 2011. Statistics are shown for consumers with
credit scores above 720 in both samples.




                                                71
                                Table A13: M (·), BO , and BM by Car Model

 Model                         M (·)         BO           BM         Model                        M (·)        BO           BM

 Ram                            0.76      795.89       239.31        Chevrolet Equinox             0.81       499.41     169.74
 Chevrolet Silverado            0.77      693.59       219.19        Ford Escape                   0.79       493.89     170.68
 Ford F-150                     0.79      660.66       220.28        Ford Fusion                   0.79       480.00     161.90
 Kia Sorento                    0.78      614.92       189.59        Toyota Camry                  0.77       475.85     143.56
 Ford Explorer                  0.80      602.00       212.74        Hyundai Elantra               0.77       474.41     156.04
 Jeep Gr. Cherokee              0.80      585.28       200.07        Chevrolet Malibu              0.80       450.21     154.90
 Jeep Wrangler                  0.81      576.16       201.04        Honda Civic                   0.78       442.62     139.26
 Hyundai Sonata                 0.77      529.34       157.96        Chevrolet Cruze               0.81       437.70     144.71
 Honda Odyssey                  0.80      519.13       169.13        Honda Accord                  0.78       437.70     150.26
 Nissan Altima                  0.79      507.10       159.52        Ford Focus                    0.80       424.82     147.52

 Note: The table shows for the 20 most common car models in the data the average estimates for the lower bound BO    M
                                                                                                                i , Bi and M (·)i .




Table A14: Selected summary statistics of consumers' misperception of financial charges.

                               Mean          p10       p25       p50        p75              p90

                          ^     0.77        0.67      0.74       0.78      0.82              0.83
                          Note: Table gives summary statistics on the distribution of estimated values of .




                                                                72
                                    Table A15: Demand Model Coefficients

                     Mean Utility                           Standard                                Make-Specific
Make                        Shift           Error of Mean Utility Shift                       Own Price Elasticity

Chevrolet                    -4.1                              0.047                                        -4.2
Chrysler                     -4.4                              0.047                                        -4.2
Dodge                        -4.8                              0.044                                        -3.7
Ford                         -4.0                              0.047                                        -4.1
GMC                          -2.7                              0.073                                        -5.4
Honda                        -3.5                              0.047                                        -3.2
Hyundai                      -4.0                              0.047                                        -2.5
Jeep                         -3.7                               0.04                                        -4.1
Kia                          -3.9                              0.045                                        -2.7
Mazda                        -4.1                              0.048                                        -2.7
Nissan                       -4.3                              0.045                                        -2.9
RAM                          -3.7                              0.051                                        -4.9
Subaru                       -3.8                              0.044                                        -2.7
Toyota                       -3.8                              0.047                                        -3.4
Volkswagen                   -4.2                              0.052                                        -2.8

Note: The table shows how mean utility is shifted for different makes, the standard errors of those mean shifts, as well as own-
price elasticities for different makes.




                                                              73
