                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MANDATED AND VOLUNTARY SOCIAL DISTANCING
                       DURING THE COVID-19 EPIDEMIC:
                                A REVIEW

                                       Sumedha Gupta
                                       Kosali I. Simon
                                        Coady Wing

                                     Working Paper 28139
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28139


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2020




This review paper was originally written in July for the Special Edition Webinar Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (BPEA) 2020: COVID-19 and the Economy: https://
www.brookings.edu/events/webinar-special-edition-bpea-2020-covid-19-and-the-economy/. The
authors thank the BPEA for financial support. The manuscript has benefited from guidance from
Caroline Buckee, Victor Chernozhukov, James Stock, and other conference participants. We also
thank colleagues Ana Bento, Thuy Nguyen, Shyam Raman, Byungkyu Lee, and Felipe Lozano
Rojas, our co-authors of the study `Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19
Epidemic: Evidence from State and Local Government Actions', NBER Working Paper: w27027,
that served as a foundation for the current manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sumedha Gupta, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady Wing. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mandated and Voluntary Social Distancing During The COVID-19 Epidemic: A Review
Sumedha Gupta, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady Wing
NBER Working Paper No. 28139
November 2020
JEL No. I0

                                         ABSTRACT

For much of 2020, the COVID-19 epidemic upended social and economic life globally. In an
effort to reduce COVID-19 risks in the U.S., state and local governments issued many
recommendations and regulations to induce social distancing, adding to voluntary reductions in
interpersonal contact. The responses to the epidemic helped contain spread, but also lead to high
unintended societal costs. In the summer months, states took steps to revive the economy and lift
social distancing regulations. However, as many epidemiologists expected, the scale of the
epidemic has expanded very rapidly in the fall. In the week of October 14, the US generated
around 57,000 new COVID-19 cases and 700 deaths each day. By November 15, the country was
generating about 151,000 new cases and 1,200 deaths per day. These rapid increases in cases and
deaths raise concerns about the capacity of local healthcare systems around the country. State
governments are once again facing difficult choices about whether and how to use policies to
address the spread of the virus. The incoming Biden-Harris administration faces an important
challenge in trying to manage the epidemic as well as a large scale vaccination campaign.
Although the epidemic is less than a year old, it has generated a huge volume of research by
economists, epidemiologists, and others. This body of work may help inform policy decisions
facing society in the coming months.

In this paper, we make five broad contributions. First, we provide a concise review of economic
and social science research on mobility patterns, labor market outcomes, consumer behavior, and
population health during the first phase of the epidemic. Second, we sketch a simple
microeconomic model that may be useful considering the determinants of social distancing and
the role of different policy instruments in promoting distancing. Third, we present a simple
typology of the policies that were used at the state and county levels during the closure and re-
opening phases of the epidemic in the U.S.. Fourth, we review a collection of new data sources
that have played an important role in monitoring and analyzing population behavior this year.
Fifth, we present results from event study regressions that try to disentangle private vs. policy-
induced changes in mobility patterns during the early part of the epidemic.

Sumedha Gupta                                   Coady Wing
Department of Economics                         Indiana University 1315
Indiana University-Purdue                       E 10th St Bloomington,
University Indianapolis                         IN 47405
425 University Blvd.                            cwing@indiana.edu
Indianapolis, IN 46202
sugupta@iupui.edu

Kosali I. Simon
O'Neill School of Public and
Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu
1     Introduction
During the first half of 2020, social distancing became the primary strategy for reducing the spread of
SARS-COV-2, which is the virus that causes COVID-19. Basic information about the threat posed by
the epidemic started to become clear when early cases and deaths occurred in January and February.
In March, the level of human physical mobility fell substantially across the country. Mobility started
to recover somewhat in May and June as initial fears regarding hospital capacity surges diminished
(Kowalczyk, 2020), and scientific knowledge regarding lower-risk ways of interacting emerged (CDC,
2020). Although people started to resume some aspects of regular life over the summer months,
mobility remained far below its pre-epidemic levels.
    As many epidemiologists expected, the scale of the epidemic has expanded very rapidly in the
fall. In the week surrounding October 14, the US population was generating around 57,000 new
confirmed cases and 700 COVID-19 deaths each day. By November 15, the country was generating
about 151,000 new cases and 1200 deaths per day. Just as they did in the early spring, these rapid
increases in cases and deaths raise concerns about the capacity of local healthcare systems around
the country. Preliminary results from clinical trials suggest that the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine could
be more than 90% effective at preventing COVID-19 cases, and the company reports that up to
50 million doses could be available by the end of 2020 and more than 1.3 billion doses could be
produced in 2021.
    The rapidly rising COVID-19 counts means that state governments around the country are
once again facing difficult choices about whether and how to use government policies to control
the spread of the virus. The incoming Biden-Harris administration faces an important challenge in
trying to manage the epidemic as well as a large scale vaccination campaign.
    Although the epidemic is less than a year old, it has generated a huge volume of research
by economists, epidemiologists, and other social scientists. This body of work may help inform
thinking about the policy options facing us in the coming months. In this paper, we make five
broad contributions that we hope will be useful to researchers and practitioners alike. First, we
provide a concise review of economic and social science research on mobility patterns, labor market
outcomes, consumer behavior, and population health during the first phase of the epidemic. While
we searched widely when conducting this review, we do not intend this to be a formal literature
search for papers with specific key words, which we think is not feasible given the very actively
evolving nature of this work. Second, we sketch a simple microeconomic model that may be useful
for thinking about the determinants of social distancing and the role of different policy instruments
in promoting distancing. Third, we present a simple typology of the kinds of policies that were used
at the state and county level during the shut down and re-opening phase of the epidemic in the
United States. Fourth, we review a collection of new data sources that have played an important
role in monitoring and analyzing population behavior during the epidemic. Fifth, we present results
from event study regressions that try to disentangle private vs policy-induced changes in mobility


                                                  1
patterns during the early part of the epidemic.
   The prevailing level of mobility is generated in part by the private decisions people make in
response to the health threat posed by the epidemic. But state and local governments have also
adopted a variety of mandates and regulations to reduce mobility even further. The production
of higher levels of social distance and lower levels of physical mobility is not a typical goal for
democratic governments. Normally, governments act to encourage and protect freedom of mobility
and assembly. During the epidemic, social distancing is valuable because it helps control the
epidemic. Unfortunately, the pre-COVID academic literature provides little guidance on which
policy levers governments can use to produce the most social distance at the lowest economic cost.
And existing economic and public health data systems do not provide much information on patterns
of physical mobility and contact, which makes it hard to optimize social distancing policies in an
iterative fashion. There may be substantial value in research that identifies principles that can guide
policy and perhaps support the development of better targeted social distancing strategies.
   In a series of research papers, we have measured levels of physical mobility using high frequency
data, and we have used the data to assess the role of state and local public policies in shaping levels
of social distancing. Our over arching goal is to develop knowledge on the underlying factors that
make some distancing policies more effective than others (Gupta et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020;
Montenovo et al., 2020; Rojas et al., 2020; Bento et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2020). In this paper, we
provide an overview of social distancing policies, provide a comprehensive literature review of what
is known to date of their effects on key outcomes, explain a collection of new data sources that can
be used to track levels of mobility, and present a core set of empirical results from the shutdown
and reopening phases of the epidemic.
   The paper is in eight parts. Section 2 discusses the literature on social distancing and physical
mobility in the context of the COVID-19 epidemic. Most of the literature is very recent and we
attempt to summarize the key questions, empirical strategies, and conclusions that have emerged
so far. In section 3, we sketch a microeconomic model of household production and choice that
incorporates physical contact and infection risk into the agent's decision process. The model is very
simple and abstracts from many features of the real world. However, it helps clarify the incentives
and constraints that affect decisions to engage in physical contact with others, and it suggests broad
principles that might be used to guide the design of social distancing policies. Section 4 reviews
the long list of public policies that state and local governments have actually adopted during the
epidemic, and explains how we organized and grouped these policies to facilitate empirical analysis.
Section 5 provides an overview of the cell signal based data sources that we are using to measure
mobility patterns across states and over time.
   These mobility data are not perfect measures of the underlying behavior of interest. We look at
several different measures from several sources. But at their core, all of the measures are constructed
by tracking (anonymously) the physical location of smart devices. They proxy human mobility



                                                  2
under the assumption that smart devices change locations because people carry them from one place
to the next. But mobility measures generally do not reveal whether a person who changes locations
remains six feet away from other people during the trip. They also don't indicate whether the person
wore a mask or how often they washed their hands. Despite their limitations, cell-phone-based
mobility data are probably the best proxy measure of social distancing currently available. One
of the main advantages of our line of research is the use of multiple measures from multiple data
systems. This provides some ability to assess the robustness of our results.1 Section 6 lays out the
event study framework we use in much of our empirical work. We present results in section 7 and
offer conclusions in section 8.


2         Related Research
In the four months since the start of the epidemic in the U.S., the social science literature on the
epidemic and the policy response has grown very rapidly. The papers in the emerging literature are
organized around a collection of broad research questions:

    1. How has the epidemic affected the way people interact with each other and with physical
          spaces?

    2. How has the response to the epidemic affected the level of economic activity?

    3. How much of the changes in mobility and economic activity are generated by private responses
          to the health and safety threat from the virus, and how much of these changes have been
          induced by public policies themselves?

    4. How have various public policies and private responses affected the downstream severity of
          the epidemic?

        The first two questions are essentially descriptive. They have been answered using a combination
of existing and new data sources. Research on questions about physical mobility and person-to-
person contact have a long history in the literature on infectious disease epidemiology. But the
conventional methods in that literature are not well-suited to monitoring population behaviors
in real time. The COVID-19 epidemic has led to heavier reliance on data harvested from smart
devices, mapping applications, and financial transactions. These data sources have expanded the set
of concepts that can be brought into the surveillance system, but it is still not clear how different
types of information are useful for public health decision making. Understanding the strengths and
    1
    It is possible that future researchers will have access to richer data on how person-to-person contact is
changing. For example, it is conceivable that data harvested from video recordings might provide information
on often people touch each other to shake hands, hug, exchange objects, etc. Data like this could provide
important insight into behavior during the epidemic.


                                                     3
weaknesses of new data sources is one of the key challenges in the literature. Balancing the value
of high frequency and low frequency measures for monitoring the state of the epidemic is another
overarching concern.
   The third and fourth questions are concerned with the causal effects of public policies adopted
during the epidemic, and to some extent with the causal effect of changes in knowledge about the
state of the epidemic. One line of work, the mobility literature, is concerned with the "first stage"
effects of policy on transmission related behaviors. Another line of work is essentially about the
possible unintended consequences of the same policies. Research on the effects of distancing policies
on labor market outcomes and consumer behavior falls into this category. A third line of work is
concerned with the way that different policy responses have shaped the course of the epidemic as
measured by COVID-19 case loads and deaths. In all three streams of work, event studies and
generalized difference in difference designs have emerged as the main strategy for trying to isolate
the causal effects of policy changes. These designs are natural given the setting and available data.
However, they rely on strong assumptions that may fail in some circumstances and not others.
   In the appendix to the paper, we include two tables that summarize key pieces of information
from a large set of working papers and recently published articles. Appendix table A1 lists papers
that provide estimates of the effects of one or more COVID-19 shutdown policies. To the extent
possible, we report the main quantitative effect estimate provided in each paper. But we caution the
reader that these "treatment effect" estimates do not correspond to a common structural parameter.
We should not expect the magnitude of the policy effects to be the same across studies based on
different outcome measures, different policy definitions, and different time horizons. Not all of the
studies we examined offer estimates of the effects of COVID-19 policies. Appendix table A2 gives a
summary of these papers; they do not include a specific quantitative effect size column, but these
papers provide useful context are organized by the same sub topics as the first table.


2.1     Pre-COVID Epidemiological Research On Mobility
Prior to the COVID-19 epidemic, the economic and public health data systems in the U.S. were
not set up to measure close physical interactions at a level of frequency and detail necessary to
provide near real-time information about human movement and mixing (Buckee et al., 2020) during
an epidemic. However, infectious disease researchers have made heavy use of information from
social contact surveys. These are point-in-time (cross-sectional) household or individual surveys that
collect detailed information on each respondent's daily contacts with other people who have specific
age and gender attributes (Mossong et al., 2008; Bento and Rohani, 2016; Prem et al., 2017). Static
contact surveys have proven to be useful for studying endemic diseases and seasonal diseases that
occur fairly reliably in a population because sudden disruptions of behavior are not expected.
   Contact surveys are most often used to estimate age-specific contact matrices, which are a way
to describe the frequency of contact between people from different age-strata in a given population


                                                  4
(Mossong et al., 2008; Prem et al., 2017). Survey-based estimates of contact matrices are used to
build more sophisticated models of the spread of infectious diseases within and between populations
with different demographic and geographic structures (Mossong et al., 2008; Rohani et al., 2010;
Bento and Rohani, 2016; Prem et al., 2017). Incorporating information on the contact structure of
a population produces structural models that more successfully explain shifts in disease prevalence
over time and across age groups. Models that ignore the contact structure in a population may
misinterpret the epidemiological processes that determine the spread of the disease. Although
contact surveys provide useful information about the average contact patterns in a population, they
are costly, slow, and may suffer from recall bias and coverage gaps (Mossong et al., 2008; Prem et al.,
2017). Thus, researchers generally do not use contact surveys to empirically track behavioral changes
during an epidemic. Likewise, we are not aware of any studies that use repeated waves of a contact
survey to estimate the effects of social distancing policies on contact patterns. That said, things
may be different during the COVID-19 epidemic. For example, in recent work on COVID-19 Jarvis
et al. (2020) fielded longitudinal contact survey that collected data on the same people each week
for 16 weeks. They compare their COVID era contact data with data from an earlier cross-sectional
contact survey collected in 2006 and find substantial changes in the contact patterns since 2006.
   Although contact surveys may still play an important role, they are a cumbersome way to
monitor the population in real time during an epidemic. In a major outbreak, it is critical to assess
the effects of public policies and informational events on the individual behaviors that shape contact
patterns. One alternative to surveys that has proven valuable is aggregate mobility data, such as
the smart device data we use in this paper. Wesolowski et al. (2012) pioneered the use of cell phone
records to understand the role of human travel patterns on the spread of malaria in Kenya. They
found that human travel facilitates malaria parasites to spread much farther than possible through
mosquito dispersal alone. Information about the importance of specific travel routes in spreading
the epidemic provides a guide for policy efforts to reduce transmission. More recently, Wesolowski
et al. (2015a) used cell phone data to study the role of travel patterns on the spread of Dengue
virus during an epidemic in Pakistan in 2013. They found that previous model-based descriptions of
human mobility did not perform well in describing the travel patterns captured by the cell phone
data, and that incorporating the cell phone travel data led to epidemiological models that were
more accurate in explaining the spread of the epidemic over time and across locations. Wesolowski
et al. (2016) offer a review of the emerging role of cell phone data in the study of infectious diseases
and epidemics.
   Aggregate mobility data provide a way to measure the intensity of movement within and between
specific geographic locations. However, the underlying data are harvested from convenience sources,
like cell phone records, which may not be representative of the population in the way that a formal
survey sample might be. The mobility measures that can be constructed from aggregate data
also lack the careful attention to construct validity that is a feature of the measures available in



                                                   5
well-designed contact surveys. Despite these limitations, the aggregate data allow researchers to
measure mobility using a daily time series available at various geographic levels of detail. These
time series data can be compared with pre-epidemic baselines and can be used as a foundation for
policy analysis based on interrupted time series and difference in difference research designs. They
offer nearly real time insight into the extent to which people are complying with various kinds of
social distancing initiatives (Wesolowski et al., 2015b). Although aggregate data are still relatively
new, previous work shows that they can be integrated with other epidemiological data, and has
explored methods that account for spatial and temporal dependence to support accurate inferences
regarding dynamics on scales appropriate to pathogens and their human hosts (Keeling and Rohani,
2011) .
   The pre-COVID literature provides clear empirical evidence that human movement shapes
transmission dynamics Bharti et al. (2015). The details depend on the pathogen, of course. But
research suggests that travel and mobility related behaviors are important in both introducing novel
pathogens into susceptible populations, and in determining how easily the pathogen spreads by
altering the frequency of contact between infected and susceptible individuals (Wesolowski et al.,
2016). For example, Mari et al. (2012) examine the role of travel patterns and waterways on spread
of Cholera. And Gog et al. (2014) study spread the 2009 influenza epidemic in the U.S. They find
that models that account for both spatial diffusion and local school opening dates fit the data the
best. There is also evidence from the pre-COVID data driven studies, that social distancing policies
can reduce the magnitude of an epidemic (Bootsma and Ferguson, 2007; Hatchett et al., 2007). In
addition, Ferguson et al. (2005) use a simulation model to assess alternative strategies for containing
an influenza epidemic in Asia. They find ­ for specific disease parameters ­ that strategies that
combine anti-viral medication with social distancing interventions are most successful.


2.2       Mobility Patterns and Social Distancing Related Behaviors
One of the most active strands of social science research on the COVID-19 epidemic is concerned
with how mobility patterns have changed in response to the risk of infection, and in response to state
and local social distancing policies. The literature has come to a consensus that human mobility
dropped precipitously in mid March, very early in the shut down sequence and around the time
of the March 13th National Emergency proclamation. The mid-March decline is large and quite
sudden. Most studies have used high frequency data sources derived from smart device apps. These
data sources do not have a long history of use in economics. As we mentioned in the discussion
of pre-COVID research, epidemiologists have been using similar data to study epidemics since at
least Wesolowski et al. (2012). So far, the emerging economics literature on mobility and social
distancing has focused on simple descriptive time-series work, and on quasi-experimental estimates
of the effects of state and local policies on mobility patterns. Although there is overlap between
the methods used in the economics and epidemiology literature, it is probably fair to say that the


                                                  6
epidemiological literature focuses less on the determinants of mobility, and more on the role that
prevailing mobility patterns in the dynamics of a given epidemic. They use cell phone data to build
better structural models of the epidemic across time and space. Economists have focused somewhat
more on the idea that mobility patterns are an outcome that public policies are trying to change in
the population.
   One concern in the literature on mobility is that the smart device users underlying the mobility
measures are unlikely to be a representative sample from the population. However, the sample size
underlying the data are at least 10% of the U.S. population, and the timing and size of the fall in
mobility seems to be similar regardless of the mobility data and concept used in individual studies.
That is, the basic time series is similar for measures of staying at home, going in to work, average
distance travelled, percent of individuals who travel out of state or out of county, indices of how
much foot traffic occurs in certain types of establishments, etc.
   Some studies ­ such as our own ­ estimate how much of the change is attributable to various
state and local social distancing policies. The literature has devoted the most attention to the effects
of stay-at-home (SAH) mandates, which occurred later in the shutdown sequence implemented in
most states. Although there are a few outlier results, most of studies find that SAH policies reduced
measured mobility by about 5-10% within the first week after the policy was implemented (Abouk
and Heydari, 2020; Alexander and Karger, 2020; Andersen, 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; Cicala et al.,
2020; Cronin and Evans, 2020; Dave et al., 2020; Elenev et al., 2020; Engle et al., 2020; Goolsbee
and Syverson, 2020; Lin and Meissner, 2020; Painter and Qiu, 2020; Gupta et al., 2020).
   The outsize attention to SAH mandates makes sense since they have proven to be the most
controversial laws and they seem to be nominally the most restrictive. However, some studies have
also examined the effects of other policies, like school closures, which happened often sooner. But it
maybe hard to reliably separate the effects as multiple policies implemented so tightly together.


2.3     Labor Market Outcomes
The losses of employment since the start of the COVID-19 epidemic are massive. There were with
20.5 million job losses in in April alone and rapid increases in unemployment insurance applications
(Rojas et al., 2020; Montenovo et al., 2020). The unemployment rate rose to from 4.5 percent
in March to 14.7 percent in April. Many people may also have dropped out of the labor market
(Coibion et al., 2020b) and would not be captured in unemployment statistics. The unprecedented
increase in initial UI claims in the early part of the pandemic was largely across-the-board and
occurred in all states, suggesting that the economic disruption was driven by both the health shock
itself and the state policies to induce social distancing (Lozano Rojas et al., 2020; Gupta et al.,
2020). On average, the literature notes a modest 2-8% increase in UI claims due to state policies,
with business closures having a larger effect than stay-at-home orders (Kahn et al., 2020; Kong and
Prinz, 2020; Lozano Rojas et al., 2020).


                                                   7
    The timeline and nature of job losses is noteworthy. Relative to the timing of the human mobility
reduction, job market losses occurred later.
    It is possible that labor market responses were delayed partly because of increases in the number
of workers who reported that they were "employed but absent" in the monthly Current Population
Surveys (CPS). That is, people may have been temporarily unemployed but expecting to be recalled
to the same jobs. This could have led to an undercount of point-in-time unemployment levels.
Surprisingly, research suggests that workers who remained employed during the early epidemic did
not experience much change in hours worked or earnings Cheng et al. (2020); Gupta et al. (2020).
During the shutdown period employment declines were steeper for Hispanics, workers aged 20 to 24,
and those with high school degrees and some college. Pre-epidemic sorting into occupations with
more potential for remote work and industries that were deemed essential explain a large share of
gaps in recent unemployment for key racial, ethnic, age, and education sub-populations (Montenovo
et al., 2020).
    Since April, there have been reductions in the number of new unemployment claims and signs of
improved labor market performance. Studies note that the official state reopenings have contributed
a modest 0-4% increase in employment; decreases in job loss among those employed were smaller
(Cheng et al., 2020; Chetty et al., 2020). Moreover, majority of those who were reemployed appear
to have returned to their previous employment, with the rate of reemployment decreasing with
time since job loss. Lastly, the groups that had the highest unemployment rates in April - Hispanic
and Black workers, youngest and oldest workers, and women - have had the lowest reemployment
rates (Cheng et al., 2020). These racial and ethnic labor market disparities are important because
they add to already existing disparities in the extent of the health tolls of COVID-19 Benitez et al.
(2020); McLaren (2020); Hooper et al. (2020).


2.4     Consumer Spending
Research to date consistently finds that consumer spending also fell by approximately 35% in mid-
March. The decline in spending occurred despite close to $2 trillion in additional federal spending thus
far for COVID-19 economic support. Rates of food insecurity have also climbed substantiallyBitler
and Schanzenbach (2020). Consumer spending may have fallen in part because people reduced their
demand for consumption goods that require high levels of social interaction. That is, efforts to avoid
transmitting and contracting the virus is probably part of the story. However, spending may also
have been affected by the timing of federal stimulus payments, enhanced unemployment benefits,
and the consequences of state shutdown and reopening policies.
    Research documents that in addition to spending having declined immediately and dramatically,
there are important shifts in the composition of people's consumption bundles. Consumer spending
at small businesses and large retail outlets has fallen. But spending on orders of food has been rising
(Alexander and Karger, 2020)). The decline in consumer spending happened across the country


                                                   8
(Alexander and Karger, 2020; Baker et al., 2020; Chetty et al., 2020) and is highly correlated with a
self-reported measure of whether a person was under a "lockdown" (Coibion et al., 2020a).
       Despite declines in spending and high rates of food insecurity, federal stimulus spending appears
to have ensured an actual fall in the poverty rate after the start of the pandemic, relative to
pre-pandemic levels (Han et al., 2020). This is noteworthy as the start of the pandemic occurred
after a strong growing economy, thus it will be important to monitor consumer spending rebounds,
and implications for financial health.


2.5        Health Outcomes
The foremost objective of the collection of state social distancing policies has been to mitigate
the spread of SARS-CoV2. A major concern is that if the virus is allowed to spread too quickly,
local health care systems could be overwhelmed. Even a slower spread of the virus could lead to
tremendous loss of life.
       Overall, the emerging literature seems to agree that the intense social distancing that occurred
between mid March and mid April did indeed "flatten the curve" during the early months of the
epidemic. The estimated effect of state policies on case and death rates vary somewhat depending on
the specific policy measure examined in the study and also on the time frame of the study. However,
most studies estimate a 20-60% reduction in cases and deaths (Chernozhukov et al., 2020; Dave
et al., 2020; Friedson et al., 2020; Jinjarak et al., 2020) and a 2-9% reduction in daily growth rates
of cases and deaths (Courtemanche et al., 2020; Lyu and Wehby, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Yehya
et al., 2020) as a result of mandatory policies and informational events.


2.6        Research Related to Reopening
Declining case and death rates have been critical to determine when states can safely reopen - the
CDC recommended 3 weeks of steady decline in cases and deaths prior to lifting any social distancing
mandates. Our work finds that human mobility, although still below the pre-COVID19 level, started
to recover somewhat prior to official state reopenings, and then increased by a further 1-8% in
response to official state reopenings (Nguyen et al., 2020). Again, both voluntary behavior and
mandates appear to guide behavior. The relatively modest increase in mobility following reopenings
is not surprising since the risk of infection has not changed. Moreover, state reopenings cannot be
viewed as the reversal of state closures.2 Although states varied in the exact timing of their closure
mandates, once implemented, school closures or stay-at-home orders were relatively homogeneous
across the states. In contrast, state reopenings have varied a great deal in nature - immediate
vs phased reopenings, sectors/industries that initially reopened and capacity limits on businesses.
   2
    In only 3 states - FL, ID, MO - official state reopenings coincided with the lifting of stay-at-home orders.
In most cases stay-at-home orders/ school closures expired after date of initial reopenings.



                                                       9
Despite a slow and partial return to economic activity recent reports note a surge in cases and
deaths following reopenings (New York Times, 2020; The Washington Post, 2020).
    If rates of cases and deaths continue to grow, states will be faced with the difficult decision
to implement second rounds of shutdowns, which research finds can been effective in curbing the
spread, but are also economically very costly. At present, states appear to be pursuing a more
nuanced policy stance based on adaptive behaviors like mask wearing, maintaining 6 feet distance
from others, capacity limits, and implementing designated business hours for at-risk population to
minimize interaction with others. Since significant voluntary social distancing occurred in response
to information of COVID-19 in mid march, we would expect that individuals would voluntarily
adopt these practices as well to lower their risk of infection. However, the large voluntary increases
in social distancing in the early days of the epidemic hides considerable heterogeneity in behavioral
response to the threat of infection along lines of political affiliation, race and other socioeconomic
and demographic characteristics (Aksoy et al., 2020; Allcott et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020; Mongey
and Weinberg, 2020).


3     Theoretical Framework
In epidemiology, the dominant paradigm for analyzing an infectious disease outbreak is the susceptible-
infected-recovered (SIR) model (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927), which examines dynamics of
an epidemic that arise as a population moves through disease relevant states. These models do
not provide much insight into the way that an epidemic might alter the behavior of people in a
population. The economic epidemiology literature nests a micro level model of individual behavior
inside the SIR framework to try to model the role of endogenous self-protection behaviors might
alter the dynamics of an epidemic (Philipson, 1996; Kremer, 1996; Geoffard and Philipson, 1996;
Philipson, 2000). A much larger literature in economics explores individual choices and investments
that affect health (Grossman, 1972, 2000). This literature allows health to affect the utility function
directly, and also indirectly as an input into many other activities that people value. A key point is
that health is not the only thing that people value, and it is common for people to make trade-offs
between health and other objectives. Indeed, a major sub-field examines the economics of risky
health behaviors such as smoking, drug use, risky sex, poor diet, and dangerous driving (Cawley
and Ruhm, 2011; Viscusi, 1993).
    In this section, we sketch a simple microeconomic model in which a utility maximizing agent
allocates time and resources between activities with different risks of infection with SARS-COV-2.
The basic model is built on the household production model introduced by Becker (1965). The
starting point is a utility function defined over a set of commodities or experiences; inputs to the
production of these commodities may require physical interaction with others, which may diminish
the production of health. We focus on a utility function defined over three commodities:



                                                  10
                                                 u = u(z, o, h)

In the model, z is a vector of regular commodities, such as housing, home-cooked meals, or in-
restaurant dining with friends. o represents market work (occupation), which pays a wage that
determines the value of a person's time and shapes the person's budget constraint, but also enters
the utility function directly. h represent a person's health status.
    Each of the commodities in the utility function must be produced with market goods, time,
and physical interaction with others. To make these relationships concrete, use j  (z, o, h) to
index the three commodities. Let xj be an input vector of market goods that may be used in the
production of commodity j . px is the vector of market prices associated with the market inputs. ej
represents the quantity of a person's time (effort) that is devoted to the production of commodity j .
Finally, dj measures physical interaction (distance) with non-household members involved in the
production of commodity j . The person produces the regular commodities z using the production
function z = z (xz , ez , dz ). Similarly, the person produces the market work (occupation) commodity
by combining market goods (e.g. a computer, suitable clothing, a car), time, and physical interaction
with non-household members using a production function o = o(xo , eo , do ).
    The health production function is somewhat different because it may depend on the infection risk
associated with the physical interactions a person makes in the production of the other commodities.
For simplicity, we assume that all physical interactions generate the same risk, and we ignore
spillovers from behaviors of others in the community. Let D =                 j   dj represent the total amount
of physical interaction with non-household members that the person experiences across all of his
home production activities. The health production function is h = h(xh , eh , D). In the model,  is
an infectious disease risk parameter normalized so that  = 1 for the health risk associated with
                                                                                               h
physical interaction with other people during "normal" times. We assume that                   D    < 0 , which
means that health is declining with physical interaction with other people and with the level of
infectious disease risk at that time and local area.3
    The model sets up a trade-off between health and the production and consumption of other
commodities that raise utility but also require potentially health-damaging exposure to the virus.
The COVID-19 epidemic can be viewed as an exogenous change in the prevailing level of the infectious
disease parameter, . The epidemic does not alter anyone's utility function or production technology.
   3
     In our main analysis, we focus on a utility function with a single health commodity. But it is also logical to
view h as a vector of health commodities, each element of which may have a production function that depends
on physical interaction in a different way. For example, we might say that h = (m, r) is a vector consisting
of mental health (m) and respiratory health (r). Then m = m(xm , em , m D) and r = r(xr , er , r D) would
represent mental health and respiratory health production functions. In this case, it might be reasonable to
              m                       r
expect that    mD
                   > 0 even though     rD
                                           < 0 so that physical interaction improves mental health and worsens
respiratory health.



                                                        11
But people faced with higher values of  may nevertheless choose a new mix of commodities to
produce and consume.
    To pay for market goods, at prices px , the person relies on earned and unearned income. Suppose
that M is the person's non-labor income, w is his/her wage rate, and eo is hours devoted to
occupational work. As above, xj represents the vector of inputs used in the production of commodity
j . The person's budget constraint is xz px + xo px + xh px = M + weo , where eo is the amount
of time the person devotes to market work. In addition to the financial budget constraint, the
person has a fixed time endowment so that the sum of his/her time spent in market work and
across the production of various commodities must satisfy T = ez + eo + eh . The person's problem
is to max u(z, o, h), subject to (i) xz px + xo px + xh px = M + weo , (ii) T = ez + eo + eh , (iii)
z = z (xz , ez , dz ), (iv) o = o(xo , eo , do ), and (v) h = h(xh , eh , D).
    Writing out first order conditions and solving the system of equations would lead to a collection of
demand functions for each market input, time use, and level of physical interaction with other people.
These demand curves are derived from the person's demand for commodities (z ), occupational work
(o), and health (h). Let xz = xz (p, w, F, ) be the person's derived demand for market good inputs
into the production of z . Likewise, let ez = ez (p, w, F, ) represent demand for time devoted to the
production of z . And let dz = dz (p, w, F, ) be the person's demand for physical interaction in order
to produce z . Similar input demand functions are defined for for inputs required to produce the
occupational work commodity (o), and to produce health (h).
    In this framework, the COVID-19 epidemic amounts to an external increase in , which is the
infection risk generated by physical interaction with other people. Marginal increases in  affect
utility through the effect of infection risk on health production. However, larger changes in 
may also generate indirect effects on utility through behavioral changes in the demand for other
commodities, market goods, and time uses. The private responses to the epidemic are captured by
                                                                                dj
partial derivatives of the various demand functions. For example,                    is the effect of an increase in
infection risk on the person's demand for physical interaction involved in producing commodity j .
                         dj
Typically, we expect          < 0 so that infection risk will reduce the demand for physical interaction
as an input to other commodities.
    The model suggest that an increase in infection risk leads to fewer physical interactions even in
the absence of any government policies. Further, the fall in demand for physical interaction is likely
to alter the demand for market goods and services that people tend to consume in conjunction
with physical interaction. The nature of these changes depends on the commodity production
functions. Physical interaction may be a close substitute for market goods in the production of some
commodities. In these cases, an increase in infection risk () will increase the demand for substitute
market inputs. In other cases, physical interaction and market goods may be complements in the
production function. Then rising infection risk will tend to reduce demand for the market goods
that are complements to physical interaction. Similar patterns hold for time use. The change in



                                                         12
demand for market goods, time use, and interaction do not flow from a change in preferences. The
issue is that people cannot produce certain commodities as safely as they did in the past. In this
sense, the disruption from the epidemic flows from a negative supply shock.
    Individual reductions in physical interaction may confer benefits on other people. The positive
externalities may justify government policies to promote social distancing. One class of social
distancing policies would target physical interactions directly. For example, the government might
levy a a tax on physical interaction, issue advice and mandates that attach stigma to interactions,
or regulate the group size of interactions. These policies will tend to reduce the demand for physical
interaction, but they will also affect the demand for various input goods and services.
    A different class of policies might focus on market goods that are viewed as strong complements
to physical distancing. For example, the government might levy higher taxes on various kinds of
public transit, admission to parks and beaches, or restaurant meals. Tax instruments like this
have not been widely used during the epidemic. Instead, governments have tended to mandate
that certain types of goods and services may not be sold during the epidemic. Closing restaurants
and bars reduces demand for the input goods directly, but also could reduce demand for physical
distancing which is a complement to visits to these establishments.
    A third class of policies might target the infection risk parameter. For example, governments
might require people to wear masks during physical interactions. A successful mask policy could
be represented as a factor that diminishes the realized effect of the infection risk parameter. For
instance, people wearing masks might produce health using h = h(xh , eh , D), where 0 <  < 1 is
the effect of the mask and the "effective" infection risk is now  < . At current margins, infection
risk mitigation policies might increase the demand for physical interaction and for the goods and
services that go along with it. These kinds of policies may have important economic benefits because
they would help resolve the supply shock in the economy.
    The model we examine here treats infection risk as an aggregate parameter and focuses on the
way that changes in infection risk might affect demand for physical interaction, market goods, and
time use. A richer model would specify a health production function that varied with characteristics
of the person, perhaps including factors like age and pre-existing health conditions that make a
person particularly sensitive to COVID-19. In that setting, the magnitude of private responses to
changes in infection risk would vary across people, and there would be a case for more targeted
government interventions that focused not only on goods and interactions, but also on people with
higher health costs of infection.


4     Government Policies During The Epidemic
In this section, we provide an overview and rough typology of the strategies that state and local
governments have used during the shutdown and reopening phase of the epidemic.



                                                 13
4.1        Typology of Policies During Shutdown
We assembled data on state and county level events and social distancing policies using information
from several policy tracking projects, including from the National Governors Association, Kaiser
Family Foundation, national media outlets, Fullman et al. (2020) and Raifman and Raifman (2020).
We began with a large collection of 15-20 separate policies that are tracked by one or more outlets.
However, many of policies, such as state laws banning utility cancellations for non-payment of bills,
are unlikely to directly affect mobility in a major way. In addition, most tracking services record
different degrees of the same type of policy, such as gatherings restrictions by the size of the group
affected, or closures of different types of economic activity. Policy trackers also differed occasionally
in whether they followed only mandates or also reported government recommendations.
       Given the difficulty of estimating effects of a large number of policies at once, one of our first
tasks was to organize and structure data on the core public policy instruments state governments
have been using during the epidemic.4 We reduced the raw number of policies under consideration by
assessing which mandates and information events were logically connected with individual behaviors
related to mobility and social distancing. We were also guided by the joint timing of policy changes,
whether a policy was adopted by a large number of states, and whether there was concordance
about the timing and nature of the policy across multiple sources.
       Most of our empirical work distinguishes two broad types of state: informational events, and
government mandates. The informational events we consider are the announcement of the state's
first COVID-19 case and death; we collect these dates through the CDC website, other repositories,
and by searching news outlets. Public information events may induce people to voluntarily engage in
individual behaviors that mitigate transmission, including social distancing, frequent hand washing,
mask-wearing. Government mandates consist of a considerable set of state level policies related
to emergency declarations, school and business closures, and stay-at-home orders. Most of our
work revolves around the date at which these mandates became active. However, we often also
consider the data of announcement as a sensitivity check and to assess the possibility of anticipatory
responses. On average, the announcement and implementation dates were usually about two days
apart.
       The six state mandates we tracked are listed below, roughly in the order in which they rolled
out across states:

   1. Emergency declarations: These include State of Emergency, Public Health Emergency,
         and Public Health Disaster declarations. All states issued these policies by March 16th,
         2020. The federal government issued an emergency declaration on March 13th, 2020. States
         may use these declarations in order to pursue other policies such as school closure, to access
   4
    In Gupta et al. (2020) we follow county policy making as well, although there was much less activity on
that front; we focus only on state policies in this current paper.



                                                    14
   federal disaster relief funds, or to allow the executive branch to make decisions for which
   they would usually seek legislative approval. By statute, states are able to exercise additional
   powers when they issue emergency declarations. In a typical state, governors are able to
   declare an emergency, and usually do so for weather-related cases--although some states,
   such as Massachusetts in 2014, have invoked public health emergencies in order to address
   addiction-related issues in the state (Haffajee et al., 2014). In some states, city Mayors also
   may issue emergency declarations. In our conceptual framework, emergency declarations are
   typically the earliest form of state policy that might induce a mobility response; however, we
   think that emergency declarations are best viewed as an information instrument that signals
   to the population that the public health situation is serious and they act accordingly.

2. School closures: Some school districts closed prior to state-level actions. However, by April
  7, 2020, 48 states had issued statewide school closure rulings(verified through Fullman et al.
  (2020) and Education Week (2020)). While school closure policies would reduce some travel
  (of children and staff), they could reduce adult mobility as well if parents changed work travel
   immediately as a result. School closures may also contribute to a sense of precaution in the
   community. Although many spring break plans were cancelled, it is possible we might also
   capture increased travel due to school closures.

3. Restaurant restrictions and partial non-essential business (NEB) restrictions:
  These policies were also fairly widespread, with 49 states having such restrictions by April 7th,
   according to Fullman et al.. This law would directly restrict movement due to the inability to
   dine at locations other than one's home.

4. Gatherings recommendations or restrictions: These policies range from advising against
   gatherings, to allowing gatherings as long as they are not very large, to cancellation of all
   gatherings of more than a few individuals. There was a lot of action on this front: 44 states
   enacted gatherings policies. In principle, these laws would reduce mobility in a manner
   similar to restaurant closings. However, gathering restrictions are hard to enforce and rely on
   cooperation from residents. Their effects on mobility patterns is apt to be negligible, and we
   generally do not focus on these policies in our empirical work.

5. Non-Essential Business closures (NEB): NEB closures typically occurred when states
   had already conducted partial closings and then opted to close all non-essential businesses. 33
   states acted in this area during our study period. NEB closure could have fairly large effects,
   as they reduce where purchases happen and also reduce work travel. Moreover, they provide
   a binding constraint on individual behavior; even those not voluntarily complying with social
   distancing recommendations had fewer locations to visit.

6. Stay-At-Home (SAH): These policies (also known as "shelter-in-place" laws) are the


                                              15
         strongest and were the last of the closure policies to be implemented. SAH mandates may
         reduce mobility in very direct and obvious ways. A few states enacted curfews specifying the
         hours when individuals can leave their homes. However, we do not classify curfew policies as
         equivalent to SAH mandates. Several states have not issued a SAH in any part of the state
         (Vervosh and Healy, 2020); as of April 3rd, these included Arkansas, Iowa, Nebraska, North
         Dakota, and South Dakota.

       The state policies adopted during the shutdown phase occurred very rapidly. With an eye
towards econometric models, we worked to understand the order and timing of the sequence of
policies and to assess the extent to which it is feasible to meaningfully separate the effects of different
policies. Figure 2 shows how the share of the U.S. population that was subject to each social
distancing policy evolved over time.5
       Emergency Declarations appear early and separate from the other policies. However, School
Closures, Gatherings Restrictions, and Restaurant/Business Closings often coincide so closely in
time that it seems infeasible to separately identify their effects in a regression analysis. Given the
information on the sequence and timing of state policies, we condensed the seven major policy
events in to a set of four major events during the shutdown phase: State First Cases and Deaths,
Emergency Declarations, School Closures, and Stay-at-Home mandates.
       As this section demonstrates, there are some principles we use for selecting which of the large
number of different state policies currently discussed in the COVID-19 policy literature we should
track in our research on mobility. The key decision factor was ensuring close connections to our
theoretic framework while considering (informally) whether we could plausibly separate the effects
of these policies.


4.2        Typology of Reopening Policies
We collected and coded data on state reopening policies, starting with New York Times descriptions
of reopening plans. We gathered additional information on the reopening schedules for each state
through internet searches.6 We consider two primary reopening dates - date of announcement of
upcoming reopenings and dates of actual reopening. We define the state's reopening date as the
earliest date at which that state issued a reopening policy of any type. The dates we arrived at as
the first reopening event for each state are identical to the ones depicted in figures used by the New
York Times article. Starting with South Carolina, by June 15, 36 states had officially reopened in
some phased form.
   5
     Figure 2.2 in Gupta et al. (2020) shows the timeline of the policy changes that occurred in each state, and
Figure 3.2 shows the timing of the first cases and deaths by state. There we show that the first COVID-19
case in a state is easily set apart in timing from the other policies, as is the first COVID-19 death.
   6
     We provide the reopening policies information we have compiled from various sources at
https://github.com/nguyendieuthuy/ReOpeningPlans.



                                                      16
       Some states never formally adopted a stay-at-home order, but even these states implemented
partial business closures (i.e. restaurant closures) and some non-essential business restrictions. Of
course, measures of mobility and economic activity have fallen in these states as well because of
private social distancing choices. In addition, the lack of an official closure does not mean that
state governments cannot take actions to try to hasten the return to regular levels of activity. For
example, South Dakota did not have a statewide stay-at-home order, but the governor announced a
"back to normal" plan that set May 1 as the reopening date for many businesses. Our study period
to examine the effect of reopenings on mobility commences on April 15 to ensure that we capture
reopenings across all states.
       Most reopening policies have been centered around seven areas of economic activity: outdoor
recreation, retail, restaurant, worship, personal care, entertainment, and industry activities. However,
the pace at which states have reopened each of these sectors has varied a lot. Some states reopened
most businesses and industries immediately out of ,7 , while others have adopted a much more phased
approach. Retail, recreation and restaurants have often reopened first and frequently only at limited
capacity.
       South Carolina was the first state to reopen on April 20. It was also one of the last states to
adopt a stay-at-home order.8 This April 20 reopening was partial, allowing retail stores to open
at 20% of capacity. By April 30, eight states had reopened to some degree (AL, MS, TN, MT,
OK, AK, GA, and SC). Eight more states reopened on May 1; by May 13, a total of 36 states had
reopened. By June 30th all states have undergone at least the first stage of reopening. In most of
our reopening analyses the study period ends on June 15, which means that we are able to estimate
impacts for at least 30 days post reopening using variation from all 51 states and DC for Phase 1
and Phase 2 reopening polices.
       Stay-at-home orders and non-essential business closures are related but distinct. Several states
issued `stay-at-home' mandates after they issued orders closing all non-essential businesses, or after
closing some non-essential businesses (such as gyms) and closing restaurants for on-site dining.
Although for the most part, stay-at-home orders coincided with orders to close all non-essential
businesses, restaurants and other select categories of business closures started well before stay-at-
home orders. Many business closures started in mid-March, along with school closures (see Figure
1). Timing of reopenings have been within 24 hours of lifting of stay-at-home orders in only 7 states
(Connecticut, Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Pennsylvania and Utah, refer Table 1 for details).
In the remaining states, reopening frequently preceded official expiry of stay-at-home orders on
average by a month (32 days).
       Figure 2a shows that by June 15 all U.S. states have adopted some form of reopening policy.
   7
     Alaska, Connecticut, Washington DC, Iowa, Indiana, Louisiana, Maryland, Montana, New Hampshire,
Nevada, South Dakota and Wyoming WY reopened initially by opening 5+ of the 7 sectors.
   8
     Although it issued an emergency declaration fairly early (March 13), South Carolina did not issue a
stay-at-home order until April 7. (See Gupta et al., 2020).



                                                   17
However, the pace of reopening has been gradual and varied. Figure 2b shows that by June 15,
nearly 75% of the population lives in states that opened the retail sector, but only 60% are in states
that opened 3 or more sectors that we track.9 However, 20 states pursued a more limited strategy
by opening only one or two sectors.10
        States that either implemented fewer social distancing measures or implemented those measures
later also tended to reopen earlier, based on time since the first of four major social distancing
measures ­ non-essential business closures, restaurant closures, social gathering restrictions, and
stay-at-home orders or advisories. These results may reflect either a lack of political desire to engage
in distancing or a more limited outbreak (Andersen, 2020; Adolph et al., 2020; Allcott et al., 2020)
.


5         Mobility Data
The data sets typically used in public health research do not provide high frequency measures
of social interaction. To make progress, our research program has made heavy use of data from
at least four commercial cell signal aggregators who have provided their data for free to support
COVID-19 research. Each company has several different measures of mobility, which may capture a
different form of underlying behavior, with different implications for the transmission of the virus
and economic activity. In addition, each company collects data potentially from different sets of app
users, and it is possible that some of the cell signal panels are more mobile than others. Given these
complexities, it is important to examine several measures of mobility both to assess the robustness
and generality of a result, and to provide opportunities to learn from differences in results across
measures. In this paper, we discuss results based on data from Apple's Mobility Trends Reports,
Google's Community Mobility Reports, PlaceIQ, and Safegraph.
Apple Mobility Trends. Apple's Mobility Trends Reports (Apple, 2020) are published daily and
reflect requests for driving directions in Apple Maps. The measure we use tracks the volume of
driving directions requests per U.S. state compared to a baseline volume on January 13, 2020; no
county-level equivalent is available.
Google Community Mobility Reports. We extract state-level measures of mobility from
Google's Community Mobility Reports (Google, 2020), which also contains county level data. We
use the data that reflect the percent change in visits to places within a geographic area, including:
grocery and pharmacy; transit stations (public transport hubs such as subway, bus, and train
stations); retail and recreation (e.g. restaurants, shopping centers, and theme parks); places of work
and residential (places of residence). The baseline for computing these changes is the median level
    9
     Following the New York Times, we track outdoor recreation, retail, food/drink establishments, personal
care establishments, houses of worship, entertainment venues, and industrial areas.
  10
     For seven states we could not clearly identify the sectors that would be affected by the reopening decision.



                                                       18
of activity on the corresponding day of the week from January 3 to February 6, 2020.
PlaceIQ. We use two anonymized, aggregated location exposure indices from PlaceIQ data, provided
in (Couture et al., 2020): (1) a mixing index that for a given day detects the likely exposure of
a smart device to other devices in a county or state on a given day, and (2) out-of-state and
out-of-county travel indices that measure among smart devices that pinged in a given geographic
location, the percent of these devices that pinged in another geographic location at least once during
the previous 14 days.
Safegraph. We use Safegraph data to measure the median hours spent at home by devices as well
as the number of devices at the census block group level that are detected at typical work location
during the day or to have left the house. We aggregate these to state by-day levels.


6     Econometric Framework
Let Yst be a measure of mobility in state s on date t. Es is the start date of a closure/reopening
policy in state s. T SEst = t - Es is number of days between t and the adoption date. We fit the
following event study regression model:



             -2                              30
    Yst =    a=-30 a 1(T SEst   = -a) +      b=0 b 1(T SEst   = b) + Wst  + s + t +   st




    In the model, s is a state fixed effect, which capture time-invariant differences in outcomes
across states. t is a date fixed effects, which represents a common trend. Wst is a vector of state ×
day measures of temperature and precipitation which helps adjust for seasonality.          st   is a residual
error term, and a and b trace out deviations from the common trends that states experience in
the days leading up to and following a given policy event. Standard errors allow for clustering at
the state level.
    Our main specifications are based on a balanced panel of states. The models are not weighted
and our estimates reflect the average state rather than the average person. The composition of
states contributing to event study coefficients is quite stable for a range of 30 days before and after
the event. The calendar time covered by the event studies varies somewhat across outcomes and
is described along with each set of results. To help summarize results, we assess the presence of
a pre-trend based on the statistical significance of the pre-policy event study coefficients. In our
summary results, we say that a measure exhibits a pre-trend if at least 30% of the coefficients in the
pre-period were statistically significant.
    We also use the event study models to decompose the overall change in mobility over time into


                                                   19
a share explained by state level policy changes and a share explained by secular trends that are not
associated with state policies. To understand the counterfactual exercise, let y
                                                                               ^st be the fitted value
for state s on date t from the estimated event study regression. These fitted values are a model
based estimate of what actually happened in the state. Let y  = yst - 30 
                                                                   st
                                                                            ^b 1(T SEst = b) is an
                                                                                b=0
estimate the counterfactual mobility outcome that would have prevailed in the absence of the state
policy. We compute the daily cross-state average of the fitted values and counterfactual estimates
to form two national time series of mobility outcomes. A close correspondence between the realized
time series and the counterfactual time series would indicate that changes in mobility are mainly
from secular trends rather than policy.


7        Results
7.1        Trends in Mobility
The collection of graphs in figure 3 shows the national and state level time series for a subset
of the mobility measures we follow in Gupta et al. (2020) and Nguyen et al. (2020). The solid
black line indicates the "smoothed" (7-day moving average) national average (not weighted by state
population). Each of the light grey lines represents a state. The state lines turn red for the time
period when a state implemented a stay-at-home (SAH) order, and then they turn green when a
state implements its first reopening stage. This provides a convenient way to observe when the
changes in mobility occurred relative to the policy dates.
       The overall pattern of results is very consistent across the different measures of mobility. Figure
3a shows the mixing index. Weekend patterns and other seasonal effects are visible, when all lines
move together. There is a substantial drop in mixing around mid-march, when the index falls 70%
between March 1 and April 14. Figure 3 b shows the average "out of county" travel measure, which
fell by 38% between March 1 and April 14. Figure 3g shows trends hours spent at home, which is a
state level average of census block group medians. Time at home increased 42% increase between
March 1 and April 14. The springtime is typically associated with more mobility and interaction, so
any decline during this period is abnormal.11
       The graphs in figure 3 shows that states with no SAH mandates also experienced large declines
in mobility as well as subsequent increases after mid April. Indeed, states with no SAH policies at
all ­ shown in grey throughout ­ had declines in movement almost as dramatic as in other states.
Furthermore, most states with SAH mandates experienced major declines in mobility even before
the SAH mandates went into effect.
  11
    Data for recent years (2018-2019) from the U.S. Department of Transportation for (seasonally unadjusted)
vehicle miles travelled, shows that the March value is typically 20% higher than February's value (U.S.
Department of Transportation 2020).




                                                     20
7.2     Mandate Effects
Estimates of the event studies evaluating the effect of closure policies and informational events on
each of the mobility measures are presented in Gupta et al. (2020). In Figure 5 we graphically
present the event study coefficients of the effect of state policies and informational events on the
'mixing index' available from PlaceIQ (Couture et al., 2020). As noted in Section 5 the mixing
index captures the concentration of devices in particular locations and most closely proxies for social
distancing and thus transmission. The results suggest that the concentration of devices in particular
locations does not trend differentially in the period leading up to any policy or informational event.
However, we do not find statistically significant evidence that the policy or information events
have induced substantial changes in mixing at the state level except for a large effect of emergency
declarations. The event study coefficients imply that emergency declarations reduced the state level
mixing index by about 68% after 30 days, relative to the value of the index on March 1st, which is
the baseline reference period for all percent effects reported for closure events. The coefficients show
a similar pattern for First Deaths, but it is not statistically significant.
    Table 2 provides a summary of the results of the event study regressions for each outcome
and policy/information event, including other ones for which figures and tables of coefficients are
reported in Gupta et al. (2020). Table 2 has a row for each state and county outcome variable, and a
column for each policy/information event. The top panel shows the effect size 5 days after the event,
expressed as a percentage of the average value of the outcome variable on March 1, 2020. The bottom
panel shows the effect size after 20 days, also expressed as a percentage of the average outcome on
March 1. We bold and indicate with ** the effects that are statistically significant at the 5% level or
better and where parallel trends hold. We use ** without bold for effects that are significant at the
10% level. The cells that are shaded in grey have possible violations of the differential pre-trends
assumption and should be largely overlooked; we do not indicate statistical significance for them.
First death announcements also carry a large coefficient but it is statistically not significant; school
closures and stay at home laws have statistically insignificant and wrong-signed coefficients.


7.3     Reopening Effects
In a manner similar to the event studies for the closure policies, we present results for the initial
reopening dates, starting in figure 5. The two panels display effects first where the policy date
is the announcement of the re-opening, and second for the actual reopening date. There is a
pattern (although not statistically significant) of what appears to be a non-parallel trend prior to
the actual reopening date, but is fairly flat prior to the announcement date. None of the estimates
are statistically significant, even after the policy is effective, although non-significant coefficients are
consistent with an increase in movement after the announcement date. This helps illustrate our
finding that it is important to consider a variety of mobility measures to assess the impact of the



                                                    21
policies. Table 2 shows that although the mixing index is not statistically precise, there are several
other outcomes that are, and do not violate pre-trends concerns. The effect sizes here are, however,
considerably smaller than in the closure period. One reason for that maybe that in the reopening
phase, we do not have informational events occurring in the same way they did during the closure
period. We do not study the impact of changing rates of COVID-19 cases or deaths, as those were
often directly referred to as conditions for reopening.
   The overall message from table 2 for the reopening dates is that estimates are fairly similar
whether we use the announcement date or the actual reopening date, and that effect sizes are fairly
small at both 5 days or 20 days, on the order of 1% to 4%. These are not surprising results, given
the very limited nature of initial reopening phases. The small effects overall also could mask larger
effects in certain situations; event study estimates are summaries of each state's experience Wing
et al. (2018) and in Nguyen et al. (2020) we show that effects are larger in states that were the last
to close businesses, and also differ along a number of other dimensions.


7.4     The Role of Secular Trends (National sentiment)
One way to interpret our results is to use the event study coefficients to tease apart the amount
of the actual change in mobility that occurred during the closure or reopening time periods, into
shares explained by state actions, relative to secular changes in sentiment due to other factors.
Figure 6 and table 3 show estimates of this decomposition for the mixing index during the shutdown
phase. We used event study regressions to estimate the effects of emergency declarations on the
mixing index outcome. The solid line in figure 6 shows how the national average mixing index
actually changed over time. The dashed line is an estimate of the counterfactual path of the mixing
index, which removes the policy effects from the model. The time trends captured by the model
imply that in the mixing index would have increased substantially in the absence of the emergency
declarations. 3 shows that the emergency declaration event study coefficients account for about
65% of the observed decline in the mixing index that occurred between the first week of March and
the second week of April. The remaining 35% was due to secular trends that occurred separately
from state emergency declarations. Decompositions like this one imply that both policy and private
responses (secular trends) played a key role during the shutdown. However, the specific policy share
vs secular share varies across measures of mobility.
   We used this same strategy to examine the state reopening policies. Figure 6 and table 4 show
decomposition results for the mixing index and the fraction of people who leave home during the
day. The solid lines in Figure 6 show how the mixing index (panel a) and the fraction leaving home
(panel b) evolved between mid-April and mid-June. Both measures rose substantially during the
reopening phase. The dashed lines show counterfactual estimates of the path of each index in the
absence of the event study state reopening effects. The results suggest that the reopening policies
had almost no influence on the rise of the mixing index. The growth in that variable is almost


                                                 22
completely attributable to a nationwide secular trend that occurred separately from reopening
events. In contrast, the model suggests that state reopening events did alter the evolution of the
fraction leaving home measure of mobility. Table 4 shows that the fraction leaving home grew from
about 60% to 70% between late April and mid-June. About 31% of that increase is attributable
to the reopening policies because of how much time had passed before policies were adopted. The
remaining 69% of the change might have happened even in the absence of state policies, given the
common trends implied by the model. These results again suggest that both private responses
(secular trends) and state level policies have played a role in generating recent increases in mobility,
however the magnitude/share of policy effects varies across measures of mobility and the policy
share is perhaps somewhat smaller during the reopening phase than during the shutdown phase.


8     Conclusion
We examine human mobility responses to the COVID19 epidemic and to the policies that arose
to encourage social distancing. A simple theoretical framework suggests that people will increase
social distance in reaction to information and apprehension regarding the virus, not just in response
to state closure or reopening mandates.
    We examine closures first, finding that information-based policies and events such as first cases
had the largest effects. This does not imply that these laws and events would always have such
impacts, as it is possible people simply react to the earliest of the policies, and more restrictive
policies like stay at home orders happened fairly late. Early state policies appeared to convey
information about the epidemic, suggesting that even the policy response operates partly through a
voluntary channel.
    Given that most states have now undertaken some steps to reduce the lockdown, we are able to
compare mobility during the closure to mobility during the reopenings. Even though the reopenings
are gradual, often with capacity limits for each sector, we find that mobility increases a few days
after the policy change. There is some evidence that reopenings lead people to increase the number
of different locations they visit, rather than increase the total time they are outside their home.
Finally, we observe that largest increases in mobility occur in states that were late adopters of
closure measures, and thus had these mandates in place for the shortest amount of time. This
suggests that closure policies may have represented more of a binding constraint in the late adopting
states. Together, these four observations provide an assessment of the extent to which people in the
U.S. are resuming movement and physical proximity as the COVID-19 pandemic continues. Given
the high costs of broad closures, it behooves researchers to examine possible targeted approaches.
    Our own empirical work and our review of the emerging literature supports several broad
conclusions. First, the epidemic has led to a massive change in human mobility and contact patterns.
This change happened quite early and suddenly and largely across the board. Although much of



                                                  23
the decline in mobility appears to be a private response to changing health condition, research also
suggests that state and local social distancing policies have helped further depress mobility. Second,
measures of economic activity related to both labor market outcomes and consumer spending have
changed dramatically in response to the epidemic. The fall in consumer spending occurred despite a
large increase in federal spending. The fall in spending occurred throughout the country and does
not seem to have been moderated by state and local policies. The decline in employment happened
a bit later than the immediate mobility and spending effects, but here as well the evidence suggests
that social distancing policies are not associated with large differences in labor market outcomes
across localities. Third, there is fairly consistent evidence that the state social distancing policies
have helped improve health outcomes as measured by cases and deaths.
   The literature on the COVID-19 epidemic has developed at a very rapid pace. The crisis is
still only a few months old, but an active research community and new availability of data has
contributed to our understanding of the way people are responding to both public health conditions
and public policy constraints. But there is still much work to be done. States have started to
reopen their economies. School reopenings are a pressing decision. There is also now evidence that
caseloads and deaths are beginning to rise again. Congress is currently debating another round of
economic aid to protect society financially against the damage caused by the epidemic. It is not
clear how long the country can maintain such low levels of physical mobility, and such high levels of
unemployment. The next phase of the epidemic may call for more targeted policies that mitigate
the spread of the virus with less disruption.




                                                  24
References
Aaronson, D., S. A. Brave, R. A. Butters, and M. Fogarty (2020). The stay-at-home labor market:
  Google searches, unemployment insurance, and public health orders. Technical report, Chicago
  Fed Letter, No. 436.

Abouk, R. and B. Heydari (2020, April). The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social
  Distancing Behavior in the United States. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3571421, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Adolph, C., K. Amano, B. Bang-Jensen, N. Fullman, and J. Wilkerson (2020). Pandemic Politics:
  Timing State-Level Social Distancing Responses to COVID-19. medRxiv , 2020.03.30.20046326.

Aksoy, C. G., M. Ganslmeier, and P. Poutvaara (2020). Public attention and policy responses to
  covid-19 pandemic.

Alexander, D. and E. Karger (2020). Do stay-at-home orders cause people to stay at home? effects
  of stay-at-home orders on consumer behavior. WP 2020-12 .

Allcott, H., L. Boxell, J. Conway, M. Gentzkow, M. Thaler, and D. Y. Yang (2020). Polarization
  and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic.
  NBER Working Paper w26946, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, M., J. C. Maclean, M. F. Pesko, and K. I. Simon (2020, May). Effect of a Federal Paid
  Sick Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device Data.
  Working Paper 27138, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, M. S. (2020). Early evidence on social distancing in response to Covid-19 in the United
  States. Working Paper , 1­11.

Apple (2020). Mobility Trends Reports. https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility.

Baek, C., P. B. McCrory, T. Messer, and P. Mui (2020). Unemployment effects of stay-at-home
  orders: Evidence from high frequency claims data. Document retrieved on July 26, 2020 from .

Baker, S. R., R. Farrokhnia, S. Meyer, M. Pagel, and C. Yannelis (2020, April). How does household
  spending respond to an epidemic? consumption during the 2020 covid-19 pandemic. Working
  Paper 26949, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Balla-Elliott, D., Z. B. Cullen, E. L. Glaeser, M. Luca, and C. T. Stanton (2020, June). Business
  reopening decisions and demand forecasts during the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27362,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                               25
  Barrios, J. M. and Y. Hochberg (2020, April). Risk perception through the lens of politics in the
     time of the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper 27008, National Bureau of Economic Research.

  Becker, G. S. (1965). A theory of the allocation of time. The economic journal , 493­517.

  Benitez, J. A., C. J. Courtemanche, and A. Yelowitz (2020, July). Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
     COVID-19: Evidence from Six Large Cities. Working Paper 27592, National Bureau of Economic
     Research.

  Bento, A. I., T. Nguyen, C. Wing, F. Lozano Rojas, Y.-Y. Ahn, and K. Simon (2020). Evidence
     from internet search data shows information-seeking responses to news of local covid-19 cases.
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

  Bento, A. I. and P. Rohani (2016). Forecasting epidemiological consequences of maternal immuniza-
     tion. Clinical Infectious Diseases 63 (suppl4 ), S 205 - -S 212.

Bharti, N., X. Lu, L. Bengtsson, E. Wetter, and A. J. Tatem (2015). Remotely measuring populations
  during a crisis by overlaying two data sources. International health 7 (2), 90­98.

Bielecki,   M.,   R. Z¨
                      ust,    D. Siegrist,    D. Meyerhofer,      G. A. G. Crameri,        Z. Stanga,
  A. Stettbacher,     T. W. Buehrer,         and J. W. Deuel (2020).          Social Distancing Al-
  ters the Clinical Course of COVID-19 in Young Adults:                     A Comparative Cohort
  Study.    Clinical Infectious Diseases .    eprint: https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article-
  pdf/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa889/33793796/ciaa889.pdf.

Bitler, Marianne, H. H. and D. Schanzenbach (2020). The social safety net in the wake of covid-19.
  Technical report, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Bitler-et-al-conference-
  draft.pdf.

Bootsma, M. C. J. and N. M. Ferguson (2007). The effect of public health measures on the 1918 influenza
  pandemic in US cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (18), 7588­7593.

Brynjolfsson, E., J. J. Horton, A. Ozimek, D. Rock, G. Sharma, and H.-Y. TuYe (2020, June). Covid-19
  and remote work: An early look at us data. Working Paper 27344, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Buckee, C. O., S. Balsari, J. Chan, M. Crosas, F. Dominici, U. Gasser, Y. H. Grad, B. Grenfell,
  M. E. Halloran, M. U. G. Kraemer, M. Lipsitch, C. J. E. Metcalf, L. A. Meyers, T. A. Perkins,
  M. Santillana, S. V. Scarpino, C. Viboud, A. Wesolowski, and A. Schroeder (2020). Aggregated
  mobility data could help fight covid-19. Science 368 (6487), 145­146.

Bui, T. T. M., P. Button, and E. G. Picciotti (2020, June). Early evidence on the impact of covid-19
  and the recession on older workers. Working Paper 27448, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                    26
Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, A. Hamins-Puertolas, and C. Kurz (2020). Tracking labor
  market developments during the covid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment. Technical report,
  Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-030. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System, https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2020.030.

Campello, M., G. Kankanhalli, and P. Muthukrishnan (2020). Tracking labor market developments
  during the covid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 27208, DOI: 10.3386/w27208.

Cawley, J. and C. J. Ruhm (2011). The economics of risky health behaviors. In Handbook of health
  economics, Volume 2, pp. 95­199. Elsevier.

CDC (2020, February). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).

Chaudhry, R., G. Dranitsaris, T. Mubashir, J. Bartoszko, and S. Riazi (2020). A country level analysis
  measuring the impact of government actions, country preparedness and socioeconomic factors on
  covid-19 mortality and related health outcomes.

Chen, K., Y. Zhuo, M. de la Fuente, R. Rohla, and E. F. Long (2020a). Causal estimation of
  stay-at-home orders on sars-cov-2 transmission. UCLA Anderson School Working Paper May 15.

Chen, M. K., Y. Zhuo, M. de la Fuente, R. Rohla, and E. F. Long (2020b). Causal estimation of
  stay-at-home orders on sars-cov-2 transmission.

Cheng, W., P. Carlin, J. Carroll, S. Gupta, F. L. Rojas, L. Montenovo, T. D. Nguyen, I. M. Schmutte,
  O. Scrivner, K. I. Simon, C. Wing, and B. Weinberg (2020, June). Back to business and (re)employing
  workers? labor market activity during state covid-19 reopenings. Working Paper 27419, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Chernozhukov, V., H. Kasaha, and P. Schrimpf (2020). Causal impact of masks, policies, behavior on
  early covid-19 pandemic in the u.s.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, and T. O. I. Team (2020, June). How did covid-19
  and stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic tracker based
  on private sector data. Working Paper 27431, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cicala, S., S. P. Holland, E. T. Mansur, N. Z. Muller, and A. J. Yates (2020, May). Expected health
  effects of reduced air pollution from covid-19 social distancing. Working Paper 27135, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020b, April). Labor markets during the COVID-19
  Crisis: A preliminary view. Technical Report w27017, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, MA.


                                                    27
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (May 2020a). The cost of the covid-19 crisis: Lockdowns,
  macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper (27141).

Courtemanche, C., J. Garuccio, A. Le, J. Pinkston, and A. Yelowitz (2020, May). Strong so-
  cial distancing measures in the united states reduced the covid-19 growth rate. Health Affairs ,
  10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608.

Couture, V., J. Dingel, A. Green, J. Handbury, and K. Williams (2020). Location Exposure Index
  Based on PlaceIQ Data. https://github.com/COVIDExposureIndices/COVIDExposureIndices/
  blob/master/documentation/LEX.pdf.

Cronin, C. J. and W. N. Evans (2020, July). Private Precaution and Public Restrictions: What Drives
  Social Distancing and Industry Foot Traffic in the COVID-19 Era? (27531).

Dave, D. M., A. I. Friedson, K. Matsuzawa, and J. J. Sabia (2020, May). When Do Shelter-in-Place
  Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time. Working
  Paper 27091, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Devaraj, S. and P. Patel (2020). Effectiveness of stay-in-place-orders during covid-19 pandemic:
  Evidence from us border counties (may 29, 2020).

Elenev, V., L. Quintero, A. Rebucci, and E. Simeonova (2020). Staggered adoption of nonpharmaceutical
  interventions to contain covid-19 across u.s. counties: Direct and spillover effects.

Engle, S., J. Stromme, and A. Zhou (2020). Staying at home: Mobility effects of covid-19. http:
  //www.countyhealthrankings.org.

Fairlie, R. W. (2020, July). The impact of covid-19 on small business owners: Continued losses and
  the partial rebound in may 2020. Working Paper 27462, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ferguson, N. M., D. A. Cummings, S. Cauchemez, C. Fraser, S. Riley, A. Meeyai, S. Iamsirithaworn,
  and D. S. Burke (2005). Strategies for containing an emerging influenza pandemic in southeast asia.
  Nature 437 (7056), 209­214.

Fetzer, T., L. Hensel, J. Hermle, and C. Roth (2020). Coronavirus Perceptions And Economic Anxiety.

Friedson, A., D. McNichols, J. Sabia, and D. Dave (2020). Did California's Shelter in Place Order
  Work? Early Evidence on Coronavirus-Related Health Benefits. Working Paper .

Fullman, N., T. Bang-Jensen, K. Amano, C. Adolph, and J. Wilkerson (2020). State-level social
  distancing policies in response to COVID-19 in the US [Data file]. Technical Report Version 1.04.



                                                   28
Geoffard, P.-Y. and T. Philipson (1996). Rational epidemics and their public control. International
  economic review , 603­624.

Gog, J. R., S. Ballesteros, C. Viboud, L. Simonsen, O. N. Bjornstad, J. Shaman, D. L. Chao, F. Khan,
  and B. T. Grenfell (2014). Spatial transmission of 2009 pandemic influenza in the us. PLoS Comput
  Biol 10 (6), e1003635.

Google (2020). COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports. https://www.google.com/covid19/
  mobility.

Goolsbee, A. and C. Syverson (2020). Fear, lockdown, and diversion: Comparing drivers of pandemic
  economic decline 2020. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Granja, J., C. Makridis, C. Yannelis, and E. Zwick (2020, May). Did the paycheck protection program
  hit the target? Working Paper 27095, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
  economy 80 (2), 223­255.

Grossman, M. (2000). The human capital model. In Handbook of health economics, Volume 1, pp.
  347­408. Elsevier.

Gupta, S., L. Montenovo, T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, I. M. Schmutte, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg,
  and C. Wing (2020). Effects of social distancing policy on labor market outcomes. NBER Working
  Paper .

Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, S. Raman, B. Lee, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and C. Wing (2020,
  April). Tracking Public and Private Response to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State
  and Local Government Actions. Working Paper 27027, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haffajee, R., W. E. Parmet, and M. M. Mello (2014). What Is a Public Health " Emergency " ? New
  England Journal of Medicine 37111 (11).

Han, J., B. D. Meyer, and J. X. Sullivan (2020). Income and poverty in the covid-19 pandemic. In
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity virtual conference, June, Volume 25.

Hatchett, R. J., C. E. Mecher, and M. Lipsitch (2007). Public health interventions and epidemic intensity
  during the 1918 influenza pandemic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (18),
  7582­7587.

Hooper, M. W., A. M. N´
                      apoles, and E. J. P´
                                         erez-Stable (2020). Covid-19 and racial/ethnic disparities.
  Jama .



                                                    29
Huang, V. S., S. Sutermaster, Y. Caplan, H. Kemp, D. Schmutz, and S. K. Sgaier (2020). Social
  distancing across vulnerability, race, politics, and employment: How different americans changed
  behaviors before and after major covid-19 policy announcements. medRxiv .

Jarvis, C. I., K. Van Zandvoort, A. Gimma, K. Prem, P. Klepac, G. J. Rubin, and W. J. Edmunds
  (2020). Quantifying the impact of physical distance measures on the transmission of covid-19 in the
  uk. BMC medicine 18, 1­10.

Jinjarak, Y., R. Ahmed, S. Nair-Desai, W. Xin, and J. Aizenman (2020, May). Accounting for global
  covid-19 diffusion patterns, january-april 2020. Working Paper 27185, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Kahn, L. B., F. Lange, and D. G. Wiczer (2020). Labor demand in the time of covid-19: Evidence
  from vacancy postings and ui claims. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Keeling, M. J. and P. Rohani (2011). Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals. Princeton
  University Press.

Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of
  epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical
  and physical character 115 (772), 700­721.

Kong, E. and D. Prinz (2020). The impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on unemployment
  during a pandemic. SSRN Working Paper 3581254, SSRN.

Kowalczyk,    L.   (2020).           After    the   surge:         Hospitals   prep     to   bring   back    regu-
  lar   patients   while     virus    cases    linger   -    the     boston    globe.        Technical      report,
  https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/05/02/nation/hospitals-next-phase-recruiting-back-regular-
  patients-while-allaying-fears-about-mingling-with-coronavirus/.

Kremer, M. (1996). Integrating behavioral choice into epidemiological models of aids. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 111 (2), 549­573.

Lin, Z. and C. M. Meissner (2020, May). Health vs. Wealth? Public Health Policies and the Economy
  During Covid-19. Working Paper 27099, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lozano Rojas, F., X. Jiang, L. Montenovo, K. I. Simon, B. Weinberg, and C. Wing (2020). Is the cure
  worse than the disease? Immediate labor market effects of covid-19 case rates and school closures in
  the US. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lyu, W. and G. L. Wehby (2020). Shelter-in-place orders reduced covid-19 mortality and reduced
  the rate of growth in hospitalizations. Health Affairs 0 (0), 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00719. PMID:
  32644825.


                                                        30
Mari, L., E. Bertuzzo, L. Righetto, R. Casagrandi, M. Gatto, I. Rodriguez-Iturbe, and A. Rinaldo
  (2012). Modelling cholera epidemics: the role of waterways, human mobility and sanitation. Journal
  of the Royal Society Interface 9 (67), 376­388.

McLaren, J. (2020). Racial disparity in covid-19 deaths: Seeking economic roots with census data.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mongey, S. and A. Weinberg (2020). Characteristics of workers in low work-from-home and high
  personal-proximity occupations. Becker Friedman Institute for Economic White Paper .

Montenovo, L., X. Jiang, F. L. Rojas, I. M. Schmutte, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg, and C. Wing
  (2020). Determinants of disparities in covid-19 job losses. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Mossong, J., N. Hens, M. Jit, P. Beutels, K. Auranen, R. Mikolajczyk, M. Massari, S. Salmaso, G. S.
  Tomba, and J. Wallinga (2008). Social contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of
  infectious diseases. PLoS medicine 5 (3).

New York Times (2020). It's not only coronavirus cases that are rising. now covid deaths are, too.
  Technical report.

Nguyen, T. D., S. Gupta, M. Andersen, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and C. Wing (2020). Impacts of state
  reopening policy on human mobility. NBER Working Paper .

Padalabalanarayanan,      S.,   V. S. Hanumanthu,           and B. Sen (2020).          Association of
  State    Stay-at-Home     Orders     and    State-Level    African    American     Population     With
  COVID-19 Case Rates.            JAMA Network Open 3 (10),            e2026010­e2026010.         eprint:
  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/articlepdf/2772155/padalabalanarayanan 2020 oi 200853 160

Painter, M. and T. Qiu (2020). Political beliefs affect compliance with covid-19 social distancing orders.
  Available at SSRN 3569098 .

Philipson, T. (1996). Private vaccination and public health: an empirical examination for us measles.
  Journal of Human Resources , 611­630.

Philipson, T. (2000). Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases. In Handbook of Health Economics,
  Volume 1, pp. 1761­1799. Elsevier.

Prem, K., A. R. Cook, and M. Jit (2017, 09). Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using
  contact surveys and demographic data. PLOS Computational Biology 13 (9), 1­21.

Raifman, M. and J. Raifman (2020). Disparities in the population at risk of severe illness from covid-19
  by race/ethnicity and income. American Journal of Preventive Medicine .


                                                    31
Rohani, P., X. Zhong, and A. A. King (2010). Contact network structure explains the changing
  epidemiology of pertussis. Science 330 (6006), 982­985.

Rojas, F. L., X. Jiang, L. Montenovo, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg, and C. Wing (2020). Is the cure
  worse than the problem itself? immediate labor market effects of covid-19 case rates and school
  closures in the us. NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Simonov, A., S. K. Sacher, J.-P. H. Dub´
                                       e, and S. Biswas (May 2020). The persuasive effect of fox
  news: Non-compliance with social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic. National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper (27237).

The Washington Post (2020). It's not only coronavirus cases that are rising. now covid deaths are, too.

Vervosh, S. and J. Healy (2020, apr). Holdout States Resist Calls for Stay-at-Home Orders: `What
  Are You Waiting For?

Viscusi, W. K. (1993). The value of risks to life and health. Journal of economic literature 31 (4),
  1912­1946.

Wang,    X.,   E. G. Ferro,     G. Zhou,      D. Hashimoto,         and D. L. Bhatt (2020).          As-
  sociation    Between   Universal     Masking   in    a   Health    Care   System    and     SARS-CoV-
  2   Positivity   Among     Health    Care   Workers.       JAMA       324 (7),   703­704.       eprint:
  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/articlepdf/2768533/jama wang 2020 ld 200077 1597432994.04794.pdf.

Wang, Y., H. Chen, V. Ngo, and X. Luo (2020). Causal chain: Shelter-in-place, social distancing, and
  suppression of covid-19.

Wesolowski, A., C. O. Buckee, K. Engø-Monsen, and C. J. E. Metcalf (2016). Connecting mobility
  to infectious diseases: the promise and limits of mobile phone data. The Journal of infectious
  diseases 214 (suppl 4), S414­S420.

Wesolowski, A., N. Eagle, A. J. Tatem, D. L. Smith, A. M. Noor, R. W. Snow, and C. O. Buckee
  (2012). Quantifying the impact of human mobility on malaria. Science 338 (6104), 267­270.

Wesolowski, A., T. Qureshi, M. F. Boni, P. R. Sundsøy, M. A. Johansson, S. B. Rasheed, K. Engø-
  Monsen, and C. O. Buckee (2015a). Impact of human mobility on the emergence of dengue epidemics
  in pakistan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (38), 11887­11892.

Wesolowski, A., T. Qureshi, M. F. Boni, P. R. Sundsøy, M. A. Johansson, S. B. Rasheed, K. Engø-
  Monsen, and C. O. Buckee (2015b). Impact of human mobility on the emergence of dengue epidemics
  in pakistan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (38), 11887­11892.




                                                      32
White, E. R. and L. R. H´
                        ebert-Dufresne (2020). State-level variation of initial covid-19 dynamics in
  the united states: The role of local government interventions. medRxiv .

Wing, C., D. H. Simon, and P. Carlin (2020). Effects of large gatherings on the covid-19 epidemic:
  Evidence from professional and college sports.

Wing, C., K. Simon, and R. A. Bello-Gomez (2018). Designing difference in difference studies: best
  practices for public health policy research. Annual review of public health 39.

Yehya, N., A. Venkataramani, and M. O. Harhay (2020, 07). Statewide Interventions and Covid-19
  Mortality in the United States: An Observational Study. Clinical Infectious Diseases . ciaa923.




                                                   33
9   Tables and Figures




                         37
                         Figure 1: State Policy and Information Timelines (January 15, 2020 - June 15, 2020)
38




     Note: Notes: Figure shows for each state, the timeline of their policy and information events shown in the legend. The timeline is updated as of
      June 15. Continuing arrows denote states yet to enter Phase 2 of re-openings.
                           Table 1: State Social-distancing related Policy Enactment and Information Event Dates.
          Statename        Emergency    School      Restaurant/Oth   Garthering      Non-Essential First Confirmed   First         Stay-At-    Initial    Phase 2
                           Declarations Closures    Restrictions     Restrict. (Any) Bus. Closures Case              Death       Home Orders Re-openings Re-openings
          Alabama          11-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        28-Mar-20      24-Mar-20      12-Mar-20         27-Mar-20   4-Apr-20    30-Apr-20   11-May-20
          Alaska           13-Mar-20    19-Mar-20   20-Mar-20                       20-Mar-20      13-Mar-20         25-Mar-20   28-Mar-20   24-Apr-20   8-May-20
          Arizona          11-Mar-20    17-Mar-20   19-Mar-20                                      11-Mar-20         24-Mar-20   31-Mar-20   8-May-20    11-May-20
          Arkansas         11-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   20-Mar-20                                      26-Jan-20         20-Mar-20               6-May-20    11-May-20
          California       4-Mar-20     19-Mar-20   15-Mar-20        19-Mar-20      11-Mar-20      26-Jan-20         4-Mar-20    19-Mar-20   8-May-20    12-May-20
          Colorado         10-Mar-20    23-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        26-Mar-20      19-Mar-20      5-Mar-20          12-Mar-20   26-Mar-20   1-May-20    27-May-20
          Connecticut      10-Mar-20    17-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        23-Mar-20      12-Mar-20      8-Mar-20          18-Mar-20   23-Mar-20   20-May-20   17-Jun-20
          Delaware         11-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      7-Mar-20          21-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   20-May-20   15-Jun-20
          DC               13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        24-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      11-Mar-20         26-Mar-20   1-Apr-20    29-May-20
          Florida          9-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        30-Mar-20      3-Apr-20       2-Mar-20          6-Mar-20    3-Apr-20    4-May-20    5-Jun-20
          Georgia          14-Mar-20    18-Mar-20   24-Mar-20                       24-Mar-20      2-Mar-20          12-Mar-20   3-Apr-20    24-Apr-20   27-Apr-20
          Hawaii           4-Mar-20     23-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          31-Mar-20   25-Mar-20   7-May-20    22-May-20
          Idaho            9-Mar-20     3-Apr-20    17-Mar-20                       17-Mar-20      8-Mar-20          24-Mar-20   25-Mar-20   1-May-20    16-May-20
          Illinois         13-Mar-20    23-Mar-20   25-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      25-Mar-20      13-Mar-20         26-Mar-20   21-Mar-20   1-May-20    29-May-20
          Indiana          9-Mar-20     17-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        21-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      24-Jan-20         17-Mar-20   25-Mar-20   4-May-20    22-May-20
          Iowa             6-Mar-20     19-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        24-Mar-20      12-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          16-Mar-20               1-May-20    8-May-20
          Kansas           12-Mar-20    18-Mar-20                                   17-Mar-20      7-Mar-20          12-Mar-20   30-Mar-20   4-May-20    18-May-20
          Kentucky         6-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        26-Mar-20      19-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          16-Mar-20   26-Mar-20   11-May-20   20-May-20
          Louisiana        11-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        23-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      9-Mar-20          14-Mar-20   23-Mar-20   15-May-20   5-Jun-20
          Maine            10-Mar-20    17-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        24-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      1-Feb-20          20-Mar-20   1-Apr-20    1-May-20    1-Jun-20
          Maryland         5-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        23-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      5-Mar-20          18-Mar-20   30-Mar-20   15-May-20   5-Jun-20
          Massachusetts    15-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   18-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      18-Mar-20      12-Mar-20         27-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   18-May-20   8-Jun-20
39




          Michigan         10-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        23-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      10-Mar-20         18-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   24-Apr-20   22-May-20
          Minnesota        13-Mar-20    18-Mar-20   17-Mar-20                                      6-Mar-20          21-Mar-20   28-Mar-20   27-Apr-20   18-May-20
          Mississippi      13-Mar-20    23-Mar-20   17-Mar-20                       23-Mar-20      8-Mar-20          18-Mar-20   3-Apr-20    27-Apr-20   1-Jun-20
          Missouri         14-Mar-20    20-Mar-20   24-Mar-20        31-Mar-20      24-Mar-20      11-Mar-20         19-Mar-20   6-Apr-20    4-May-20    16-Jun-20
          Montana          12-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   20-Mar-20        28-Mar-20      24-Mar-20      13-Mar-20         27-Mar-20   28-Mar-20   26-Apr-20   1-Jun-20
          Nebraska         10-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        30-Mar-20      14-Mar-20      3-Mar-20          25-Mar-20               4-May-20    1-Jun-20
          Nevada           13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   20-Mar-20                                      11-Mar-20         27-Mar-20   31-Mar-20   9-May-20    29-May-20
          New Hampshire    13-Mar-20    3-Apr-20    19-Mar-20                       16-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          27-Mar-20   28-Mar-20   11-May-20   1-Jun-20
          New Jersey       13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        28-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      2-Mar-20          23-Mar-20   21-Mar-20   9-Jun-20    15-Jun-20
          New Mexico       9-Mar-20     18-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        21-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      4-Mar-20          10-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   16-May-20   1-Jun-20
          New York         11-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        24-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      11-Mar-20         25-Mar-20   22-Mar-20   15-May-20   29-May-20
          North Carolina   12-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        21-Mar-20      19-Mar-20      5-Mar-20          16-Mar-20   30-Mar-20   8-May-20    22-May-20
          North Dakota     7-Mar-20     18-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        20-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      1-Mar-20          14-Mar-20               1-May-20    29-May-20
          Ohio             9-Mar-20     17-Mar-20   15-Mar-20        24-Mar-20      12-Mar-20      9-Mar-20          20-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   1-May-20    26-May-20
          Oklahoma         15-Mar-20    17-Mar-20   25-Mar-20        26-Mar-20      24-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          19-Mar-20               24-Apr-20   15-May-20
          Oregon           8-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20                       16-Mar-20      28-Feb-20         14-Mar-20   23-Mar-20   15-May-20   4-Jun-20
          Pennsylvania     6-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        23-Mar-20      16-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          18-Mar-20   1-Apr-20    8-May-20    29-May-20
          Rhode Island     9-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   16-Mar-20                       17-Mar-20      1-Mar-20          1-Apr-20    28-Mar-20   9-May-20    1-Jun-20
          South Carolina   13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   18-Mar-20                       18-Mar-20      7-Mar-20          16-Mar-20   7-Apr-20    20-Apr-20   4-May-20
          South Dakota     13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20                                   6-Apr-20       10-Mar-20         10-Mar-20               1-May-20
          Tennessee        12-Mar-20    20-Mar-20   23-Mar-20        1-Apr-20       23-Mar-20      5-Mar-20          21-Mar-20   1-Apr-20    27-Apr-20   22-May-20
          Texas            13-Mar-20    23-Mar-20   21-Mar-20        21-Mar-20      20-Mar-20      13-Feb-20         16-Mar-20                           18-May-20
          Utah             6-Mar-20     16-Mar-20   18-Mar-20                       16-Mar-20      6-Mar-20          22-Mar-20   27-Mar-20   1-May-20    16-May-20
          Vermont          12-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20                       15-Mar-20      7-Mar-20          14-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   27-Apr-20   4-May-20
          Virginia         13-Mar-20    18-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      13-Mar-20      7-Mar-20          19-Mar-20   30-Mar-20   15-May-20   5-Jun-20
          Washington       29-Feb-20    17-Mar-20   16-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      11-Mar-20      21-Jan-20         29-Feb-20   23-Mar-20   5-May-20    8-May-20
          West Virginia    12-Mar-20    18-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        25-Mar-20      17-Mar-20      5-Feb-20          19-Mar-20   24-Mar-20   4-May-20    21-May-20
          Wisconsin        16-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   17-Mar-20        24-Mar-20                     17-Mar-20         29-Mar-20   25-Mar-20   29-Apr-20   11-May-20
          Wyoming          13-Mar-20    16-Mar-20   19-Mar-20                       20-Mar-20      11-Mar-20         13-Apr-20               1-May-20

     Note: Author compilations based on Fullman (2020), the public use map/tracker of K-12 school closures (Education Week), New York Times
      and our own compilations; we collected data on the timing of the first COVID-19 case announcements from media reports in each state. Data
      are current as of June 15, 2020
     Figure 2: U.S. Population covered by State Closure and Re-opening Policies
                                               (a)




                                               (b)




Note: Author's compilations based on several sources. Data covered January 20, 2020 - June 15, 2020.
                                  Figure 3: Trend in mobility changes.
                                                           (b) Average out-of-county move-
                         (a) Mixing index.
                                                           ment.




              (c) Requests for driving directions                   (d) Fraction at Work




                     (e) Retail and recreation                  (f) Grocery and pharmacy




                   (g) Median hours at home.                   (h) Fraction leaving home.




Note:   Author's calculation based on data from Apple Mobility, Google Mobility, SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility Metrics
 and PlaceIQ smart device data. Each grey line represents a state, which turn red after the state implements stay-at-home
                                                         41
 orders and green after phase 1 of reopening. The thick black line represents a "smoothed" 7 day moving average of the
 states.
Figure 4: Effects of Mitigation Policies and Information Events on Mixing Index. Regression
Results (Coefficients and 95% Confidence Intervals)




 Note: The dependent variable shows the state's index for mixing (average amount of mixing within its
  census block groups). Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Full event study estimates available
  in Gupta et al. (2020).



                                                     42
Figure 5: Effects of Announcement and Effective date of initial reopening on Mixing Index.
Regression Results (Coefficients and 95% Confidence Intervals)




 Note: Note: The dependent variable shows the state's index for mixing (average amount of mixing within
  its census block groups). Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Full event study estimates
  available upon request.




                                                  43
Table 2: Effect Sizes: Percentage magnitude effects of the policy/informational events on
social distancing measures.
                                   I: Effects of Mitigation Policies and Informational Events
                                   First Confirmed    Emergency           School       Stay-atHome   First Death
                                   Case (FCC)         Declarations (ED)   Closure (SC) (SAH)         (FD)
                                              Effects After 5 days
Mixing Index                       1%                 -14%***             4%          -7%            -11%
Median Hours at Home               -1%*               6%***               1%          5%             3%*
Fraction Leaving Home              1%**               -1%*                -1%         -5%            -2%***
Total Out-of-State Movement        -2%                -1%                 -4%**       -1%            0%
Total Out-of-County Movement       -1%                -2%**               -4%***      -3%            -2%
                                              Effects After 20 days
Mixing Index                       -10%               -52%***             13%         -8%            -31%
Median Hours at Home               -2%                27%***              3%          11%            9%**
Fraction Leaving Home              2%                 -13%***             -3%         -9%            -7%***
Total Out-of-State Movement        -9%                -3%                 -13%        1%             5%
Total Out-of-County Movement       -2%                -8%***              -9%***      -2%            -6%*
                                II: Effects of State Initial reopenings
                                   Announcement of
                                   Initial Reopening Initial reopening
                                              Effects After 5 Days
Mobility Measures
Request for driving directions     -6%                -3%
Mobility to retail/recreation      3%                 3%
Mobility to Grocery/Pharmacy       8%                 9%
Mobility to Transit Stations       0%                 9%
Mobility to Workplace              2%                 3%**
Fraction at Work                   -3%*               2%
Fraction left home                 1%**               1%**
Mixing Index                       -2%                5%
Out of state movement              -2%                0%
Out of county movement             -1%                0%
Absence of Mobility Measures
Stay in Residential Areas          -1%               -4%**
Median hours at home               -1%*              -1%***
                                            Effects After 20 Days
Mobility Measures
Request for driving directions     -15%               -15%
Mobility to retail/recreation      8%                 4%
Mobility to Grocery/Pharmacy       8%                 4%
Mobility to Transit Stations       0%                 -6%
Mobility to Workplace              4%                 1%
Fraction at Work                   -2%                1%
Fraction left home                 4%***              1%
Mixing Index                       20%                -4%
Out of state movement              -1%                -8%
Out of county movement             2%                 0%
Absence of Mobility Measures
Stay in Residential Areas          -5%                -4%
Median hours at home               -3%***             -3%***
 Note: Each cell is from a separate regression. *** and bold text denotes effect sizes with p-values<0.01.
  ** and bold text denotes effect sizes with p-values<0.05. * and bold text denotes effect sizes with
  pvalues<0.10. Grey shaded cells denote violation of pre-treatment parallel trends--we do not denote
  statistical significance for these cells. Effect sizes for closures are estimated using coefficients in the
  event-study tables presented in Gupta et al. (2020), divided by the dependent variable value as of March
  1, 2020. Effect sizes for reopenings are estimated using coefficients in the event-study tables presented in
  Nguyen et al. (2020), divided by the dependent variable value as of April 15, 2020.
                                                     44
Figure 6: Change in Social Distancing (Mixing Index) Attributed to Emergency Declarations.




 Note: Note: Corresponding to Figure 5, Figure 6 shows calendar time trends of the predicted lines with
  and without the policy event time terms set to zero, for the Mixing index measure of mobility, and the
  Emergency Declarations policy measure.




          Table 3: Estimated Effects of Emergency Declarations on Mixing Index.
                                                  February 26 - March 3   April 8 - April 14   Change
        Actual Mixing Index                               194.3                 51.9           -142.4
        Counterfactual Mixing Index (No policy)           194.3                 144.9           -49.4
        Secular share of change                                                                 0.35
        Policy share of change                                                                  0.65
 Note: Author's calculation based on decomposition of changes in mobility to share attributable to state
  emergency declarations and those resulting from secular trends. Related estimates plotted in Figure6.




                                                     45
Figure 7: Change in Social Distancing (Mixing Index and Fraction Leaving Home) Attributed
to Initial Reopening.
                      (a) Estimated Effects of Initial Reopening on Mixing Index.




               (b) Estimated Effects of Initial Reopening on Fraction Leaving Home.




 Note:  Corresponding to Figure5, Figure 6(a) shows calendar time trends of the predicted lines with and without the policy
  event time terms set to zero, for the Mixing index measure of mobility, and the Emergency Declarations policy measure.
  Figure 6(b) provides specific values discussed in the text.




                                                          46
              Table 4: Estimated Effects of Reopening on Social Distancing.
                                                          April 17 - April 23 June 10 - June 16 Change
       Actual Mixing Index                                      53.2              121.2         68.0
       Counterfactual Mixing Index (No policy)                  53.2              121.5         68.3
       Secular share of change                                                                   1.0
       Policy share of change                                                                    0.0
       Actual Fraction Leaving Home                              0.6               0.7           0.1
       Counterfactual Fraction Leaving Home (No policy)          0.6               0.7           0.0
       Secular share of change                                                                  0.69
       Policy share of change                                                                   0.31

Note: Author's calculation based on decomposition of changes in mobility to share attributable to state
 initial reopening policy and those resulting from secular trends. Related estimates plotted in Figure7.




                                                     47
Appendix

A   Relevant Literature




                          48
                                                                 Table A1: Causal Effects of COVID-19 Shutdown Orders.
     Study                          Data                                   Finding                                                                                                             Effect Sizes
                                                                                                                    Human mobility
     Abouk and Heydari (2020)       Google Mobility                        "We show that statewide stay-at-home orders had the strongest causal impact on reducing social interactions."       >600% increase in staying
                                                                           "Other policies such as school closure mandates, large gathering bans, and more limited stay-at-home                at home." (Table 2)
                                                                           orders do not show any significant impact on keeping people at home"
     Alexander and Karger (2020)    Unacast                                "First, stay-at-home orders caused people to stay home: Countylevel measures of mobility declined 8% by             County level SAH: 8%
                                                                           the day after the stay-at-home order went into effect."                                                             decline in mobility the day
                                                                                                                                                                                               after policy
     Andersen (2020)                SafeGraph                          "Mandatory measures to increase social distancing appear to be effective, most notably stay at home orders              5% increase in staying at
                                                                       which increase the share of devices at home by 2 percentage points. Social distancing orders also appear                home(Table 1)
                                                                       to have substantial informational content and, in the case of mask mandates, the informational content
                                                                       appears to be greater than the gross effect of mask mandates on behavior."
     Chen et al. (2020a)          Veraset                              "...we observe that by April 30th---when nine in ten Americans were under a SHO---daily movement had fallen             0.17 change in index
                                                                       70% from pre-COVID levels. One-quarter of this decline is causally attributable to SHOs..."                             (Table s1)
     Cicala et al. (2020)         Unacast                              "States that imposed stay-at-home policies before March 28 decreased travel slightly more than other states,            Not reported
                                                                       but travel in all states decreased significantly." Fig 1a shows that states with early SAH laws had larger
                                                                       drops in vehicle travel than other states.
     Cronin and Evans (2020)      SafeGraph                            "...mobility series at the national and state levels start to change dramatically in a short window from March 8-14,    SAH laws increased"
                                                                       well before state or local restrictions of note are in place. In difference-in-difference models, declarations of       at home rate 0.04 , 7 days
                                                                       state of emergency reduce foot traffic and increase social distancing. Stay at home restrictions explain a              after the laws (Table 2)
                                                                       modest fraction of the change in behavior across outcomes."
     Dave et al. (2020)           SafeGraph                            "...we document that adoption of a SIPO was associated with a 5 to 10 percent increase in the rate at which             5-10 % increase in staying
                                                                       state residents remained in their homes full-time."                                                                     at home
     Elenev et al. (2020)                                              "...decentralized NPI decisions, which does not internalize externalities generated on surrounding locations, could     0.947 increase in hours at home
                                                                       result in lower NPI implementation and weaker reduction in mobility..".."We find that spillover effects range           per day due to county SAH
                                                                       between a third and a half of the direct effect depending on the particular outcome or policy considered."              (Table 1)
     Engle et al. (2020)          Unacast                              "An official stay-at-home restriction order corresponds to reducing mobility by 7.87%."                                 7.87%. reduction in mobility
     Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) SafeGraph                            "...legal shutdown orders account for only a modest share of the decline of economic activity (and that having          7 pp drop in
                                                                       county-level policy data is significantly more accurate than state-level data).".."While overall consumer               consumer traffic from county
                                                                       traffic fell by 60 percentage points, legal restrictions explain only 7 of that. Individual choices were far more       level policy
49




                                                                       important and seem tied to fears of infection. Traffic started dropping before the legal orders were in place;
                                                                       was highly tied to the number of COVID deaths in the county.."
     Gupta et al. (2020)          PlaceIQ, SafeGraph, Google Mobility, "...first case announcements, emergency declarations, and school closures reduced mobility by 1-5% after 5 days         2-45% decline in mobility due to state informational
                                  Apple Mobility                       and 7-45% after 20 days. Between March 1 and April 11, average time spent at home grew from 9.1 hours to                events like first confirmed case, emergency declarations,
                                                                       13.9 hours." "...55% of the growth comes from emergency declarations and 45% comes from ecular (non-                    and school closures; 3-4% reduction in mobility due to
                                                                       spolicy) trends. State and local government actions induced changes in mobility on top of a large response              stay-at-home orders
                                                                       across all states to the prevailing knowledge of public health risks."
     Lin and Meissner (2020)      Google Mobility                      "Stay-at-home is associated with lower workplace and more residential activity, but common shocks matter much           9.7% increase in residential mobility
                                                                       more."                                                                                                                  from SAH laws (Table A2)
     Nguyen et al. (2020)         PlaeIQ, Safegraph, Apple,            "(four days) after reopening, we observe a 6% to 8% mobility increase."                                                 6% to 8% mobility increase due to state
                                  Google mobiliy                                                                                                                                               initial reopenings
     Painter and Qiu (2020)       SafeGraph                            "Democrats are more likely to switch to remote spending after state orders are implemented. Political alignment
                                                                       with officials giving orders may partially explain these partisan differences."

                                                                                      Employment Effects
     Baek et al. (2020)             Initial UI claims Bureau of Labor      "...each week of Stay-at-Home exposure increased a state's weekly initial UI claims by 1.9% of its employment       additonal week of SAH increased state's
                                    Statistics, Census Bureau              level relative to other states." "...implies that, of the 17 million UI claims made between March 14 and April 4,   weekly UI claims by 1.9% relative to
                                                                           only 4 million were attributable to the Stay-at-Home orders. This evidence suggests that the direct effect of       baseline
                                                                           SAH orders accounted for a substantial, but minority share, of the overall initial rise in unemployment claims."
     Cheng et al. (2020)            CPS Monthly data                       "...reopening policies generated asymmetrically large increases in reemployment of those out of work,               Additional 10 days since reopening
                                                                           compared to modest decreases in job loss among those employed."                                                     employment is 4 percent higher (Table 1)
     Chetty et al. (2020)           Homebase, Burning Glass,               "State-ordered reopenings of economies have little impact on local employment."                                     No effect. (Figure 11)
                                    Earnin and UI claims
     Coibion et al. (2020a)         customized survey with more            "The imposition of lockdowns can account for much of the decline in employment in recent months as                  Aggregate consumer spending dropped by
                                    than 10,000 respondents                well as declines in consumer spending."                                                                             31 log pp; unemployment rate over next year
                                                                                                                                                                                               13 pp higher in counties with earlier lockdown
     Kahn et al. (2020)             Burning Glass Technologies             "...collapse was broad based, hitting all U.S. states, regardless of the intensity of the initial virus spread or   No effect of SAH policies; Across the
                                                                           timing of stay-at-home policies."                                                                                   board job vacancies in April 2020 30% lower
                                                                                                                                                                                               than level at the beginning of the year.
                                                                                                      Table A1: Contd.
     Kong and Prinz (2020)        Google search data for              "We find that between March 14 and 28, restaurant and bar limitations and nonessential business closures        Restaurant/bar limitations and non-essential
                                  employment                          could explain 4.4% and 8.5% of UI claims respectively, while the other NPIs did not increase UI claims"         business closures explain 4.4% and 8.5% of UI
                                                                                                                                                                                      claims respectively; no impact of SAH
                                                                                                                                                                                      orders, large-gatherings bans, school closures,
                                                                                                                                                                                      and emergency declarations
     Gupta et al. (2020)          Google mobility, SafeGraph, Google "...employment rate fell by about 1.7 pp for every extra 10 days that a state experienced a stay-at-home mandate 1.7 pp fall in employment for every additional 10 days
                                  search data of employment, UI      during the period March 12-April 12, 2020; select business closure laws were associated with similar employment of SAH and certain business closures.
                                  claims, CPS                        effects. Our estimates imply that about 40% of the 12 pp decline in employment rates between January and
                                                                     April 2020 was due to a nationwide shock while about 60% was driven by state social distancing policies."
     Lozano Rojas et al. (2020)   CPS Monthly data, UI claims        "most of the economic disruption was driven by the health shock itself. Put differently, it appears that the     No effect of social-distancing policies.
                                                                     labor market slowdown was due primarily to a nationwide response to evolving epidemiological cond-
                                                                     itions and that individual state policies and own epidemiologic situations have had a comparatively
                                                                     modest effect."

                                                                                 Consumer Spending
     Alexander and Karger (2020) consumer spending at small           "stay-at-home orders caused large reductions in spending in sectors associated with mobility: small bus-         Year-over-year 35% reduction in consumer
                                 and large businesses from            inesses and large retail stores. However, consumers sharply increased spending on food delivery services         spending at small businesses; 10% lower
                                 Womply (county day level)            after orders went into effect." ".. responses to stay-at-home orders were fairly uniform across the country,     in-store large firms , 71% increase online
                                 and Second Measure (state            and do not vary by income, political leanings, or urban/rural status."                                           transactions at large firms as of April 15th.
                                 day level), both by industry
     Baker et al. (2020)         Fintech ("Fintech encour-            "As the number of cases grew, households began to radically alter their typical spending across a number         General spending declined by approximately
                                 ages households to increase          of major categories" (and some analysis that looks at whether declines were larger in states that                50%; shelter-in-place states decreased restaurant
                                 savings through targeted             adopted policies earlier)                                                                                        spending by about 31.8%, while users in other
50




                                 information and rewards")                                                                                                                             states decreased restaurant spending by 12.3%
     Chetty et al. (2020)        "daily statistics on consumer        "We first show that high-income individuals reduced spending sharply in mid-March 2020, particularly in          Spending in top-income-quartile households
                                 spending, business revenues,         areas with high rates of COVID-19 infection and in sectors that require physical interaction. This reduction     down by 36% relative to pre-COVID levels, as
                                 employment rates, and other          in spending greatly reduced the revenues of businesses that cater to high-income households in person,           compared with 28% for bottom-income-quartile
                                 key indicators disaggregated         notably small businesses in affluent ZIP codes."                                                                 households. Hours of work, employment and job
                                 by county, industry, and                                                                                                                              postings fell by 80%+, 36% and 30% in affluent
                                 income group"                                                                                                                                         areas as compared with 30%,11% and 15% in
                                                                                                                                                                                       least affluent areas.
     Coibion et al. (2020b)       customized survey with more         "The imposition of lockdowns can account for much of the decline in employment in recent months as well          Aggregate consumer spending dropped by
                                  than 10,000 respondents             as declines in consumer spending"                                                                                31 log pp; unemployment rate over next year
                                                                                                                                                                                       13 pp higher in counties with earlier lockdown

                                                                       Spread of infections (Cases, Deaths)
     Chernozhukov et al. (2020)   Google mobility                     "both policies and information on transmission risks are important determinants of Covid-19 cases and            Mandating face masks for employees on April 1st
                                                                      deaths and shows that a change in policies explains a large fraction of observed changes in social               could have reduced growth rate of cases/ deaths
                                                                      distancing behavior."                                                                                            by 10+ pp in late April, and 17- 55% less deaths
                                                                                                                                                                                       nationally by end of May. Removing non-essential
                                                                                                                                                                                       business closures (while maintaining school closures,
                                                                                                                                                                                       restrictions on movie theaters and restaurants) could
                                                                                                                                                                                       lead to 20-60% more cases and deaths by end of
                                                                                                                                                                                       May; without stay-at-home orders, cases would
                                                                                                                                                                                       have been larger by 25 -170%
     Courtemanche et al. (2020)   daily growth rate in confirmed      "Adoption of government-imposed social distancing measures reduced the daily growth rate of confirmed            5.4%-9.1% decline in daily growth rate of cases
                                  COVID-19 cases at the county        COVID-19 cases by 5.4 percentage points after one to five days, 6.8 percentage points after six to ten days,     due to social distancing mandates
                                  level                               8.2 percentage points after eleven to fifteen days, and 9.1 percentage points after sixteen to twenty days."
     Dave et al. (2020)           daily state-level coronavirus       "approximately three weeks following the adoption of a SIPO, cumulative COVID-19 cases fell by 44 percent"       44% decline in cumulative C-19 cases
                                  case data                                                                                                                                            following SIPO
                                                                                                        Table A1: Contd.
      Devaraj and Patel (2020)      County coronavirus deaths data       "Our estimation approach relies on county-pairs across state-borders where one state has SIPO whereas the            C-19 case growth rate is 1.994 pp lower in
                                                                         other state does not, controls for matched county-pair fixed effects and day of observation fixed-effects."          counties with SIPO
                                                                         .."daily COVID-19 incidence case growth rate is 1.994 percentage points lower for counties in SIPO
                                                                         states relative to those bordering in non-SIPO states"
      Friedson et al. (2020)        daily state-level coronavirus data   "California's statewide SIPO reduced COVID-19 cases by 125.5 to 219.7 per 100,000 population by April 20,            36% reduction in C-19 cases in CA 1 month
                                                                         one month following the order. We further find that California's SIPO led to as many as 1,661 fewer                  after SIPO
                                                                         COVID-19 deaths during this period."
      Jinjarak et al. (2020)        "Oxford COVID-19 Government          "Our results suggest that policy interventions are effective at slowing the geometric pattern of mortality growth,   Mortality growth rates in countries with stringent
                                    Response Tracker, and daily          reducing the peak mortality, and shortening the duration to the first peak."                                         policies on average 22, 17, and 13 pp lower 2, 3,
                                    C19 mortality by country"                                                                                                                                 and 4 weeks after. Estimates of policy stringency
                                                                                                                                                                                              statistically insignificant when interacted with
                                                                                                                                                                                              exogenous country characteristics -
                                                                                                                                                                                              implies stringent policies likely to be endogenous
      Lyu and Wehby (2020)          Hospitalization data for 25          "SIPOs reduced the daily mortality growth rate after nearly three weeks from enactment, and the daily growth         Daily mortality growth rate for states with SIPOs
                                    states from COVID Tracking           rate of hospitalizations two weeks after enactment"                                                                  declined by an average of 6.1 pp after 42 days
                                    Project. Hosp and deaths data                                                                                                                             from SIPO enactment
                                    by state by day
      Wang et al. (2020)            SafeGraph, The New York Times'       "we find that SIP policies increased the median percent of time spent at home by only 2.5%. In contrast, non-        SIPO increased median percent of time spent at
51




                                    COVID-19 tracking project            policy factors led to an increase of 5.14%."                                                                         home by 2.5%
      Yehya et al. (2020)           Covid-19 cases and deaths from       "Later statewide emergency declarations and school closure were associated with higher Covid-19 mortality.           delayed emergency declarations and school closure
                                    Johns Hopkins Center for             Each day of delay increased mortality risk 5 to 6%."                                                                 increased mortality risk 5-6%
                                    Systems Science and Engineer-
                                    ing Coronavirus Resource Center

                                                            Self reported social distancing, opinions, internet searching
      Barrios and Hochberg (2020) Google mobility, baseline voter     "Using mobile phone and survey data, we show that during the early phases of COVID-19, voluntary social
                                  participation in elections          distancing was higher when individuals exhibit a higher sense of civic duty"
      Coibion et al. (2020b)      customized survey with more         "households living in counties that went into lockdown earlier expect the unemployment rate over the next               Unemployment rate over next year 13 pp
                                  than 10,000 respondents             twelve months to be 13 percentage points higher and continue to expect higher unemployment at horizons of               higher in counties with earlier lockdown
                                                                      three to five years. They also expect lower future inflation, report higher uncertainty, expect lower mortgage
                                                                      rates for up to 10 years, and have moved out of foreign stocks into liquid forms of savings."

     Note: Studies covered here are limited to ones that (at a minimum) estimate effects of state policies on the outcomes listed, of which we are
      aware. We limit the data column to the outcome measures of the paper. We limit the effect size discussion to the state policy coefficient. The
      default is state policy, we note when coefficients relate to county policy. For brevity of table, we select only the quotes that appear the most
      relevant to this review paper.
     Table A2: Other Literature on COVID-19 and Labor Markets, Consumer Spending, Disease Transmission, Social distancing
     and Mobility.
       Study                         Data                               Finding
                                                                                                 Human mobility
       Allcott et al. (2020)         SafeGraph                          "..areas with more Republicans engage in less social distancing, controlling for other factors including public
                                                                        policies, population density, and local COVID cases and deaths."
       Huang et al. (2020)                                              "..the average black individual in the US social distanced significantly more than the average white individual, and the average 2016
                                     Unacast                            Clinton voter social distanced significantly more than the average 2016 Trump voter."

       Mongey and Weinberg (2020) Safegraph                             "..we show that MSAs with less pre-virus employment in work-from-home jobs experienced smaller declines in the incidence of
                                                                        `staying-at-home', as measured using SafeGraph cell phone data."

                                                                                               Employment Effects
       Andersen et al. (2020)        Safegraph                          " ..(the temporary federal paid sick leave mandate ) decreased our full-time work proxy and increased our at home proxy. In particular,
                                                                        we find an initial decrease in working full-time of 17.7% and increase in staying home of 7.5%, with effects dissipating within three
                                                                        weeks."
       Aaronson et al. (2020)        Google search data,                "Applying our elasticity estimate (of unemployment insurance filings with respect to search intensity ) to the state-level Google Trends
                                     unemployment rates                 indexes for the topic "unemployment," we show that out-of-sample forecasts made ahead of the official data releases ..
                                                                        predicted to a large degree the extent of the COVID-19 related surge in the demand for unemployment insurance"
       Balla-Elliott et al. (2020)   Nationwide survey of small         "..post-lockdown delays in reopening can be explained by low levels of expected demand."
                                     businesses
       Brynjolfsson et al. (2020)    nationally-representative sample   "Of those employed pre-COVID-19, we find that about half are now working from home, including 35.2% who report they were
                                                                        commuting and recently switched to working from home."
       Bui et al. (2020)             CPS Monthly data                   "..while previous recessions, in some ways, did not affect employment outcomes for older workers as much, this recession
                                                                        disproportionately affected older workers of ages 65 and older."
52




       Cajner et al. (2020)          ADP (payroll processing data)      "After aggregate employment fell by 21 percent through late-April, we highlight a modest employment rebound through late-May."
       Campello et al. (2020)        LinkUp (job postings data)         "Firms have cut back on postings for high-skill jobs more than for low-skill jobs, with small firms nearly halting their new hiring
                                                                        altogether. New-hiring cuts and downskilling are most pronounced in local labor markets lacking depth (where employment is
                                                                        concentrated within a few firms), in low-income areas, and in areas with greater income inequality. Cuts are deeper in industries
                                                                        where workers are more unionized and in the non-tradable sector."
       Coibion et al. (2020b)        PanelViews Survey                  "..job loss has been significantly larger than implied by new unemployment claims."
       Fairlie (2020)                CPS Monthly data                   "African-Americans experienced an increase in unemployment to 16.6 percent, less than anticipated based on previous
                                                                        recessions. In contrast, Latinx, with an unemployment rate of 18.2 percent, were disproportionately hard hit by COVID-19."
                                                                        "For African-Americans "slightly favorable industry distribution partly protected them from being hit harder by COVID-19."..
                                                                        "unfavorable occupational distribution and lower skills contributed to why Latinx experienced much higher unemployment
                                                                        rates than whites."
       Fairlie (2020)                CPS Monthly data                   "African-American business owners continue to be the hardest hit by COVID-19 experiencing a drop of 26 percent in
                                                                        business activity from pre-COVID-19 levels. Latinx business owners fell by 19 percent, and Asian business owners dropped
                                                                        by 21 percent."
       Granja et al. (2020)       Small Business Administration,        "..we do not find evidence that funds flowed to areas more adversely affected by the economic effects of the pandemic,.."
                                  Womply, and Homebase
       Mongey and Weinberg (2020) CPS Monthly data                      "..we show that both occupations and types of workers predicted to be employed in low work-from-home jobs experienced
                                                                        greater declines in employment according to the March 2020 CPS."
       Montenovo et al. (2020)       CPS Monthly data                   "...greater declines in employment in April 2020 (relative to February) for Hispanics, workers aged 20 to 24, and those with high
                                                                        school degrees and some college." "...job loss was larger in occupations that require more interpersonal contact and that cannot
                                                                        be performed remotely. Pre-epidemic sorting into occupations with more potential for remote work and industries that are currently
                                                                        essential explain a large share of gaps in recent unemployment for key racial, ethnic, age, and education sub-populations.
                                                                        However, there is a larger unexplained component to the gender employment gaps."
                                                                                                    Table A2: Contd.
                                                                                                                     Spread of infections (Cases, Deaths)
      Bielecki et al. (2020)              Sample of 508 recruited soldiers stationed at a         Social distancing not only can slow the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in a cohort of young, healthy adults but it can also prevent the
                                          Swiss Army Base in Airolo between 25 March              outbreak of COVID-19 while still inducing an immune response and colonizing nasal passages. Viral inoculum during infection
                                          and 14 April 2020.                                      or mode of transmission may be a key factor determining the clinical course of COVID-19.
      Chaudhry et al. (2020)              John Hopkins University Center for Science and          "Rapid border closures, full lockdowns, and wide-spread testing were not associated with COVID-19 mortality per million
                                          Engineering (JHU-CSSE), WHO, CDC, Worldometer           people. However, full lockdowns and reduced country vulnerability to biological threats (i.e. high scores on the global health
                                          Coronavirus Statistics website, WHO Situation           security scale for risk environment) were significantly associated with increased patient recovery rates."
                                          Reports
      Chen et al. (2020a)                 Veraset                                                 "Linking social distancing behavior with an epidemic model, we estimate that reductions in movement have causally reduced
                                                                                                  SARS-CoV-2 transmission rates by 49%."
      Padalabalanarayanan et al. (2020)   State-level data on COVID-19 cases, tests, and          "...cumulative case rates would have been more than 200% higher and fatality rates approximately 22% higher if there
                                          fatalities from the COVID Tracking Project              were no SAHOs, as compared with SAHOs fully in place. A higher proportion of African American population was
                                                                                                  associated with higher case rates (b = 0.045; 95% CI, 0.014 to 0.077; P = .001) and fatality rates (b = 0.068; 95% CI, 0.044
                                                                                                  to 0.091; P < .001).
      White and H´  ebert-Dufresne (2020) Covid-19 cases and deaths from                          "We find that epidemic dynamics were most strongly associated with non-pharmaceutical government actions
                                          Johns Hopkins Center for                                during the early phase of the epidemic. In particular, early social distancing restrictions, particularly on
                                          Systems Science and Engineer-                           restaurant operations, was correlated with increased doubling time.
                                          ing Coronavirus Resource Center
      Wang et al. (2020)                  Electronic medical records of healthcare workers       Universal masking at MGB was associated with a significantly lower rate of SARS-CoV-2 positivity among healthcare workers.
                                          of Mass General Brigham tested for SARS-CoV-2
                                          between March 1 and April 30, 2020. Mass General
                                          Brigham is the largest health care system in
                                          Massachusetts, with 12 hospitals and more than
                                          75 000 employees. Job description for each worker
53




                                          obtained by linking their record to the healthcare
                                          system's human resources databases.
      Wing et al. (2020)                  NHL hockey games,                                     "one additional NHL/NBA game leads to an additional 783 COVID-19 cases during March-mid May and an additional 52 deaths."
                                          National Basketball Association (NBA) games,          "... an additional NCAA Division 1 men's basketball games results in an additional 31 cases and an additional 2.4 deaths."
                                          NCAA men's college basketball games,
                                          Major League Baseball (MLB) teams and National
                                          Football League (NFL), COVID-19 cases and
                                          deaths from The New York Times (2020) database.
                                                                                    Self reported social distancing, opinions, internet searching
      Aksoy et al. (2020)                 daily Google searches in a country                    ".. countries with high levels of public attention are more likely to implement non-pharmaceutical interventions,
                                                                                                 even after controlling for the number of cases and deaths." "..positive effect of public attention on policy
                                                                                                 implementation is driven entirely by countries with good institutions."
      Allcott et al. (2020)               Original survey                                        "..significant gaps at the individual level between Republicans and Democrats in self-reported social distancing, beliefs about
                                                                                                 personal COVID risk, and beliefs about the future severity of the pandemic."
      Barrios and Hochberg (2020)         Unacast, Google search trends                          "..during the early phases of COVID-19, voluntary social distancing was higher when individuals exhibit a higher sense of civic duty.
                                                                                                 as measured by smartphone location patterns"
      Bento et al. (2020)                 Google search trends                                   "..we show that (first COVID-19 case public announcement in a state ) increases collective attention to the crisis right away.
                                                                                                 as measured by smartphone location patterns"
      Fetzer et al. (2020)                Google search trends                                   "..we document a substantial increase in economic anxiety during and after the arrival of the coronavirus."
      Simonov et al. (2020)               SafeGraph, HomeBase (firm closure data                 "..a 10% increase in Fox News cable viewership (approximately 0.13 higher viewer rating points) leads to a 1.3 percentage point
                                          and employee counts), Facteus (provider of             reduction in the propensity to stay at home."
                                          financial data for business analytics)


     Note: These studies represent ones that do not meet the Table A2 criteria for inclusion, but provide background on the topics.We limit the data
      column to the outcome measures of the paper. For brevity of table, we select only the quotes that appear the most relevant to this review paper.
