                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ALL ABOARD: THE EFFECTS OF PORT DEVELOPMENT

                                           César Ducruet
                                            Réka Juhász
                                        Dávid Krisztián Nagy
                                        Claudia Steinwender

                                        Working Paper 28148
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28148


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2020




We thank Treb Allen, David Atkin, Leah Brooks, Don Davis, Dave Donaldson, Joseph Doyle, Nicolas
Gendron-Carrier, Matt Grant, Gordon Hanson, Tarek Hassan, Tom Holmes, David Hummels, Amit
Khandelwal, Giampaolo Lecce, Nels Lind, Nina Pavcnik, Giacomo Ponzetto, Jim Rauch, Steve Redding,
Roberto Rigobon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Daniel Sturm, Tavneet Suri,
Jaume Ventura, Jon Vogel and David Weinstein for helpful comments and discussions. We thank
Bruce Blonigen for kindly sharing data and we thank staff at the Port Authorities of Houston, New
Orleans, Long Beach, Los Angeles, Portland, San Francisco and Seattle for helping with our information
requests. Olalekan Bello, Sabrina Chen, Naman Garg, Yi Jie Gwee, Hamza Husain, Felix Iglhaut,
Rodrigo Martinez Mazza, Emanuela Migliaccio, Shuhua Si, Yue Yu, Howard Zihao Zhang and a team
of Columbia University undergrad students provided outstanding research assistance. Reka acknowledges
funding from the Provost's Office at Columbia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by César Ducruet, Réka Juhász, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Claudia Steinwender. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
All Aboard: The Effects of Port Development
César Ducruet, Réka Juhász, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Claudia Steinwender
NBER Working Paper No. 28148
November 2020
JEL No. F6,O33,R40

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effects of port development on the economy. By using scarce local land
intensively, ports put pressure on local land prices and crowd out other forms of economic
activity. We use the introduction of containerized shipping -- a technology that substantially
increased land requirements at the port -- to estimate the effects of port development. We find an
important role for the crowding-out effect both at the local and at the aggregate level. First, we
show that the causal effect of the shipping boom caused by containerization on local population is
zero -- port development increases city population by making a location more attractive for firms
and consumers, but this well-known market access effect is fully offset by the crowding-out
mechanism. Second, to measure the aggregate implications, we add endogenous port
development to a standard quantitative model of cross-city trade. Through the lens of this model,
we estimate that containerization increased aggregate world welfare by 3.95%. However, relative
to the positive welfare effects of a trade-cost reduction in standard models, our model implies a
sizeable welfare cost associated with the increased land-usage of ports, partly offset by welfare
gains from endogenous specialization based on comparative advantage across port- and non-port
activities. In terms of the distributional effects, we find that initially poorer countries gained more
from containerization as they had a comparative advantage in port development.

César Ducruet                                      Dávid Krisztián Nagy
CNRS                                               CREI
13 rue du Four                                     Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
Paris 75006                                        08005 Barcelona
France                                             Spain
cdu@parisgeo.cnrs.fr                               dnagy@crei.cat

Réka Juhász                                        Claudia Steinwender
Department of Economics                            MIT Sloan School of Management
Columbia University                                100 Main Street, E62-521
420 West 118th Street                              Cambridge, MA 02142
New York, NY 10027                                 and NBER
and NBER                                           csteinwe@mit.edu
rj2446@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28148
Introduction
From Sri Lanka to the Netherlands, countries across the income distribution invest heavily in port
development.1 Seaports play a vital role in the global trading system, handling over 80% of world
merchandise trade in 2018 in terms of volume (UNCTAD, 2019). Rich and poor countries alike
view investments into ports as an integral part of their growth strategy, as modern facilities allowing
for the fast flow of cargo through the port are a precondition for a country to participate in global
production networks (Rodrigue, 2016, p. 131). Despite this, ports have been understudied relative
to other forms of transport infrastructure such as roads or railways.2 In particular, little is known
about the economic effects of port development. What determines the economic geography of
ports (i.e., where port activity is located)? What are the gains from port development and how are
they distributed across countries?
    In this paper, we study these questions by examining a breakthrough innovation in port technol-
ogy: containerization, that is, the handling of cargo in standardized boxes. This new technology
dramatically changed the transshipment of cargo at seaports during the 1960s and 1970s. Our
analysis sheds light on a novel mechanism that affects i) the economic geography of ports, ii) the
gains from port development, and iii) the distribution of these gains. This mechanism is driven by
the land-intensity of ports. Different to other transport infrastructures such as railways or roads,
ports are investments that occupy large amounts of land in the cities in which they are located. For
example, the ports of Antwerpen and Rotterdam occupy more than 30% of the metropolitan area
of the city (OECD, 2014). By using locally scarce land resources heavily, ports drive up land rents
and crowd out other economic activity.
    In our analysis, we exploit the introduction of containerization to identify the crowding-out
effect of port development. Using rich historical evidence, as well as detailed time series data
on wharf dimensions for one port (New Orleans), we show that containerization is a much more
land-intensive technology than the one it replaced. That is, more land is needed at the port under
containerized technology; the data from New Orleans suggest that the land intensity of trans-
shipment technology increased by about 75% after containerized terminals were introduced. The
benefit of containerization was that by increasing land usage at the port, transshipment times (Port
of San Francisco, 1971) and costs (Hummels, 2007) were drastically reduced.
    We use a unique dataset of city populations and shipping flows worldwide for the period 1950-
1990 to estimate the local, city-level effects of containerization. To isolate exogenous variation,
   1
      As an example, the Port of Rotterdam (Netherlands) undertook the expansion of its container facilities by 110
ha in 2004 at a cost of EUR 657m, 200m of which was financed by the European Investment Bank (Source: https:
//www.eib.org/en/projects/pipelines/all/20030288). The Port of Colombo (Sri Lanka) has made massive investments
in recent years. A single project upgrading harbor infrastructure was undertaken between 2008-2012 at a cost of Rs
42 billion (Source: https://www.slpa.lk/port-colombo/projects).
    2
      Redding and Turner (2015) provide an overview of this literature. An exception is Brooks, Gendron-Carrier, and
Rua (2019), who study the reduced-form effects of containerization on county-level economic outcomes in the U.S.

                                                         1
we build on a previous literature that has shown that access to deep sea ports was an important
determinant of a city's suitability for containerization (Brooks et al., 2019; Altomonte, Colantone,
and Bonacorsi, 2018). We develop a novel measure of `naturally endowed' depth (as distinct from
depth attained by dredging) using granular data on oceanic depths around each city in our data.
We show that cities exogenously more suited to containerization witnessed a boom in shipping
flows after the onset of containerization, but not before. Surprisingly, however, this boom in local
shipping did not translate into population inflows: we find an effect of shipping on population in
our IV estimates that is both economically and statistically insignificant.
    We view the zero local population effects of containerization as an unexpected finding. It is in
contrast to standard models that predict an inflow of population as improved market access makes
a location more desirable for firms and consumers (Co¸      sar and Fajgelbaum, 2016; Nagy, 2018;
Fajgelbaum and Redding, 2018). Indeed, other papers studying similar shocks to a location's
accessibility have found a positive effect on population (Bleakley and Lin, 2012; Campante and
Yanagizawa-Drott, 2018; Brooks et al., 2019). However, the higher land intensity of containerized
port technology can provide an explanation for the zero population effect. Intuitively, the increased
use of scarce local land can counteract the market access effect by driving up land prices and
crowding out other economic activity from the city. Consistent with an important role for land
prices in determining where port development takes place, we indeed show that shipping increased
disproportionately more in low land rent cities.
    Informed by the local, reduced form effects of port development, in the second part of the paper
we develop a tool for quantitative general equilibrium analysis. The model is an otherwise standard
economic geography model of trading cities to which we add an endogenous port development
decision. As such, the model incorporates not only the standard market access effect, but also
allows for port development to crowd out other forms of economic activity. This is because in the
model, developing the port (and hence reducing trade costs) requires scarce local land that can be
used for other purposes. Whether a city ultimately gains in population is the outcome of the trade-
off between the market access and crowding-out mechanisms. Thus, the model has the ability to
rationalize the zero population effects of shipping found in the data.
    Guided by the model, we re-estimate the causal effect of increased shipping flows on population
controlling for market access. In line with the predictions of the model, our causal estimates point
to a negative effect of shipping on city population once market access is controlled for. This finding
provides further empirical evidence consistent with the crowding-out effect of port development.
    In the final part of the paper, we quantify the aggregate and country-level effects of con-
tainerization by taking the model to the data. We use data on shipping flows, city GDP and
population in 1990 to back out cities' unobserved model fundamentals. Next, we simulate the
pre-containerization equilibrium in the model by undoing the transshipment cost reduction and


                                                  2
increase in the land intensity of port technology that containerization caused. Comparing these
two equilibria reveals the effects of containerization. We test whether the model can replicate the
same local effects of containerization that we found in the reduced form. First, we show that the
model-simulated data closely matches the zero population effects of shipping using the same IV
strategy (based on depth) as in the reduced form. Second, we show that containerization increased
shipping more in low land-rent cities, as in the data.
    Our results show that containerization increased world welfare by 3.95%. To better understand
how the crowding-out channel affects these welfare gains, we compare the aggregate welfare ef-
fects in our model to what a standard model in which transport cost reductions are exogenous and
free (i.e., they do not use scarce resources) would predict. We find a quantitatively meaningful
role for two mechanisms. First, we estimate the aggregate resource cost of containerization to be
substantial: it offsets about 13% of the welfare gains arising from a standard model. Second, we
also find a role for additional welfare gains stemming from endogenous specialization in port- and
non-port activities based on comparative advantage. In particular, these gains offset about 63%
of the resource cost of containerization. In addition, we find that, unlike in our model, the local
population effects of shipping are positive, economically meaningful and statistically significant
in the standard model. This result again underscores the link between the zero local population
effects of shipping and the endogenous crowding-out mechanism that is present in our model.
    Finally, we examine the distributional implications of containerization by studying the country-
level welfare gains from containerization implied by the model. These gains are heterogeneous:
while 26% of countries experience gains below 2%, 29% of them see gains above 10%. We find
that initially poorer countries gained more from containerization. We show that in the model, this
relationship is explained by poorer countries being less productive in non-port activities (hence
having a comparative advantage in port activities) and these countries having worse market access
before containerization. We also show that the negative relationship between pre-containerization
market access and the gains from containerization is amplified relative to a standard model without
endogenous port development. This is because endogenous port development can be conducted at a
lower cost in poor countries that tend to have lower land rents on average. These findings highlight
the importance of accounting for the endogenous crowding-out mechanism when quantifying how
the gains from containerization were distributed across countries. They also imply that the `Sri
Lankas' of the world have more to gain from port development than the `Netherlands'.
Related literature. A recent, growing literature provides evidence that better trading opportunities
lead to local benefits inducing city development (Bleakley and Lin, 2012; Armenter, Koren, and
Nagy, 2014; Nagy, 2020; Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott, 2018). Some of these studies focus
on city development at port locations in particular (Fujita and Mori, 1996; Co¸ sar and Fajgelbaum,
2016; Fajgelbaum and Redding, 2018). We contribute to this literature by showing that trade-


                                                 3
induced development can also have substantial local costs. The crowding-out mechanism that
drives the cost side in our setting also relates the paper to the `Dutch disease' literature. This liter-
ature shows that booming industries can entail significant costs by putting a strain on scarce local
resources and therefore crowding out other (tradable) sectors (Corden and Neary, 1982; Krugman,
1987; Allcott and Keniston, 2017).3 Relative to this literature, our setting contains the potential for
not only costs but also gains, as booming port activities benefit local tradables through improving
market access. Thus, one contribution of our paper is to generalize the predictions from these two,
seemingly disparate literatures that have focused on either the costs or the benefits from booming
sectors.
    Our paper is also related to the quantitative international trade literature, which has developed
tractable models of trade across multiple countries with various dimensions of heterogeneity (An-
derson, 1979; Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Melitz, 2003). These seminal models characterize trade
and the distribution of economic activity across countries as a function of exogenous trade costs. A
standard prediction of these models is that the relationship between trade flows and costs follows
a gravity equation, which has been documented as one of the strongest empirical regularities in
the data (Head and Mayer, 2014). We complement this literature by developing a framework in
which trade costs are endogenous, in a way that is both tractable and preserves the gravity struc-
ture of trade flows. This relates our paper to Fajgelbaum and Schaal (2020) and Santamaría (2020),
who consider endogenous road construction in multi-location models of economic geography, as
well as Brancaccio, Kalouptsidi, and Papageorgiou (2020), who endogenize trade costs in the non-
containerized shipping sector. Unlike these papers, we focus on port development as a source of
endogenous shipping costs, and solve for the decentralized equilibrium as opposed to the opti-
mal allocation to quantify the effect of containerization-induced port development on trade, the
distribution of population, and welfare.
    Finally, our paper is related to a large literature studying the effects of transport infrastructure
improvements.4 In particular, there is a growing empirical literature studying the effects of con-
tainerization (Hummels, 2007; Bernhofen, El-Sahli, and Kneller, 2016; Gomtsyan, 2016; Co¸             sar
and Demir, 2018; Holmes and Singer, 2018; Altomonte et al., 2018; Brooks et al., 2019) or the
role of container shipping networks in world trade (Wong, 2017; Heiland, Moxnes, Ulltveit-Moe,
and Zi, 2019; Ganapati, Wong, and Ziv, 2020). Most closely related is Brooks et al. (2019), who
study the reduced-form effects of containerization on local economic outcomes across U.S. coun-
ties. Our main contribution to this literature is twofold. First, motivated by the evidence that
containerization dramatically increased land use in ports, this paper highlights the crowding-out
effect of containerization and finds sizeable local and global costs stemming from this effect. Sec-
   3
     Another related paper is Falvey (1976), who discusses how the transportation sector can draw away resources
from tradables in particular.
   4
     Redding and Turner (2015) provides an overview of recent developments in this literature.

                                                       4
ond, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper seeking to quantify the aggregate effects
of containerization on global trade and welfare through the lens of a general equilibrium economic
geography model.
    The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we describe the main features of con-
tainerized technology. Section 2 discusses the main data sources used in the analysis. Section 3
presents the reduced form empirical strategy and results, while Section 4 introduces the model.
Section 5 revisits the empirics guided by the predictions of the model. In Section 6, we take the
model to the data, while in Section 7 we present our estimates of the aggregate effects of container-
ization. Section 8 concludes.

1       Containerization and other new port technologies
The introduction of steamships and railroads in the 19th century substantially reduced both wa-
ter and overland transportation costs. However, transshipment technology ­ that is, the loading
and unloading of cargo at transportation nodes such as seaports ­ remained slow and expensive
(Krugman, 2011). As a report by McKinsey highlighted; "The bottleneck in freight transport
has always been the interface between transport modes, especially the crucial land/sea interface"
(1972, pp. 1-3). Containerization, that is, the handling of cargo in standardized boxes, was the
breakthrough innovation that dramatically changed transshipment technology and reduced costs
(Hummels, 2007; Rodrigue, 2016).5 Within the space of a few years in the 1960s and 1970s, the
technology ports used to transship cargo changed dramatically.6
    In this section, we discuss features of containerized technology important for our analysis.
First, we show that substantial transshipment cost reductions were achieved in shipping as a result
of containerization. However, this came at the cost of needing to dedicate much more land to the
port. Second, we show that many of the changes that we refer to using the shorthand term `con-
tainerization' also affected non-containerized cargo. This point is important, as both our empirical
and structural analysis capture the effects of new technologies on all cargo types.
1.1     The cost ­ space trade-off in containerization
As late as the mid-1950s, transshipment at seaports was a costly and slow procedure as it entailed
handling cargo item-by-item ­ a process called breakbulk shipping. The reason for this was that



    5
      The key advantage of containerization is the speed and efficiency with which containers can be transshipped
between different modes of transportation such as across ships, trucks and railroad (i.e., their intermodality), and
within the same mode (e.g., ship-to-ship or truck-to-truck). Our objective in this paper is to understand the effect
that containerization had on transshipment at seaports. This includes transshipping from one ship to another, as
well as transshipping between vessels and railcars or trucks at the seaport. However, we do not analyze the effects
containerization has had on inland transshipment, e.g., from road to rail.
    6
      Rua (2014) provides a discussion of the swift adoption of containerization worldwide.

                                                         5
cargo came in many different sizes and so needed to be handled individually.7 We illustrate break-
bulk technology at work in the Port of New Orleans in 1954 in Panel A of Appendix Figure A.1
(the third-largest U.S. port in 1950 according to our data).8 The San Francisco Port Commission
(1971) estimated that it took 7-10 days to merely discharge cargo from a ship using this technology.
According to Bernhofen et al. (2016), two-thirds of a ships' time would be spent in port. This led
to high costs as the capital utilization of ships was low, and the cost of capital tied up in inventory
was high.9
     Port technology changed dramatically starting in the late 1950s when U.S. shippers first started
placing cargo into boxes called containers.10 Containerized port technology can be seen in its
mature form at the Port of Seattle in 1969 (the seventh-largest U.S. port in 1970 according to our
data) in Panel B of Appendix Figure A.1 (a mere 15 years after the photo at the Port of New
Orleans was taken). Cargo, packed in standardized containers, is loaded onto and off ships using
large, purpose-built cranes situated on the wharf. Large, open areas beside the wharf are used to
line up containers.
     Cargo packed into containers at the origin and not opened until the final destination substan-
tially reduced transshipment costs for a number of reasons.11 First, as containers could be handled
in a uniform way, loading and unloading times were vastly reduced. The San Francisco Port Com-
mission (1971) estimated that a container ship could be unloaded and loaded in 48 hours or less
at that time, a tenth of the previous time spent in port. Similarly, using detailed data on vessel
turnaround times for one anonymized port, Kahveci (1999) estimates that the average time ships
spent in port fell from 8 days to 11 hours as a result of containerization, a reduction of 94%. Sec-
ond, the reduction in turnaround time justified investment into much larger vessels (Gilman, 1983).
The average size of newly-built container ships increased by 402% between 1960 and 1990, as Ap-
pendix Figure A.2 shows. Larger ship sizes made it possible to realize even larger cost reductions
through economies of scale in shipping and port handling. Rodrigue (2016, p. 118) estimates that
moving from a 2,500 TEU capacity vessel to one with 5,000 TEU reduced costs per container by
   7
      By the 1950s, machinery was widely used across ports in the form of forklifts, conveyor belts and small cranes
(Levinson, 2010, p. 18), but they did not eliminate the need to handle cargo individually, which was the main driver
of lengthy transshipment times. The usage of machinery in breakbulk shipping is nicely illustrated in Figure A.1 that
shows a small crane being used to receive cargo.
    8
      The wharf shown in the figure was a newly completed extension to the import-export facilities of the port in 1954,
suggesting that this was considered state-of-the-art technology as late as the mid-1950s. This is also evidenced by the
use of cranes to offload cargo.
    9
      Industry experts estimated that the handling of cargo at the port accounted for a major share of freight costs
(Levinson, 2010). As an example, transshipment costs were estimated to account for 49% of the total transport cost
on one route from the U.S. to Europe (Eyre, 1964).
   10
      Containerized shipping was initially introduced on domestic routes between U.S. ports, but the technology was
rapidly adopted and importantly, standardized worldwide in 1967 (Rua, 2014).
   11
      In the following, we discuss transshipment cost reductions at ports, which is the focus of our paper. A more
detailed discussion about other transport cost reductions as a consequence of containerization can be found in Rodrigue
(2016).

                                                           6
50%.12, 13
     Adapting ports to containerized technology was not without costs, however. Most importantly,
faster turnaround times could only be achieved at the cost of building much larger terminals. This
is a well-known feature of containerized ports in the transportation literature: In discussing the
`challenges' associated with containerization, Rodrigue (2016, p. 118) puts site constraints in the
first place, and in particular, the large consumption of terminal space. Containerized terminals
need more space as it is the easy accessibility of the containers that allows for efficient on- and
off-loading. The containers are lined up next to where the ships dock, and space is also needed to
rapidly off-load cargo. There are additional dedicated `upland areas' near the facility that allow for
the containers to be temporarily stored (New York Port Authority, 1958, p.5) and new space needed
to be made for large `railyards' where containers could await transshipment onto rail carriages
(Riffenburgh, 2012, pp. xi-xii).14
     The increased space requirements of containerized facilities were evident from the earliest days
of the new technology.15 As early as 1958 (two years after the first containerized shipments had
sailed from New York), the New York Port Authority put in place plans to develop the Elizabeth
facility for containerized cargo handling; "Extensive supporting upland area is one of the most
important features of the development, since these large open spaces are indispensable in the han-
dling of general cargo in the age of container ships" (1958, p. 5). The Port of San Francisco (the
fifth largest port in the U.S. in 1950 according to our data) was raising alarm bells about the inad-
equacy of the city's finger piers to accommodate new types of cargo handling; "The Port [should]
commence the phasing out of finger piers. [The piers are] commercially obsolete for the new gen-
eration of ships and the new types of cargo handling technology" (Port of San Francisco, 1971, p.
27). "No pier facilities in the Bay Area today are capable of handling the new space requirements
on this scale of new and larger container ships. (...) thus more berthing and backup area is needed"
(1971, p. 13).
     Ports in densely built up areas such as Manhattan and San Francisco were almost certainly
doomed to decline as one observer noted for San Francisco; "Rows of finger piers adjacent to a

  12
      The 6,000 TEU landmark for vessel size was surpassed in 1996, after our sample period (Rodrigue, 2016, p. 118).
  13
      As more cranes can be used to unload the cargo of larger vessels, transshipment times did not need to increase
substantially.
   14
      Of course, warehouses and transit sheds were replaced to a large extent as containerization was rolled out. How-
ever, the space requirements of the two are not the same, as warehouses and transit sheds tended to be multi-story.
   15
      Before containerization, there were some smaller innovations in handling breakbulk cargo such as palletization
(whereby goods are placed on a pallet and handled as a unit) and pre-slinging (whereby goods are grouped together
using slings and the unit is handled together). UNCTAD (1971) gives a more detailed overview of these trends. These
new processes also allowed cargo to be handled as a unit, saving some transshipment time, though importantly, not in a
standardized way (given the different-sized cargo involved). In Appendix A we show that these smaller improvements
made contemporaries aware of the space ­ cost trade-off, and small changes to port layout (such as the widening of
finger piers) were implemented. However, these pre-containerization changes were minor compared to the effect of
containerization.

                                                          7
densely built up city could not adequately serve container shipping, which involved larger ships
that required larger wharves and much larger areas of open space for loading and unloading"
(Corbett, 2010, p. 164).
    While it is difficult to quantify precisely how much more space containerized ports require, we
have been able to find high quality data for one port that allows us to give a tentative answer: New
Orleans. Appendix Figure A.3 presents data on the wharf length and area dimensions of terminals
at the Port of New Orleans for the years 1950-1985.16 The measure we are interested in is the area
required to serve a ship under the different technologies. In addition, as the discussion above has
highlighted, containerized ships were typically larger and required larger wharves, thus rendering
a raw comparison between containerized and non-containerized terminals biased. For this reason,
we examine the area of the port divided by wharf frontage (that is, the length of the wharf where
ships can dock, thus accounting for differences in ship size). The numbers are striking; after
containerization was introduced at the Port of New Orleans, the area per wharf frontage increased
by 75%. Taking the rich historical evidence together with the data from New Orleans, we conclude
that increased land intensity is an important feature of containerized technology.
1.2    New technologies for other types of cargo handling
To what extent did other types of non-containerized cargo handling benefit from similar innova-
tions, or from spillovers from containerization? This is an important question, as our empirical
research design will estimate the effects of new methods of cargo handling on the sum of shipping
flows (that is, on the sum of containerized and non-containerized ships). The evidence suggests that
non-containerized cargo transshipment also underwent some similar ­ albeit generally weaker ­
trends during our sample period. First, we see substantial reductions in ship turnaround times. Us-
ing data for one anonymized port between 1970-1998, Kahveci (1999) shows that ship turnaround
times decreased by between 40-94% for different types of cargo, with the smallest gain being
achieved for petroleum products and the largest for breakbulk cargo that was replaced by con-
tainers. Cars (for which the `roll-on roll-off' technology was introduced; a technology that most
closely resembles containerization in many ways) had almost the same efficiency gains as break-
bulk cargo, followed by forest products and liquid bulk. Accordingly, faster turnaround times
made larger ships cost-efficient, so vessel sizes also became significantly larger across many dif-
ferent cargo types. As Appendix Figure A.2 shows, the average size of newly built non-container
vessels increased by 68% between 1960 and 1990 (in contrast to the 402% increase for container
ships discussed above). It is also conceivable that non-containerized cargo benefited from other
spillovers from the containerized technology. For example, deeper ports made it possible to receive

  16
    Detailed data on wharf dimensions are reported in various editions of the port's annual reports (see the notes to
Figure A.3 for information on sources). These data include area information on warehouses that may serve multiple
terminals, even if they are not located directly at the terminal.

                                                         8
larger ships for all types of cargo.
    For these reasons, we will use the term `containerization' as shorthand for the bundle of new
technologies and possible spillover effects of containerization that affected all cargo.

2        Data
Our analysis builds on a decadal city-level dataset of shipping flows, population, and other eco-
nomic outcomes for the period 1950-1990. We complement this with GIS data that allows us to
calculate certain geographic characteristics of the city important for our analysis. We review the
main variables used in the analysis below. Summary statistics for the main variables are reported
in Appendix Table A.1. Additional details on data construction and data sources are discussed in
Appendix C.
Shipping Flows. Crucial to our analysis is a dataset of worldwide bilateral ship movements at the
port level. These data correspond to the period 1950-1990, and come from Ducruet, Cuyala, and
Hosni (2018). An observation is a ship moving from one port to another at a particular point in
time. As such, it is similar to contemporary satellite AIS (Automatic Identification System) data
that tracks the precise movements of vessels around the globe.17 One week samples of these data
were extracted from the Lloyd's Shipping Index, a unique source that provides a daily list of mer-
chant vessels and their latest inter-port movements.18 We are aware of no previous application in
the economics literature.
    These data provide us with rich variation to study the geography of sea-borne trade through
the second half of the 20th century. First, they cover both domestic and international shipping.
Second, the data include both containerized and non-containerized cargo. Third, the data cover a
long time period spanning the containerization revolution. We are thus able to compare the effects
of port activity on cities both before and after the arrival of the new technology. We know of no
other data source that has a similar coverage across time and space, especially at such a detailed
level of disaggregation. An important limitation, however, is that we do not observe either the
value or the volume of shipment but only bilateral ship movements. From these ship movements,
we sum the total number of ships passing through each port, which we call shipping flows. We
clean these data by hand-matching them to the 1953 and 2017 editions of the World Port Index
(WPI), which is a widely used reference list of worldwide ports.19 Our base sample consists of
    17
      These type of AIS data are used in Heiland et al. (2019) and Brancaccio et al. (2020).
    18
      The data were entered from issues of the Lloyd's List for the first week of May. It should be noted that ship
movements from the first week of May will often include journeys that took place in March or April due to the time
lag between sailing and printing. The data are discussed in more detail in Ducruet et al. (2018).
   19
      The initial Lloyd's List sample of `ports' included ports on navigable rivers such as Budapest, Hungary. We
therefore chose to discipline the sample of ports using WPI. We use a historic and current edition of the WPI to ensure
we capture both ports that may no longer exist, and ones that only appear later in the period. A different approach
would have been to choose a distance threshold from the coast and drop any port located further from the coast than
the threshold. This definition, however, is very sensitive to the precision of the coastline shapefile used to calculate

                                                           9
Lloyd's List ports that match to at least one of the WPI editions.
City population. As we are interested in the economic effects of containerization, we use data on
city population worldwide for locations with more than 100,000 inhabitants from Villes Géopolis
(Moriconi-Ebrard, 1994) for each decade between 1950-1990 (Geopolis cities, henceforth). The
advantage of these data relative to sources such as the more frequently used UN World Cities
dataset is that a consistent and systematic effort was made to obtain populations for the urban
agglomeration of cities (that is, the number of inhabitants living in a city's contiguous built-up area)
as opposed to the administrative boundaries that are often reported in country-specific sources.
For example, New York (New York) and Newark (New Jersey) form one `city' according to this
definition. As is common with censored city population data, we observe population for cities
that reached 100,000 inhabitants in any year throughout this period. For most of these cities, we
observe population even when the city had fewer than 100,000 inhabitants. This type of sample
selection can lead to important biases as we oversample fast-growing cities that were initially
small. In the empirical section, we show that our results are robust to using the subset of cities that
had already attained 100,000 inhabitants in the first sample year, 1950.
    Ports were hand-matched from the shipping data to cities based on whether the port was lo-
cated within the urban agglomeration of a city in the Geopolis dataset, allowing for multiple ports
to be assigned to one city (Ducruet et al., 2018). We define port cities in a time invariant manner;
a port city with positive shipping flows in at least one year will be classified as a port city for all
years. Appendix Table A.2 contains the breakdown of port and non-port cities. Of the 2,636 cities
in the Geopolis dataset, 553 have at least one port assigned. We label these as port cities. For
these cities, we observe shipping flows and city population for the years 1950-1990. In addition,
we have information for 1,592 ports that are not assigned to a city in the Geopolis dataset. Ap-
pendix Figure A.4 visualizes the spatial distribution of cities in our data, distinguishing between
port and inland cities. Our reduced form empirical analysis focuses on estimating the local effects
of containerization on the 553 port cities. The quantitative estimation covers the full set of 2,636
Geopolis cities (port and non-port cities).
Underwater elevation levels. We use gridded bathymetric data on underwater elevation levels at a
detailed spatial resolution (30 arc seconds, or about 1 kilometer at the equator) from the General
Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO) to measure sea-depth around the city.20
Saiz land rent proxy. While we are not aware of any dataset that covers land rents globally going
back to the 1950s, Saiz (2010) has proposed a geography-based measure that correlates well with

distance form the coast, which is why we did not choose this method. Despite filtering the Lloyd's List sample through
the WPI, our final sample still contains a handful of ports that are very far inland. In the empirical analysis, we show
that our results are robust to different ways of treating these `inland ports'.
   20
      Additional information on these data are described in Appendix C.1.

                                                          10
land-rents. This allows us to construct land rent proxies for all cities in our dataset. The `Saiz-
measure' is defined as follows: Take a 50 kilometer radius around the centroid of the city. Exclude
all sea cells, all internal water bodies and wetland areas and all cells with a gradient above 15%.
The remaining cells, as a share of the total cells can be used as a proxy for land rents. We replicate
the methodology in Saiz exactly, using GIS data that have global coverage.21 Spatial variation in
the Saiz measure is visualized in Appendix Figure A.5.
City-level GDP per capita. Data on city-level income levels are needed for the quantitative es-
timation only. We are not aware of readily available sources of GDP per capita data for cities
worldwide. For this reason, we estimate GDP per capita for the last year in our sample (1990) for
the full sample of 2,636 worldwide cities in the following way. First, we use estimates of city GDP
from the Canback Global Income Distribution Database for a subset of our sample (898 cities)
for which data are reported for 1990. We extrapolate GDP per capita for the full sample of cities
using the linear fit of the GDP per capita data on nightlight luminosity and country-fixed effects,
building on a growing body of evidence suggesting that income can be reasonably approximated
using nightlight luminosity data (Donaldson and Storeygard, 2016).22
Port share. We define the port share as the share of a city's land occupied by the port. These data
are needed for calibrating the model for the quantitative estimation. We have been able to find
high-quality, consistent data for the land area occupied by ports for only 7 port cities in 1990, as
these data are typically not recorded.23

3        The reduced form effects of containerization
In this section, we study the local effects of containerization on port cities. To isolate the causal
effect of containerization, we develop an exogenous measure of port suitability based on the depth
of the sea around the port. We examine three questions. First, did cities exogenously more suited
to containerization witness an increase in shipping flows? We confirm that they did, but only after
1960, consistent with historical evidence on timing. Second, did this boom in shipping flows trans-
late into increased city population? Surprisingly, we find no discernible causal effect of shipping
flows on local port city population. Third, we work towards understanding this result by examining
whether our data show evidence consistent with the land-intensive nature of shipping discussed in
Section 1. We find that indeed, low-rent cities witnessed higher increases in shipping flows, as the
land price mechanism would suggest. We begin this section by introducing the exogenous measure
of port suitability used throughout the paper and proceed to discussing the three empirical results.



    21
       These sources are documented in Appendix C.2.
    22
       More details on this exercise are provided in Appendix C.3.
    23
       We provide additional details on data construction in C.4.

                                                          11
3.1    An exogenous measure of port suitability
Section 1 discussed the fact that containerization led to larger ship sizes, and that this in turn
required greater depth at the port. Following the previous literature, we think of naturally endowed
depth as an exogenous cost-shifter that makes it cheaper for a port to reach a desired depth through
costly dredging (Brooks et al., 2019; Altomonte et al., 2018). The empirical challenge is that
observed port depth is a combination of naturally endowed depth and depth attained by dredging.
Our solution to this relies on using contemporary granular data on underwater elevation levels
around the port to isolate the naturally endowed component of depth. In particular, we take all
sea cells within certain buffer rings around the geocode of the port and sum the number of cells
that are `very deep', which we define as depth greater than 30 feet following Brooks et al. (2019).
The authors argue that given vessel sizes in the 1950s (pre-containerization), depth beyond 30 feet
conferred no advantage to the port.24 Below, we will test how reasonable this assumption is by
examining pre-trends in shipping.
    To operationalize our measure, we need to take a stand on which set of cells around the port to
consider. Our aim is to measure depth in areas around the port that are used by ships to navigate
and wait for their docking time. To get a sense of where these areas are for a typical port, we
examine the location (using exact geocodes) of stationary ships around the port in a one hour win-
dow for 100 random ports in our sample using contemporary data.25 The cumulative distribution
of ships around these ports, split by percentiles of port size, is shown in Appendix Table A.3. For
these 100 ports, we find stationary ships located up to 25-30 km around the port, and sometimes
even beyond.26 However, the majority of stationary ships are located within 5 km, which justifies
our baseline measure of port suitability: the log of the sum of `very deep' cells in a buffer ring 3-5
km around the port.27 We will examine the effect of depth measured at various buffers and show
that the effects are similar in nearby rings, suggesting that the variation we use from the 3-5 km
buffer is a representative measure of depth at the port.
Testing for endogenous dredging. The key assumption behind our ability to isolate naturally en-
dowed depth (from depth attained by dredging) is that when ports need to invest in costly dredging,
  24
      In practice, the geocode of the port is typically not exactly on the coastline. To correct for the measurement error
that we would introduce from having geocodes closer or farther away from the coastline, we project all geocodes onto
the coastline.
   25
      These data are from marinetraffic.com and refer to stationary ships near the port captured between November 4
and 10, 2019, at 12:00-13:00 local time. More details regarding these data are provided in Appendix C.8. There is a
concern that measures of where ships are found around the port today is a poor proxy for where ships were located
during our sample period. Partly for this reason, we will show that depth measured in the same way at different nearby
buffers yields similar results.
   26
      We observe stationary ships farther away from the port for larger ports ­ in particular those in the 75th-100th
percentile, which makes sense given that larger ports need to accommodate more ships at any given time. We would
therefore also expect there to be more ships waiting around the port for their docking time.
   27
      There are zeros in the data, that is, there are ports with no cells deeper than 30 feet in the 3-5 km buffer around
the port. For this reason, in practice, we use ln(1 + i 1depthi 30f t ), where i denotes a cell.

                                                           12
they typically do not dredge entire areas in our buffers, but narrow channels that ships use to navi-
gate to the port. By calculating depth over many sea cells, the vast majority of depth measurements
for each port should reflect naturally endowed depth. We test this assumption in the following way.
For 100 random ports in our sample, we obtained access to nautical maps from marinetraffic.com
which clearly demarcate the dredged channels that ships use to navigate to the port.28 We then
constructed a binary variable, `Dredging', that takes the value 1 if a port has a dredged channel in
the 3-5 km buffer ring used in the baseline. Appendix Table A.4 shows the association between
this measure and the depth measure. The unconditional association (column 1) is negative and sta-
tistically significant. That is, ports that we measure to be shallow are more likely to have a dredged
channel. This is what we would expect to find if our measure captured naturally endowed depth.29


Balancing checks. Finally, we examine the extent to which our measure of exogenous port suit-
ability is correlated with other observables pre-containerization in order to assess the types of
confounders that may bias the results. Appendix Table A.5 shows the results. If greater depth
would have led to more shipping even before containerization, we would expect to see a positive
coefficient between depth and shipping flows. However, we see that the unconditional measure of
depth is negatively correlated with both the level of shipping flows in 1950 (measured in logs), and
population in 1950 (measured in logs), indicating that initially small cities had larger depth. In
terms of growth rates pre-containerization, depth is weakly positively correlated with population
growth between 1950 and 1960 (the coefficient is significant at 10%). This suggests that our depth
measure is correlated with small cities that are growing relatively fast, i.e., population convergence.
In order to purge our depth measure of this variation, we residualize it on city population in 1950
(measured in logs).30 We re-examine how the part of the variation in depth that is uncorrelated
with 1950 population, `residualized depth', correlates with the same observables. Reassuringly,
residualized depth is correlated neither with the level of shipping and population in 1950 (the latter
by construction), nor with the change in shipping and population between 1950 and 1960. In the
empirical analysis, we therefore use the residualized measure of depth as the baseline measure of
exogenous port suitability.
    Appendix Table A.5 also shows the correlation with other observables. Residualized depth
is uncorrelated with country level GDP per capita measured pre-containerization and the latitude
and longitude of the city (this is also true for raw depth). However, both depth and residualized

  28
      For more details on this exercise, see Appendix C.9.
  29
      Adding continent or coastline fixed effects (columns 2 and 3, respectively) reduces the size of the negative coef-
ficient and we lose statistical significance in column 3, but the estimated coefficients remain negative.
   30
      More precisely, we regress the log of depth on the log of population in 1950 and take the residuals from this
regression. Population in 1950 is not observed for 21 out of 553 port cities. For these, we replace 1950 population
with the first year in which population is observed, which is generally 1960.

                                                          13
depth are correlated with the Saiz land rent proxy. This is perhaps unsurprising, as arguably similar
geographic characteristics determine the overland (Saiz measure) and underwater (depth measure)
geographic features around a city. For this reason, we show robustness of all our results to the
inclusion of the Saiz land rent proxy interacted with year indicator variables. Appendix Figure A.6
visualizes the spatial variation in the residualized depth measure. While there seems to be some
spatial correlation in depth, there is also a fair amount of variation within narrowly defined regions.
We will tackle the issue of spatial correlation head-on in the empirics by testing the robustness of
our results to using only within-region variation. We will also show that our results are robust to
adjusting for spatial autocorrelation in the error term by reporting Conley standard errors (Conley,
1999).
3.2    Results
In this subsection, we use the depth-based measure of port-suitability to examine the local effects
of containerization.
Result 1: Depth predicts shipping, but only after 1960. First, we examine whether depth predicts
shipping flows during our sample period. We implement this using the following flexible specifi-
cation that allows us to examine the timing of when depth started to matter for shipping.


                         1990                                          1990
  ln(Shipit ) =                  j  Depthi  1(Y ear = j ) +                     j  ln(P opi,1950 )  1(Y ear = j )
                       j =1960                                        j =1960
                       +i + t +         it


    The outcome variable of interest, ln(Shipit ), is the log of shipping flows observed in city i at
time t. This is the sum of all shipping flows recorded for city i at time t. We expect containerized
technology (as defined in Section 1) to affect this measure both through its effect on containerized
and non-containerized cargo. We need to take a stand on the treatment of zeros in the shipping
data.31 In the baseline measure, we annualize the weekly counts of ships from the raw data by
multiplying the one-week sample of shipping flows we observe by 52. This is primarily so that
our results are comparable to regressions we run using model-simulated data in the quantification
exercise in Section 7. Finally, we replace the zeros in the data with ones and take the natural
logarithm of this adjusted annualized count.32 Depthi is the cross-sectional measure of port suit-
  31
     The data contain zeros for two reasons: First, we may observe zeros because of measurement error: small ports
with low shipping flows may not register an interport-movement during the week in which we capture the data. Second,
zeros may appear due to the time-invariant definition of port status that we use. We observe zero shipping flows in a
particular year if a port was established in the city only after 1950, or if a port shut down in the city during our sample
period. Overall, we observe zero shipping flows for 16% of the port-year observations. From examining the data, the
zeros seem to be more likely driven by mismeasuring small shipping flows rather than the entry and exit of ports.
  32
     In robustness checks discussed below, we show that all of the results presented in this section are robust to other

                                                           14
ability defined in the previous subsection. We interact this measure with binary indicators for the
decades 1960 ­ 1990 to estimate the time path of how depth affected shipping flows. In addition,
we include the full set of city and year fixed-effects (denoted i and t , respectively) as well as the
log of population in 1950 interacted with year indicator variables across all specifications. This is
equivalent to using the residualized depth measure in a panel setting. We cluster standard errors at
the city level in the baseline to account for the serial correlation of shocks. We also report Conley
standard errors (in curly brackets). As these are always very close to the clustered standard errors
and do not change the statistical significance of our results, we will only report them for the main
results.33 Each j in this specification estimates the increase in shipping caused by having a deeper
port in a given year relative to 1950.
    Table 1 contains the estimated coefficients. Column (1) presents coefficients for the baseline
specification. A number of points should be noted. First, deeper ports did not witness differential
growth in shipping flows between 1950 and 1960 (coefficient -0.051, se. 0.063), consistent with
this being a decade in which containerization was just being developed in a few ports around the
world. Second, we see an effect of depth in each of the following decades, as containerization was
adopted worldwide. The coefficient of interest is much larger and significantly different from zero
for the interaction of depth and each year indicator including and after 1970 (e.g., the coefficient for
the 1970 interaction is 0.222, se. 0.069). This is consistent with containerization technology being
rolled out in the early 1960s across US ports and worldwide later in the decade, as we discussed in
Section 1.
    A causal interpretation of the estimated effect of depth relies on the identifying assumption
that the time-varying effect of depth is uncorrelated with the error term. The timing of when
depth started to matter and the lack of pre-trends provide some evidence that this assumption is
plausible. Next, we turn to further testing this result with more demanding specifications. One
concern is that many determinants of depth may be spatially correlated and if true, the estimates
could be hard to disentangle from broader regional trends. To this end, column (2) adds the full set
of `coastline' by year-fixed effects to examine the extent to which our identifying variation relies
on cross-regional variation.34 Note that this set of fixed effects subsumes continent by year fixed
effects. A comparison of the coefficients between columns (1) and (2) reveals that they are very
similar, suggesting that broader regional trends are unlikely to be driving the effects.
    Column (3) adds the Saiz land rent proxy interacted with year indicators to capture trends

standard ways of dealing with the zeros. In these, we do not annualize the data in order to verify that this transformation
does not drive the results.
   33
      We allow for spatial correlation at distances up to 1,000 km and set the spatial decay function to be linear.
   34
      We define coastlines in the following way. We assign each port to its nearest ocean (e.g., `Pacific Ocean') or body
of water (e.g., `Great Lakes') and further disaggregate oceans by continent. This yields 22 coastlines worldwide. Ex-
amples are `Mediterranean ­ Europe' and `North America ­ Atlantic'. Appendix Figure A.7 visualizes the `coastlines'
that this exercise yields.

                                                           15
driven by the time-varying effect of land rents. Recall that this is a particularly important ro-
bustness check as the depth measure is correlated with the Saiz measure. Column (3) shows that
the results are robust ­ the coefficients of interest become a bit larger across the board but the
pre-trends remain small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, while the estimated coeffi-
cients including and after 1970 are much larger and highly significant throughout. Column (4)
adds country GDP per capita (measured in 1960) interacted with year indicators to control for po-
tentially differential growth trends across initially rich and poor countries.35 The coefficients are
remarkably stable.
    Based on these results, we introduce a `containerization' treatment indicator that turns on in
years including and after 1970. This pools observations before 1970 and including and after 1970
together and yields a single coefficient that estimates the differential effect of depth on shipping
after the onset of containerization. Column (5) shows the results. Cities endowed with more depth,
and hence more suitable to containerized technologies witnessed disproportionate increases in their
shipping flows after containerization (coefficient 0.246, se 0.059).
    How much heterogeneity is there in the effect of containerization across regions? We examine
this question by estimating the specification in column (5) and drop continents one at a time. The
coefficient estimates for each of these specifications are plotted in Appendix Figure A.8. The
coefficient remains fairly stable and highly significant (the baseline coefficient is 0.246, while the
ones that drop continents one at a time fluctuate between 0.2 and 0.3). The coefficient does become
somewhat smaller when we drop North-America, which is in line with the United States being the
birthplace and an early adopter of containerization. The coefficient also becomes smaller when
we drop Asia, consistent with the notion that gains to containerization may have been particularly
large in Asia.
    The appendix contains further important robustness checks. First, we test robustness to differ-
ent data construction choices. In particular, we examine different ways of treating zero shipping
values, different ways of defining the depth measure for the handful of ports that are located far
inland from the coastline and restricting the sample to the subset of cities that had already attained
100,000 inhabitants by 1950 to examine sample selection bias (Appendix Table A.6). The co-
efficient of interest remains similar in magnitude and highly significant across all these checks.
Second, we examine how stable the effect of depth on shipping is depending on the buffer that we
use to calculate our depth measure (Appendix Table A.7). The effect is similar across the different
buffers, but becomes weaker as we move further away from the coast.36 Having established that
our depth-based measure of port-suitability predicts shipping flows after containerization, we now

  35
     We use the 1960 (pre-containerization) measure of country GDP per capita as this is observed for a larger set of
countries than for 1950.
  36
     At buffers further out at sea we lose a lot of variation as many locations have a lot of depth far away from the
coast.

                                                         16
turn to examining how this boom in shipping affected city population.
Result 2: The local causal effect of shipping on population is not distinguishable from zero.                          We
estimate the effect of shipping on population using the following specification;


                                                            1990
        ln(P opit ) =   ln(Shipit ) + i + t +                        j  ln(P opi,1950 )  1(Y ear = j ) +          it    (1)
                                                           j =1960


where ln(P opit ) is the natural logarithm of population in city i at time t, and all other variables
are as previously defined. The main identification challenge is that the shipping flows of a city are
endogenous. Our main worry is reverse causality: fast growing cities will also witness increases in
their shipping flows. Our solution is to isolate variation in shipping caused by exogenous suitability
to containerization using the depth measure as an instrument for shipping. In particular, we use
the binary version of our containerization treatment defined in the previous section: we interact
the cross-sectional measure of depth with an indicator variable that takes the value of one in years
including and after 1970. We cluster standard errors at the city level. We also report Conley
standard errors for our main results in Appendix Table A.8.37
     Table 2 contains the main regression results. In columns (1) to (6) we estimate the effects
of interest using all years in the sample, while columns (7) to (10) show the estimates from the
long-differenced specification. Turning first to the full panel specification, the OLS specification
of equation (1) shows that the association between shipping and population is small, positive and
statistically different from zero (coefficient 0.013, se. 0.005). The 2SLS estimate in column (2)
shows a similarly sized coefficient but we cannot reject zero (coefficient 0.015, se. 0.049). To
assess magnitudes, we report the standardized `beta' coefficients for our effects of interest in italics
underneath the estimated regression coefficients. These make clear that while the OLS may be
statistically significant, the magnitudes of both the OLS and the 2SLS estimates are economically
negligible. A one standard deviation increase in shipping leads to a 0.03 (OLS) or 0.035 (2SLS)
standard deviation increase in population. Columns (3) and (4) show the first stage and reduced
form respectively. These make clear why the results are indistinguishable from zero. While the
first stage is strong (the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic is 21.13), there is no reduced form relationship
between depth and population (the reduced form coefficient is 0.004, se 0.013).38 Columns (5)
and (6) show the full time path of effects for the first stage and reduced form respectively. The
time path of the fully flexible first stage was already discussed in the previous section: the effect

  37
      As these are typically very close to the clustered standard errors, we only report them for the main results for
easier readability of the tables.
   38
      The specification here is identical to that in Table 1, but the sample size shrinks slightly as we lose those observa-
tions where population is unobserved in some years (1% of the sample).

                                                            17
of depth on shipping is small and indistinguishable from zero pre-containerization, and it becomes
large and highly significant after the onset of containerization. The coefficients on the reduced
form make clear that the statistically insignificant coefficient in the 2SLS estimate does not stem
from the fact that population is sluggish to adjust. The time path of the coefficients shows no
discernible trend, and there is no clear difference in population growth post-containerization for
deeper ports. All of the coefficients are estimated to be very close to zero (the one `furthest' away
from zero is 0.007), the coefficients are never close to statistical significance and in two of the five
decades, the estimated reduced form coefficient is negative, suggesting that if anything, deeper
ports were growing at a slower rate than shallower ones in some decades.
     While the large standard errors typical of 2SLS estimation make a definitive answer difficult,
there are several reasons why we believe that the most reasonable interpretation of our results is that
shipping booms caused by containerization led to no discernible effects on population. First, as dis-
cussed above, the standardized `beta' coefficients make clear that the magnitudes of both the OLS
and the 2SLS estimates are economically negligible. Second, if we examine the long-differenced
specification in columns (7) to (10), neither the OLS nor the 2SLS estimate is significantly dif-
ferent from zero, and both standardized beta coefficients again show an economically negligible
effect. In fact, the 2SLS coefficient estimate is smaller ­ it is less than half the size estimated in the
full panel, consistent with the fact that it was population observations from earlier years that drove
the point estimate in the full panel specification. While the long-differenced specification has the
disadvantage of using fewer observations, it has the advantage that it examines the long-run effects
of the shipping boom on population, once the latter has had time to adjust.
     Third, we subject the 2SLS specification to the same set of robustness checks conducted above.
Appendix Table A.9 presents the results. Despite the demanding nature of these specifications, the
first stage remains sufficiently strong (the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic is always above 10) and
the estimated 2SLS coefficient is never statistically different from zero. In fact, in two out of
three cases, the estimated coefficient is negative. In particular, we estimate a negative, though
statistically insignificant effect when we add the full set of coastline by year fixed effects (column
2) and when we control for initial GDP per capita by year trends (column 4). Fourth, no single
continent drives this result. In Appendix Figure A.9 we plot the estimated coefficient dropping
continents one at a time. The 2SLS coefficient remains close to zero and is never statistically
significant. Appendix Table A.10 shows that the results are robust to various ways of treating zero
shipping flows in the sample, to how we define the IV for ports further inland and to restricting the
sample to cities that already reached 100,000 inhabitants in 1950.
     We view the null effect on population as a surprising finding. Intuition and standard models
(Co¸ sar and Fajgelbaum, 2016; Nagy, 2018; Fajgelbaum and Redding, 2018) would both suggest
that a boom in shipping should make a location more attractive for households and firms, as they


                                                   18
can access consumers and producers more cheaply (the `market access effect'), leading to an in-
flow of population. Indeed, the past literature has found that these types of positive shocks to a
city's accessibility tend to lead to a boom in local population (Bleakley and Lin (2012); Brooks
et al. (2019); Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2018).39 While comparing the economic size of
the effect in these papers relative to ours is difficult given the different contexts and different `treat-
ments', these papers all show that their effect is economically meaningful, while making the same
claim with our results would be difficult.
    What can explain the difference between our findings and previous work? One notable differ-
ence in our setting is the increased land intensity of of port activities induced by containerization
discussed in Section 1. This may be a force that crowds out population. The large space occupied
by ports, and in particular, the increased land usage necessary to adapt to containerization may
have crowded out other forms of economic activity. If this force is strong enough, it could coun-
teract the more standard, positive market access effect. In the last part of this section, we examine
the extent to which we can detect the effects of this in our data. We also note that in Section 7, we
will return to the question of what magnitude of an effect one would expect in our setting in the
absence of the crowding out mechanism. We will show through the lens of our model that only by
including the crowding out mechanism can we match the null population effect found in this sec-
tion. Switching this mechanism off leads to a statistically and economically significant population
effect ­ as predicted by the standard market access effect.
Result 3: Containerization increased shipping more in low rent cities. We now turn to examining
whether land prices affect where port development takes place in response to containerization. We
do this in the following way. To the extent that this mechanism is at work, we would expect low
land-rent cities to be more attractive places for containerized ports all else equal, as the opportunity
cost of port development in these locations is low. We test for this by examining the heterogeneity
of the depth-shipping relationship from Result 1 using the following specification;



       ln(Shipit ) =   Depthi  1(Y ear  1970) +   Depthi  Renti  1(Y ear  1970) (2)
                                                                     1990
                         +  Renti  1(Y ear  1970) +                          j  ln(P opi,1950 )  1(Y ear = j )
                                                                   j =1960
                         +i + t +        it

  39
     The paper closest to our setting is Brooks et al. (2019), who study the effect of containerization on the population
of U.S. counties located nearby. They find a positive and statistically significant effect of containerization on local
population. Though the two settings are difficult to compare as we study cities around the world, we think one crucial
difference is that while we examine the effects on cities, their unit of analysis is a county. As we argue below, the most
likely mechanism driving the null result is that the land intensity of port technology acts as an important opposing
force crowding out population. This mechanism is more likely to be detectable at the generally finer level of spatial
resolution that we examine.

                                                           19
where Renti is the Saiz land rent proxy for city i, and all other variables are as defined above.40 The
coefficient of interest is  ­ that is, we are interested in the interaction between our depth suitability
measure and the Saiz land rent proxy (interacted with the `containerization' treatment variable that
turns on in 1970). We have defined the Saiz measure such that higher values correspond to less area
that can be developed, implying high land-rents. Note that this is a fully saturated specification in
that we allow both depth and the Saiz measure to have their own time trend break in 1970. We plot
the marginal effect of depth at different values of the Saiz measure in Figure 1 (the corresponding
estimates are presented in Table 3). Consistent with the land intensive nature of containerized
technology, the coefficient of interest,  , is negative, large and statistically different from zero
(coefficient -0.707, se. 0.323). Cities with exogenously deeper ports witnessed increased shipping
flows after 1970, but disproportionately more so in low land rent cities.
    Appendix Figure A.10 explores the heterogeneity of the result by dropping continents one at a
time. The effect is consistently negative as we drop continents, though it is smaller in magnitude
when we drop Asia, suggesting that the land price mechanism may have exerted a particularly
strong influence in this part of the world.
    We perform the same set of robustness checks for this result as for previous ones. We add
coastline by year fixed effects and control for initial country GDP per capita interacted with year
indicators in Appendix Table A.11. Alternatively, we treat zero shipping flows in different ways,
define the depth measure for ports further inland in different ways, and restrict the sample of cities
to those that already attained a population of 100,000 inhabitants in 1950 in Appendix Table A.12.
The results are largely robust to these specifications, as our coefficient of interest,  , remains
negative and economically large throughout all these checks, though in two especially demanding
specifications the level of significance drops below 10%.
    We provide additional evidence that the land prices matter for determining the location of ports
in the appendix. In Appendix Table A.13, we examine the location of ports within cities using
information from the World Port Index on the geocodes of ports in our sample in 1953 and 2017.41
We show that during this time period, ports moved further from the centroid of the city towards
the outskirts, where land prices are typically lower (Duranton and Puga, 2019). This is particularly
striking for the subset of cities in which a new port was built (e.g., in Sydney, Australia). In these
cases, the new port was located on average 9 km further from the centroid of the city than the old
port. In sum, land prices matter for determining where port development takes place.
    Taking all the results of this section together, the lack of population effects following the ship-
ping boom caused by containerization is strongly suggestive of some type of counteracting force
crowding population out of the city (alongside standard forces that lead to population inflows).
  40
   We report standard errors clustered at the city level, as well as Conley standard errors in curly brackets.
  41
   We provide details on the data used for this exercise, and in particular, on how we calculate city centroids in
Appendix C.6.

                                                       20
The land rent heterogeneity result suggests that the land-intensive nature of containerized technol-
ogy described in Section 1 is an empirically important determinant of where containerized port
infrastructure was developed. All else equal, port development tends to take place in cities where
the land price is lower, as measured by the Saiz land rent proxy. Armed with this evidence we
now turn to writing down a quantitative spatial model that captures many realistic features of port
infrastructure development, including, but not limited to, the land price mechanism. In Section 5,
we revisit the empirical analysis guided by the insights of the model to probe further the land price
mechanism.

4     A model of cities and endogenous port development
To measure the aggregate effects of port development induced by containerization, we develop
a rich and flexible quantitative general equilibrium model of trade across cities. In the model,
we explicitly take into account the fact that port cities can endogenously develop their port to
benefit from new port technologies. Cities facing high demand for transshipment because of their
geographic position or other favorable local conditions want to invest more in developing their
port. Developing the port, however, is costly as it requires scarce land that can be used for other
purposes. As a result, the model captures both the benefits and costs of port development. Section
4.1 outlines the setup, while Section 4.2 discusses the qualitative predictions that the model delivers
on port development and its consequences on the spatial distribution of population across cities.
4.1     Setup
The world consists of S > 0 cities, indexed by r or s. An exogenously given subset of cities
are port cities, while the rest are non-port cities. We make the Armington assumption that each
city produces one variety of a differentiated final good that we also index by r or s (Anderson,
1979). Each city belongs to one country, and each country is inhabited by an exogenous mass of
workers who choose the city in which they want to live. Mobility across cities is, however, subject
to frictions.
4.1.1    Workers
Each worker owns one unit of labor that she supplies in her city of residence. The utility of a
worker j who chooses to live in city r is given by
                                                                   
                                           S                       -1
                                                             -1
                              uj (r) =          qj (r, s)               a (r) bj (r)                   (3)
                                          s=1


where qj (r, s) is the worker's consumption of the good made in city s, a (r) is the level of amenities
in city r, and bj (r) is an idiosyncratic city taste shifter.  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across
goods.

                                                     21
     The dispersion of bj (r) represents the severity of cross-city mobility frictions that workers
face, similar to Kennan and Walker (2011) and Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018). To
see why this is the case, note that if bj (r) do not vary across workers or cities, then any increase
in income or amenities at r translates into a massive flow of workers towards r. On the other hand,
if bj (r) are very dispersed, then workers move to the cities they prefer for idiosyncratic reasons,
hence changes in economic fundamentals lead to little migration. For tractability, we assume
that bj (r) is drawn from a Fréchet distribution with shape parameter 1/ and a scale parameter
normalized to one. Hence, a larger value of  corresponds to more severe frictions to mobility.
4.1.2    Landlords
Each city r is also inhabited by a positive mass of immobile landlords who own the exogenously
given stock of land available in the city. We normalize the stock of land available in each city to
one.42 Landlords have the same preferences over goods as workers. They do not work but finance
their consumption from the revenues they collect after their stock of land.
    Each landlord is small relative to the total mass of landlords in the city and hence thinks that
she cannot influence prices. Yet the mass of landlords is small enough that the population of each
city can be approximated well with the mass of workers who choose to reside in the city.
    In non-port cities, landlords rent out their land to firms that produce the city-specific good. In
port cities, landlords can also use part of their land to provide transshipment services. The more
land they use for transshipment services, the more the cost of transshipping a unit of a good de-
creases. The landlord can charge a price for the transshipment service she provides. Competition
among port city landlords drives down this price to marginal cost. Hence, profits from transship-
ment services are zero in equilibrium.43
4.1.3    Production
Firms can freely enter the production of the city-specific good. Hence, they take all prices as given
and make zero profits. Production requires labor and land. The representative firm operating in
city r faces the production function

                                              ~ (r) n (r) (1 - F (r))1-
                                      q (r) = A



  42
      We could allow the stock of available land to vary across cities. This more general setup is isomorphic to our
current model, except that, instead of productivity in the city-specific good sector, a combination of the stock of land
and productivity enters the model's equilibrium conditions. In other words, the city productivity levels we identify
from our current model reflect not only productivity per se but also the stock of available land. This fact, however,
does not affect our quantitative results as we keep productivity levels fixed in our model simulations.
   43
      In Section 7, we show that the aggregate gains from containerization remain similar in an alternative framework
in which landlords have market power and thus can make profits. We provide a detailed description of this alternative
framework in Appendix B.7.

                                                          22
where q (r) denotes the firm's output, A   ~ (r) is total factor productivity in the city, n (r) is the
amount of labor employed by the firm, and F (r) is the share of land that landlords in the city use
for transshipment services (thus, F (r) = 0 in non-port cities). Hence, 1 - F (r) is the remainder of
land that landlords rent out to firms for production, and  and 1 -  correspond to the expenditure
shares on labor and land, respectively.
    We incorporate agglomeration economies by allowing total factor productivity to depend on
the population of the city, N (r):
                                        A~ (r) = A (r) N (r)

where A (r) is the exogenous fundamental productivity of the city, and   [0, 1 -  ] is a pa-
rameter that captures the strength of agglomeration economies.44 The representative firm does not
internalize the effect that its employment decision has on local population. Hence, it takes N (r)
as given.
4.1.4    Shipping and port development
Firms in city r can ship their product to any destination s  S . Shipping is, however, subject
to iceberg costs: if a firm i from city r wants to ship its product over a route  that connects r
with s, then it needs to ship T (, i) units of the product such that one unit arrives at s. Shipping
costs consist of a component common across firms T    ¯ (), as well as a firm-specific idiosyncratic
component (, i) that is distributed iid across firms and shipping routes:45

                                                        ¯ () (, i)
                                              T (, i) = T

For tractability, we assume that (, i) is drawn from a Weibull distribution with shape parameter
 and a scale parameter normalized to one. Firms only learn the realizations of their idiosyncratic
cost shifters after making their production decisions. Therefore, they make these decisions based
on the expected value of shipping costs,

                                          ¯ () E [ (, i)] = T
                                                            ¯ ()                 +1
                            E [T (, i)] = T                                                .
                                                                                 

After learning (, i), they choose the route that minimizes their total shipping costs.
   Certain shipping routes involve land shipping only (land-only), while others involve a combi-
  44
      We make the assumption   1 -  to guarantee that agglomeration forces are not overwhelmingly strong in the
model. Estimates of the land share, 1 -  , tend to be substantially above estimates of agglomeration externalities .
In particular, our calibration involves setting  to 0.06 (a standard value used in the literature) and 1 -  to 0.16 based
on Desmet and Rappaport (2017).
   45
      The assumption of idiosyncratic shipping cost shifters follows Allen and Atkin (2016) and Allen and Arkolakis
(2019), and allows us to tractably characterize shipping flows with a large number of cities. In the alternative case
with no idiosyncratic shifters, applied in Allen and Arkolakis (2014) and Nagy (2020), finding optimal shipping flows
is computationally more demanding.

                                                          23
nation of land and sea shipping through a set of ports (land-and-sea). Land-only shipping is only
available between cities that are directly connected by land. The common cost of land-only ship-
ping between cities r and s is an increasing function of the minimum overland distance between
the two cities, d (r, s):
                                      ¯ () = 1 +  (d (r, s))
                                      T

   The cost of land-and-sea shipping depends on the set of ports en route. In particular, the
common cost of shipping from r to s through port cities p0 , ..., pM takes the form

                                                          M -1                              M
   ¯ () = [1 +  (d (r, p0 ))] [1 +  (d (pM , s))]
   T                                                             [1 +  (d (pm , pm+1 ))]         [1 + O (pm )]
                                                          m=0                              m=0


where  (d (r, p0 )) corresponds to the overland shipping cost between the origin and the first port
en route p0 , and  (d (pM , s)) corresponds to the overland shipping cost between the last port en
route pM and the destination.  (d (pm , pm+1 )) denotes the sea shipping cost between ports pm
and pm+1 , a function of the minimum sea distance between the two ports, d (pm , pm+1 ). Finally,
O (pm ) denotes the price that the firm needs to pay for transshipment services in port city pm .46
    Transshipment costs are central to our analysis as these are the costs that port city landlords can
lower by developing the port, that is, by allocating more land to the port. In particular, we assume
that the landlord's cost of handling one unit of a good at port pm equals

                                  [ (pm ) +  (F (pm ))] Shipping (pm )

where  (pm ) is an exogenous cost shifter capturing the fundamental efficiency of port pm ,  (F (pm ))
is a non-negative, strictly decreasing and strictly convex function of F (pm ), the share of land allo-
cated to the port, and Shipping (pm ) captures congestion externalities arising from the fact that
handling one unit of cargo becomes more costly as the total amount of shipping, Shipping (pm ),
increases for a given port size.47 As each port city landlord is atomistic, she takes the price of trans-
shipment services O (pm ) and the total port-level shipping Shipping (pm ) as given when choosing
F (pm ). Moreover, perfect competition among port city landlords ensures that the price of trans-
shipment services is driven down to marginal cost and therefore

                            O (pm ) = [ (pm ) +  (F (pm ))] Shipping (pm )                                     (4)


  46
      Note that this formulation does not allow for land shipping between two subsequent ports along the route. In
practice, this is extremely unlikely to arise as land shipping is substantially more expensive than sea shipping.
   47
      To be precise, Shipping (pm ) is defined as the dollar amount of shipping flowing through port pm , excluding
the price of transshipment services at pm . We exclude the price of transshipment services from the definition of
Shipping (pm ) as it simplifies the procedure of taking the model to the data.

                                                        24
in equilibrium.
     One concern is that, according to our formulation, land is required for transshipment services
while labor is not. In reality, ports employ labor. To address this concern, Appendix B.6 presents
an extension of our model in which a combination of land and labor must be employed in transship-
ment. This appendix also shows that the model with transshipment labor, although more complex
in its structure, delivers qualitative predictions that are extremely similar to the predictions of our
baseline model.
4.1.5      Equilibrium
In equilibrium, workers choose their consumption of goods and residence to maximize their utility,
taking prices and wages as given. Landlords choose their consumption and land use to maximize
their utility, taking prices, land rents and shipping flows as given. Firms choose their production of
goods, employment and land use to maximize their profits, taking prices, land rents and wages as
given. Competition drives profits from production and profits from transshipment services down to
zero. Markets for goods, land and labor clear in each city, and markets for transshipment services
clear in each port city. Appendices B.1 and B.2 provide a formal definition and characterization of
the equilibrium.
4.2      Predictions of the model
In equilibrium, the share of land allocated to the port in port city r is the solution to the equation

                                                                   R (r)
                                         -  (F (r)) =                                               (5)
                                                            Shipping (r)1+

where R (r) denotes land rents in city r, given by

                                                       1 -  w (r) N (r)
                                             R (r) =                                                (6)
                                                          1 - F (r)

such that w (r) is the wage in city r.48 As the left-hand side of equation (5) is decreasing in F (r)
by the convexity of  , we have the following two propositions.

Proposition 1. Land allocated to the port is increasing in the amount of shipping flows.

    Proposition 1 is the consequence of two forces in the model. The first is economies of scale
in transshipment technology: as shipping flows increase, it becomes profitable to lower unit costs
by allocating more land to the port. The second force is congestion: an increase in shipping flows
makes landlords allocate more land to the port to palliate congestion.

Proposition 2. Land allocated to the port is decreasing in land rents.
  48
       The derivation of equations (5) and (6) is included in Appendix B.2.

                                                           25
    Proposition 2 highlights that the cost of adopting containerized technologies differs across
cities. Cities that have high land rents do not allocate much land to the port as the opportunity cost
of land is very high. As a result, everything else fixed, port development primarily takes place in
low-rent cities, consistent with what we document in the data.

    Finally, the model delivers the spatial distribution of population N (r) as the solution to the
following equation:

                                       -1                       ( -1)           ( -1)2                      ( -1)2
   N (r)[1++(1- -)(-1)] 2-1 =  -1 a
                                  ~ (r)                        2 -1     A (r)    2 -1    (1 - F (r))(1- )    2 -1    M A (r)   (7)

where M A (r) is the market access of city r, given by

                      S            ( -1)2            ( -1)                          ( -1)                                 -1
                           a
                           ~ (s)    2 -1    A (s)   2 -1     (1 - F (s))(1- ) 2-1 N (s)[1-(-1)-(1- -)] 2-1
       M A (r) =
                     s=1
                                                                   E [T (r, s)]-1

and a
    ~ (r) can be obtained by scaling amenities a (r) according to

                                                         ~ (r) = c a (r)
                                                         a

where the endogenous country-specific scaling factor c adjusts such that the exogenously given
population of country c equals the sum of the populations of its cities.49
    How is the population of a port city affected by the development of its port? Our last propo-
sition shows that the net effect on population is the outcome of two opposing forces: the market
access effect that increases the population of the city, and the crowding-out effect that leads to a
decrease in the city's population.

Proposition 3. An increase in the share of land allocated to the port in city r, F (r), decreases
shipping costs E [T (r, s)], thus increasing M A (r). Everything else fixed, an increase in M A (r)
increases the population of the city (market access effect). At the same time, holding M A (r) fixed,
an increase in F (r) decreases the share of land that can be used for production, 1 - F (r), thus
decreasing the population of the city (crowding-out effect).

Proof. These results follow directly from equation (7).

    Proposition 3 sheds light on the fact that, to measure the net effect of port development, it is
essential to consider both its benefits and its costs. On the one hand, port development lowers
shipping costs. On the other hand, it requires scarce local land that needs to be reallocated from
other productive uses. The model, and equation (7) in particular, provide a structure that allows
  49
       Appendix B.2 provides the derivation of equation (7).

                                                                  26
us to capture these opposing forces. The next section is aimed at looking for evidence on these
opposing forces in the data.

5        Empirical evidence for the model's mechanisms
In this section, we examine whether there is empirical evidence for the two opposing model forces
through which port development affects local city population. Equation (7) shows that port de-
velopment has a positive effect on population through lowering transshipment costs which will
increase the market access term. However, holding market access fixed, port development has a
negative effect on population as it crowds out non-port activities.
    Due to the lack of time-varying data on port sizes, we cannot directly take equation (7) to the
data. However, we can estimate a simplified version of the equation to understand whether we can
disentangle the positive and negative effects of port development predicted by the model. Based
on this reasoning, we estimate the following relationship, referred to as model-inspired empirical
specification:

                       ln(P opit ) = 1  ln(Ship)it + 2  ln(M A)it + i + t +                        it                   (8)
                                          [1- ( -1)-(1- -) ] 2 -1
                                                                -1
                                  S   P opst
where ln(M A)it = ln              s=1           Tt (i,s)-1
                                                                        is the empirical equivalent of the model-

based market access term, and all other variables are as previously defined in Section 3. According
to the mechanism described in the model, we expect 1 to be negative and 2 to be positive.
    Constructing the market access term requires us to estimate time-varying bilateral trade costs
Tt (i, s) between origin and destination. As in the model, we assume that these bilateral costs
consist of a combination of three possible components: first, the cost of shipping overland; second,
the cost of sea shipping; and third, the cost of transshipment at seaports. Armed with these, we use
the fast marching algorithm to calculate the lowest overall shipping cost between any given pair of
cities. Following Allen and Arkolakis (2014), we assume that overland shipping costs  and sea
shipping costs  take the form

                                        (d) = et d                   (d) = et d

where d is (point-to-point) distance traveled. We take the values of t and t from the road and sea
shipping cost elasticities estimated by Allen and Arkolakis (2014).50
    There are no readily available measures of transshipment costs that we are aware of. To con-

    50
    Allen and Arkolakis (2014) also allow for costs of inland and sea shipping that are fixed with respect to distance.
However, they set the fixed costs of road shipping to zero. In the case of sea shipping, our aim is to define transshipment
costs incurred at the seaport in a broad sense, such that they include any cost that is not a function of shipping distance,
such as the fixed costs of sea transportation.

                                                             27
struct these, we use the following approach. Both the model and the transportation literature on
ports argue that there are important economies of scale in port technologies rendering larger ports
more cost-efficient (Rodrigue, 2016). We use estimates of port costs, available for a subset of our
ports from Blonigen and Wilson (2008), to estimate the empirical relationship between port costs
and shipping flows at the port level in our data using a simple linear OLS specification.51 Consis-
tent with economies of scale in shipping, we find a negative and statistically significant association
between port costs and the size of shipping flows. We use the estimated coefficient from this re-
gression to predict port efficiency for all the ports in our data for each decade.52 Note that changing
transshipment costs are the only source of time series variation in our estimated trade costs.
    The model-based measure of market access requires taking a stand on the values of the param-
eters  ,  ,  and . Table 5 contains the parameter values we use and their source. As we use
the same values when taking the full model to the data, Section 6.2 discusses the calibration of all
structural parameters in detail.
    Both regressors in the model-inspired specification (8) are potentially endogenous. Identifying
1 and 2 thus requires two sources of exogenous variation. We use the baseline measure of
depth in the vicinity of the port as an instrument for shipping, as explained in Section 3. We
use an exogenous population-growth shifter based on regional climate to construct an instrument
for market access. This IV is based on insights from the urban economics literature which has
found that people have moved to places with warm winters over the course of the 20th century ­ a
phenomenon attributed to the invention of air conditioning (e.g., Oi (1996); Rappaport (2007)).
    In order to implement this in our setting, we use the average number of frost free days,
f rostf reei , during the years between 1961-1990 in each city to predict population growth dur-
ing our time period.53 Notice that this second instrument uses a source of exogenous variation that
is orthogonal to port depth, as the number of frost free days and port depth (both residualized and
un-residualized) are uncorrelated with each other.54 In order to predict population, we estimate the
following specification:

                                   1990
                  ln(P op)it =            k  f rostf reei  1(Y ear = k ) + i + ct +               it
                                 k=1960

where k estimates the effect of warmer winters on population in each decade, i denotes city-

  51
      See Appendix C.10 for more details.
  52
      Details on this estimation are provided in Appendix Tables A.14 and A.15. Note that we predict the port cost for
the full set of 2,145 ports in our data set. These include the set of ports for which we do not have population data.
This is in order to allow for the most realistic trade routes. See Appendix Table A.2 which shows the breakdown of
different types of ports in the sample.
   53
      Appendix C.11 describes the data on the number of frost free days.
   54
      The correlation between the number of frost free days and unresidualized depth is 0.04 (p-val: 0.40), and the
correlation between the number of frost free days and residualized depth is -0.02 (p-val: 0.68).

                                                         28
specific fixed effects, and ct allows for the full set of country by year fixed effects. Inclusion of
these implies that we only use within-country variation in climatic conditions when estimating the
effect of frost-free days on population growth. We do this to address the concern that climatic
conditions vary across regions in ways that may correlate with unobserved drivers of population
growth, confounding our estimates of interest. Appendix Table A.16 shows the result of this es-
timation and presents some robustness checks. To construct our second instrument for market
access, we predict population for each city ­ year pair based on the estimated effects of frost free
days and the estimated city fixed effect (we do not use the estimated country-year fixed effects to
predict population):

                                          1990
                         ln(P op)it =             k  f rostf reei  1(Y ear = k ) + i
                                         k=1960

Using these predictions for city-level population, we define our second instrument as follows:

                                                                 exp(ln(P op)it )
                                 ln (M AIVit ) = ln
                                                             s
                                                                 (T1950 (i, s))-1
where T1950 (i, s) is the transport cost between cities i and s in 1950. We hold bilateral transport
costs fixed throughout all years in order to make sure that potentially endogenous changes in trade
costs over time are not used in the instrument.
    A final question is what sample should be used for the estimation of equation (8). The model
applies to all cities, regardless of whether they are port or non-port cities. However, as port devel-
opment opportunities are only available for port cities, the crowding-out mechanism will only be
relevant for these cities. Moreover, the IV used to identify 1 (port depth, as described in section 3)
is only defined for port cities. Accounting for non-port cities, however, is important as the general
equilibrium effects of port development elsewhere will impact population and trade costs to these
cities, and hence affect port cities. For this reason, while the specifications are estimated on the set
of port cities in our dataset, the market access of port cities is calculated using the full set of (port
and non-port) cities.
    Table 4 presents the estimation results. Columns (1) and (2) report the baseline reduced form
OLS and 2SLS estimates for comparison. Columns (3) and (4) add the measure of market access
as a control. The OLS estimate in column (3) shows a very small negative effect of shipping on
population relative to column (1) that is not distinguishable from zero. Column (4) shows the 2SLS
specification. Consistent with the predictions of the model, once we control for market access,
shipping has a negative, statistically significant effect on population.55 The instruments yield a
  55
   As expected, market access has a significant positive effect on population. It is difficult to compare the size of the
market access effect to existing estimates (Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016; Jedwab and Storeygard, 2020; Maurer and
Rauch, 2020) because different papers construct market access in different ways. Jedwab and Storeygard (2020) are

                                                          29
combined Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic of 9.63 which is just below the often recommended value of
10; however, it is larger than the critical value of 7.03 that the Stock-Yogo weak ID test suggests
for 10% maximum bias (Stock and Yogo, 2002).56 Columns (5) and (6) report the first stages of
the regression. Reassuringly, depth is a strong predictor of shipping, while the market access IV
predicts market access strongly. Appendix Table A.17 shows that the pre-trends check with respect
to depth holds (for both first stages) in this more complex specification that adds market access.57
    We test the robustness of this result in a number of ways. Appendix Table A.18 shows that
the results are remarkably robust to dropping cities in the close vicinity of the city in the market
access IV, suggesting that much of the identifying variation is coming from population movements
further away from the city itself. Appendix Table A.19 shows that the sign of the effects are robust
to the same set of controls used in Section 3, though in the case of these demanding specifications,
we don't always retain statistical significance at 10%.
    In summary, these results show strong support for the model mechanisms. On the one hand,
new port technologies improve a location's market access, drawing population in. This market
access effect is well known in the literature and has been found to be present in different contexts
(Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016; Jedwab and Storeygard, 2020; Maurer and Rauch, 2020). On the
other hand, there is a marked, negative, direct effect of shipping on economic activity, consistent
with the crowding-out effect of port development. We conclude that this lends well-identified
evidence for the model mechanism. In the next section, we therefore turn to taking the full model
to the data.

6    Taking the model to the data
We take the full structure of the model to the data in this section. This allows us to estimate the
aggregate effects of changing port technologies in Section 7.
    Taking the model to the data consists of three steps. In the first step, we calculate inland and
sea shipping costs across cities and choose a functional form for endogenous transshipment costs
as a function of land use,  (F ). In the second step, we choose the values of the model's seven
structural parameters. In the last step, we back out the values of unobserved city fundamentals
(amenities, productivities and exogenous transshipment costs) using a cross section of observed
city characteristics: population, shipping flows and GDP. Below, we describe each of these steps
in detail.

the only paper we are aware of that report standardized coefficients that allow for a comparison. They estimate that
a one standard deviation increase in market access leads to a 0.43 ­ 0.85 standard deviation increase in population.
Relative to that paper, our estimate is slightly larger (1.13), but within the same ballpark.
   56
      With the usual caveat that Stock and Yogo (2002) values have been derived only for i.i.d. errors, whereas we
allow for autocorrelated or spatially correlated standard errors.
   57
      As there is no similar `pre-treatment period' for the market access IV, it is not possible to conduct a similar
exercise for this IV.

                                                         30
6.1    Calculating shipping costs
We follow our strategy outlined in Section 5 to calculate inland and sea shipping costs across
cities58 as a function of distance d, assuming

                                      (d) = et d                  (d) = et d

and setting the elasticities t and t to the corresponding estimates in Allen and Arkolakis (2014).59
    We also need to choose endogenous transshipment costs as a function of the share of land al-
located to the port (port share, F ),  (F ). The existing literature provides us with little guidance
on this, as ours is the first paper that argues for the relevance of this relationship in a quanti-
tative trade and geography framework. Hence, our goal is to keep the functional form of  as
simple as possible. That said, the functional form needs to satisfy our theoretical restrictions
(  0,  < 0,  > 0) and needs to be numerically tractable in the model inversion and counter-
factual simulations. In particular, the range of  should ideally span the entire (-, 0) interval
over its domain (0, 1), as otherwise it would be potentially impossible to obtain port shares that
rationalize the GDP and shipping data in every port city from equations (5) and (6). One simple
function that satisfies all these restrictions is

                                                 (F ) = 1 - F -                                                    (9)

where we restrict  > 0 to guarantee  < 0. We can then obtain  by integrating equation (9) as

                                                 F  + ( - 1)-1
                                          (F ) =               +
                                                     F  -1

where we restrict   ¯ = - 1 + ( - 1)-1 to guarantee   0.60
6.2    Choosing the values of structural parameters
We also need to choose the values of the model's seven structural parameters. On the production
side, we take the estimate of the strength of agglomeration externalities,  = 0.06, from Ciccone
and Hall (1993). This estimate has performed well in the literature for various countries and time
periods.  = 0.06 implies that doubling city size increases city productivity by 6%. Still on
the production side, the expenditure shares on labor and land equal  and 1 -  , respectively.
Unfortunately, we are not aware of any study that measures the land share for the entire world.

  58
      We have 553 port and 2,083 non-port cities in our data. For details, see Section 2.
  59
      See Section 5 for details on these estimates.
   60                                                                              
      As total transshipment costs in city r equal [ (r) +  (F (r))] Shipping (r) ,  is isomorphic to a uniform shifter
in exogenous port costs  (r) and therefore cannot be identified separately from them. Thus, we set  to its theoretical
lower bound     ¯ without loss of generality.

                                                         31
Thus, we base our benchmark value of  on Desmet and Rappaport (2017), who estimate a value
of 0.10 for the difference between the land share and the agglomeration elasticity in the United
States between 1960 and 2000, a period that corresponds to our sample period. Given we set
 = 0.06, this suggests choosing  = 0.84.61
    On the consumption side, we have two structural parameters: the migration elasticity, which
we set to  = 0.15 based on Kennan and Walker (2011), and the elasticity of substitution across
tradable final goods, which we set to  = 4 based on Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003).
    Finally, there are three structural parameters that influence shipping costs. One is the dispersion
of idiosyncratic shipping costs, which ­ together with the functional form of these costs ­ we take
from Allen and Arkolakis (2019), setting  = 203. Another is the elasticity of transshipment costs
to total shipping at the port (congestion externalities), which we take from the empirical estimates
of Abe and Wilson (2009), setting  = 0.074. Table 5 summarizes the calibration of our structural
parameters.
    The last structural parameter to choose is  from the endogenous transshipment function.
Given the role that this parameter plays in driving the relationship between the value of ship-
ping flows and the port share through equation (5), we calibrate it to match the correlation between
these two variables in the data.62 We use the port share data constructed for seven cities that was
described in Section 2. The correlation between shipping and port share for these seven cities is
0.474.
    In the model, we compute the correlation between shipping and port share in the following
way. First, for each port city, we numerically solve equations (5) and (6) for the port share that
rationalizes shipping flows, Shipping (r), and city GDP,  -1 w (r) N (r). As we explain in Ap-
pendix B.3, our theoretical restrictions on  guarantee that this procedure identifies a unique port
share F (r)  (0, 1) for each port city. Next, we calculate the correlation between Shipping (r)
and F (r) for our set of port cities.
    Under higher values of  , the endogenous port development mechanism plays a stronger role
in the model. This is because, under higher  , the endogenous transshipment cost function is more
responsive to changes in the port share:

                                         d | (F )|
                                                   = -F - log (F ) > 0
                                            d

Hence, everything else fixed, landlords have an incentive to increase the port share further if  is
high. As a consequence, we expect a stronger correlation between shipping and port share under

  61
      Another advantage of using the land share estimate by Desmet and Rappaport (2017) is that it also accounts for
the share of land embedded in housing, which is absent from our model but could matter for the quantitative results.
   62
      To calculate this correlation, we first transform the number of ships, which is what we directly observe in the data,
into the value of shipments, which is what enters equation (5). This procedure is described in detail in Section 6.3.

                                                           32
higher values of  . This is precisely what we find. Appendix Figure A.11 plots the values of the
correlation for a range of  between 0.020 and 0.046. Within this range,  = 0.031 is the one that
implies the correlation found in the data, 0.474.63 Hence, we use this value of  in our baseline
calibration.64
6.3    Recovering post-containerization fundamentals
In the final step of taking the model to the data, we use observed data on city populations, shipping
flows and city level GDP per capita together with the structure of the model to find the set of city
amenities a (r), productivities A (r) and exogenous transshipment costs  (r) that rationalize the
data.
    As city-level GDP data are only available for 1990, we choose to back out the model funda-
mentals based on the 1990 distribution of population, shipping and GDP. Since this year is after
the advent of containerization, the counterfactual we will simulate in Section 7 to estimate the
aggregate effects of containerization will roll back, or undo, the containerization shock. Hence,
the effect of containerization can be assessed by comparing the counterfactual equilibrium (pre-
containerization) to our 1990 equilibrium (post-containerization).
    We transform the number of ships observed in the data in port city r in 1990, Ship (r), into the
value of shipments, Shipping (r), according to

                                           Shipping (r) = V · Ship (r)

where we choose V to match the ratio of shipping to world GDP. The rationale behind choosing
this particular moment is that it can be calculated as a simple linear function of V :

                                       r   Shipping (r)               r Ship (r)
                                                        =V ·
                                           r GDP (r )                 r GDP (r )


where Ship (r) and GDP (r) are both observable in the data. This procedure gives us a value of
V = 364.65
   Using city-level GDP data, we can obtain wages as

                                                            GDP (r)
                                               w (r) = 
                                                             N (r)

according to the model, where the structural parameter  is calibrated to 0.84, as explained in
  63
      Instead of calculating the model-implied correlation over the entire set of port cities, we can compute it for the
same set of seven port cities where we observe the port share. Reassuringly, for  = 0.031, this gives us a correlation
of 0.463, essentially identical to the one found for the whole set of port cities.
   64
      In Section 7, we investigate robustness of the aggregate gains from containerization to alternative values of  .
   65
      As not all our port cities have a positive shipping flows in 1990 but the model cannot rationalize zero shipping
flows under finite positive values of city-specific fundamentals, we change Ship (r) from zero to one in these cities.

                                                          33
Section 6.2.
    Once population N (r) and wages w (r) are available for each city and the value of shipments,
Shipping (r), is available for each port city, the equilibrium conditions of the model can be in-
verted to back out city amenities up to a country-level scale, a
                                                               ~ (r), fundamental city productivities
A (r), and each port city's exogenous transshipment costs  (r). We provide the details of this
inversion procedure in Appendix B.3.66

7        The aggregate effects of containerization
To measure the aggregate effects of containerization, we use our model to conduct a counterfac-
tual in this section. As we took the model to post-containerization (1990) data in Section 6, our
counterfactual involves rolling back containerization: i.e., changing port technologies back to pre-
containerization technologies. At the same time, we keep all other fundamentals of the model
(city amenities and productivities, inland and sea shipping costs and country populations) fixed.
Hence, comparing the 1990 equilibrium to the counterfactual equilibrium allows us to measure the
aggregate effects of containerization on the world economy.
7.1      Counterfactual: Rolling back containerization
How do we roll back containerization? As we argued in Section 1, containerization had two
major effects on port technologies. First, it decreased transshipment costs, especially in deep
ports due to increased ship sizes. Second, it increased the land intensity of transshipment. In
our counterfactual, we incorporate these aspects of containerization by changing transshipment
technology in the following way. To capture the higher transshipment costs of pre-containerization
technologies, we increase exogenous transshipment costs  (r) uniformly across ports relative to
the 1990 values of these costs. To capture the fact that containerization made port depth relevant
for transshipment, we offset the negative relationship between  (r) and depth that we observe in
1990. Finally, to capture the lower land intensity of pre-containerization technologies, we decrease
the shape parameter of our endogenous transshipment cost function,  .67
    As discussed in Section 6.2, a decrease in  makes the endogenous transshipment cost function
less responsive to changes in the port share, F (r). Hence, under lower values of  , port city
landlords have less incentive to increase F (r). As a result, port sizes will be generally smaller
in the counterfactual. To choose the value of the parameter in the counterfactual, CF , we use
the well-documented evidence on New Orleans described in Section 1. In particular, we argue

    66
      The complex structure of the model does not allow us to prove that the inversion procedure identifies a unique set
of a
   ~ (r) , A (r) and  (r). Nonetheless, we have experimented with various different initial guesses, and the inversion
algorithm converges to the same fixed point, suggesting that the vector of city-specific fundamentals that rationalize
the data is likely unique.
   67
      Appendix B.4 describes the details of how we solve for the equilibrium of the model under these new fundamen-
tals.

                                                          34
in Section 1 that the size of the port of New Orleans increased by 75% due to the technological
aspects of containerization. In our model, this means that the port share of New Orleans would have
increased by 75% if we kept the non-technological determinants of the port share, i.e., shipping
and land rents, fixed:
                                    F (New Orleans)
                                                      - 1 = 0.75                               (10)
                                    ^ (New Orleans)
                                    F
where F (New Orleans) is the port share of New Orleans in 1990, given by

                                                                      R (New Orleans)
                      - 1 - F (New Orleans)- =                                                                      (11)
                                                                Shipping (New Orleans)1+

which we obtain by combining equations (5) and (9), and F^ (New Orleans) is the port share im-
plied by the same rents and shipping but shape parameter CF :

                         ^ (New Orleans)-CF =                           R (New Orleans)
                     - 1-F                                                                                          (12)
                                                                 Shipping (New Orleans)1+

To back out CF , we first solve equation (11) for F (New Orleans). Next, we solve equation (10)
    ^ (New Orleans). Finally, we solve equation (12) for CF . This procedure yields CF = 0.021.
for F
    To offset the relationship between exogenous transshipment costs and depth, we first run the
regression
                              log  (r) = 0 - 1  Depth (r) +  (r)

on our sample of port cities, where  (r) is the exogenous transshipment cost of city r recovered in
Section 6.3, and Depth (r) is our residualized depth measure, defined in Section 3. In line with the
fact that depth lowers transshipment costs after containerization, we find 1 = 0.048 (se. 0.025, p-
value 0.053). We then undo the dependence of exogenous transshipment costs on depth by adding
1  Depth (r) to log  (r).68
    Finally, we incorporate the overall reduction in transshipment costs due to containerization by
increasing log  (r) uniformly across ports. In particular, we add a constant CF > 0 to all log  (r)
such that total transshipment costs are 25% higher in our counterfactual than in 1990. We choose
this number in the following way. Rodrigue (2016) estimates that containerization led to an overall
70% to 85% reduction in maritime transport costs by 2010.69 What fraction of this cost reduction
  68
      To avoid outliers influencing the results of this step, we trim the values of  (r) at 0.01 before estimating 1 . The
inversion algorithm assigns very small  's to some cities. Due to lack of machine precision in the inversion algorithm
for very small values of  's, very small differences in  's may be exaggerated greatly when taking logs of  's in the
estimation. This affects 19 port cities, for which we identify  (r) below 0.01. As these 19 port cities are deeper than
average, we obtain a slightly higher regression coefficient, 1 = 0.056, without the trimming.
   69
      Rodrigue (2016, p. 117) states: "While before containerization maritime transport costs could account for between
5 and 10 percent of the retail price, this share has been reduced to about 1.5 percent, depending on the goods being
transported." A reduction from 5% to 1.5% of retail price equals a 70% cost reduction (= 1 - 1.5/5); similarly, a

                                                           35
happened prior to 1990? We know that container ship sizes increased prior to 1990 by 36% of
the overall increase until 2010.70 Assuming that cost reductions were proportional to ship size
increases, approximately 36% of the 70% cost reduction must have happened before 1990 (using
the more conservative end of Rodrigue's estimate). This gives us a 25% decrease in transshipment
costs. Naturally, higher values of CF yield a larger change in transshipment costs, suggesting
that there should be a unique CF at which we meet our 25% target. This procedure identifies
CF = 0.280.
    Overall, according to our simulation, these changes in transshipment technology lead to an
increase in the international trade to world GDP ratio by 4.8 percentage points from the counter-
factual to the 1990 equilibrium. As a reference point, the trade to world GDP ratio increased by 15
percentage points between 1960 and 1990. This suggests that containerization was responsible for
about one-third of the overall increase in trade to world GDP during these three decades.
    The land occupied by ports (i.e., the port share) increases in most port cities from the coun-
terfactual to the 1990 equilibrium. Port shares become larger for two reasons. First, the increase
in  increases the incentive to invest more land in port development, mimicking the changing
land-intensity of port technologies caused by containerization. Second, the reduction in trade costs
leads to increased demand for shipping, encouraging yet more investment in port development.
Appendix Figure A.12 presents the full distribution of port share changes across cities. The me-
dian change is 2 percentage points, while the 5th percentile is -0.1 pp and the 95th percentile is 32
pp. As a comparison, in our data for New Orleans, we find that the port share increased by 0.29 pp
between 1960 and 1990, which puts this city at the 40th percentile of our model-implied port share
change distribution. As New Orleans was not among the more prominent adopters of containerized
technology71 , its position in the model-implied distribution lends additional credibility to the port
share changes implied by the model simulation.
7.2    Test of the model: The reduced-form effects of containerization
In this section, we show that our quantified model can replicate the two key reduced-form facts
related to containerization estimated in Section 3: the fact that the local causal effect of shipping
on population is indistinguishable from zero, as well as the fact that containerization increased
shipping more in low-rent cities. As we do not feed these reduced-form results into either the
model calibration or the counterfactual, we view these as tests of the model.
    To examine the local population effects of shipping in the model, we consider the specification

                                     ln(Ni ) =    ln(Shippingi ) +                    i                     (13)


reduction from 10% to 1.5% equals an 85% cost reduction.
   70
      This can be seen in Appendix Figure A.2, which is based on data from Haworth (2020).
   71
      For example, New Orleans built its first dedicated containerized facility relatively late, in 1975.

                                                            36
where  denotes the change in a variable from the counterfactual to the 1990 equilibrium. We
instrument the change in shipping with residualized port depth. Thus, specification (13) is analo-
gous to the long-differenced version of specification (1). The only difference is that while we ran
the long-differenced version of equation (1) on 1950 and 1990 data, we run equation (13) on the
model-simulated counterfactual and 1990 data.
    Table 6 presents the results of this exercise. Column (1) replicates the estimates obtained
from the long-differenced specification in the data (which is, therefore, identical to column (8) of
Table 2). Column (2) presents the estimated coefficient from the model-simulated data. Recall that
shipping had no discernible causal effect on local city-population in the data. We find the same null
result in the model-simulated data. As the size of the shock at the city level is potentially different
between the model and the data, the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients are not directly
comparable between columns (1) and (2). However, we report the corresponding standardized
coefficients, which are comparable, in italics. These demonstrate that a one standard deviation
increase in shipping translates into a negligible (0.006 standard deviation) population gain in the
model as well as in the data (0.022) ­ neither estimate is statistically or economically significant.72
    In Section 3, we interpreted the estimated coefficient as a surprising result. A boom in shipping
due to containerization does not translate into population gains, suggesting that there is a force
crowding out population alongside the standard positive market access effect. Our model has such
a force: the crowding-out effect of increased land use caused by port development. Column (2)
confirms that this force is sufficient to eliminate the positive local population effect of increased
shipping due to the market access effect, making the causal effect of shipping economically and
statistically insignificant. In other words, we can obtain a crowding-out effect in the model that is
strong enough to replicate the zero population effects of shipping observed in the data. This is true
despite the fact that, as we mentioned in Section 7.1, the model-implied increases in land use are
not particularly large.
    Armed with this evidence, we now examine whether containerization makes shipping activity
reallocate toward low-rent cities in the model. To this end, we consider the specification

                         ln(Shippingit ) =   Depthi +   Depthi  ln(Ri,CF )                        (14)
                                                    +  ln(Ri,CF ) +    it


where t is one of the two time periods: the `counterfactual period' or 1990. This specification is
the long-differenced version of specification (2), which we ran on the full panel. Depthi is our
depth measure residualized on population in 1950, as in the data. The difference is that, while
we had to rely on a proxy of city-level rents in specification (2), we can use model-implied (pre-

  72
       We discuss columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 in section 7.3.

                                                           37
containerization) rents Ri,CF in specification (14). Our coefficient of interest is  , that is, the
interaction between port depth and rents.
    We evaluate the coefficient of interest,  , at different values of log rents ln(Ri,CF ) in Figure 2.73
As the figure shows, the effect of land rents on shipping is negative, large and statistically signifi-
cant, as is the case in the data. Thus, the model can successfully replicate the finding from Section
3 that containerization increased shipping more in initially low land rent cities. This provides fur-
ther evidence that the land price mechanism is present in the model not only in a qualitative sense
(as we showed in Section 4.2), but it is a significant driver of where port development takes place.
In summary, we view these results as providing validation for the model's ability to capture the
main forces affecting port development. In the next section, we therefore turn to discussing our
estimates of the aggregate effects.
7.3    The aggregate welfare effects of containerization
We estimate that aggregate world welfare increased by 3.95% as a result of containerization.74 The
welfare gains from containerization stem from a combination of three factors in the model: lower
shipping costs, which increase welfare; the increased cost of land use, i.e., the resource costs of
containerization, which lower the gains; and the gains from increased specialization of cities in
port or non-port activities, i.e., the specialization gains from containerization.
    To assess the quantitative importance of each of these margins, we develop two simple bench-
mark models that will allow us to isolate the three mechanisms at work. `Benchmark 1' is closest
to a standard model, as it assumes that transshipment costs are exogenous and free ­ that is, land
is solely used for the production of the city-specific good. Thus, the welfare gains from container-
ization only stem from shipping cost reductions in this benchmark model. `Benchmark 2,' on the
other hand, allows for both exogenous and endogenous transshipment costs, such that endogenous
transshipment costs depend on land use, as in our baseline model. However, we restrict land use
to be identical across port cities (and equal to the average port share in our baseline).
    As Benchmark 2 only differs from Benchmark 1 in land being used for port activities, a com-
parison between these two models reveals the resource costs of increased land use due to con-
tainerization. As our baseline model only differs from Benchmark 2 in the potential specialization
of port cities in port- or non-port activities (through each city choosing the allocation of land be-
tween the two), a comparison between these two models reveals the endogenous specialization
gains from containerization.
    To implement the decomposition of the aggregate welfare effects, we follow a procedure sim-
  73
     Appendix Table A.20 shows the corresponding estimates.
  74
     We define the change in aggregate world welfare as the average of changes in country-level welfare between
the counterfactual and the 1990 equilibrium, weighted by country population. Within each country, labor mobility
equalizes welfare across cities, as in Redding (2016). However, we do not allow for mobility across countries, hence
different countries experience different welfare effects. We discuss these country-level effects in Section 7.4.

                                                        38
ilar to the one described in Section 6.3 to take Benchmark 1 and Benchmark 2 to our 1990 data.
Next, we conduct the containerization counterfactual in each benchmark model. In particular,
we conduct the counterfactual such that the world trade to GDP ratio changes to the same extent
(+4.8%) in each benchmark as in our baseline model. Hence, differences in the welfare effects
across the models do not stem from trade changing to a different extent in one versus the other.75
    We find that containerization leads to welfare gains of 4.15% in Benchmark 1. In other words,
the gains from the shipping cost reduction caused by containerization amount to 4.15% of world
welfare. In Benchmark 2, the gains from containerization reduce to 3.60%. The difference between
Benchmark 1 and Benchmark 2, 0.55 percentage points, captures the resource costs of container-
ization. These costs are sizeable: they eat up as much as 13.3% of the gains from the shipping cost
reduction. Finally, the difference between Benchmark 2 and our baseline model, 0.34 percentage
points, captures the specialization gains from containerization. Note that these gains are able to
offset about 63% of the resource costs of containerization, but they do not fully compensate for all
the costs. Based on this exercise, relative to a standard model in which transport cost reductions are
exogenous and free, both model mechanisms ­ the resource cost and the endogenous specialization
effect ­ lead to quantitatively meaningful effects on welfare. As the resource cost effect is larger
than the endogenous specialization effect, on net the gains in our model end up being somewhat
smaller than what a standard model would predict.
    Besides using the two benchmarks for the decomposition of aggregate welfare effects, we
can also use them to provide a further test of whether it is indeed our endogenous crowding-out
mechanism that leads to the null effect of shipping on population in the model. To this end, we
estimate the causal effect of shipping on population ­ equation (13) ­ in the two benchmarks,
and contrast them with the baseline model. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 report the results for
Benchmark 1 and Benchmark 2, respectively. Unlike in our baseline model, shipping leads to a
significant increase in city population in both benchmarks. This is intuitive: while better market
access draws people into the city in all three models, increased land use in transshipment does not
have a differential impact on city population in the benchmarks.76 To compare the magnitudes of
the estimated coefficients, we report the standardized coefficients in italics. These demonstrate that
a one standard deviation increase in shipping translates into substantially larger (0.124 and 0.14
standard deviation) increase in population in the benchmarks than in the baseline model (0.006)
or in the data (0.022). This underscores that the crowding out effect is driving the zero local
population effect of shipping in the model. It also points to the fact that the crowding-out effect is

  75
      We provide a detailed description of each benchmark model, the procedure of taking them to the data and the
procedure of conducting the counterfactual in them in Appendix B.5.
   76
      In Benchmark 2, land used for transshipment increases equally across port cities. Hence, land used for trans-
shipment does not react endogenously to shipping, leading to no differential impact on the population of cities with
different changes in shipping. In Benchmark 1, no land is used for transshipment by assumption.

                                                        39
sizeable ­ not just in terms of the effect it has at the aggregate level, but also in terms of its local
effect.
    In Table 7, we examine the sensitivity of our headline aggregate welfare result to different val-
ues of the containerization shock and some alternative modeling choices. In rows (2) and (3), we
use higher and lower values of our transshipment cost parameter  , respectively. In rows (4) and
(5), we use alternative values of our counterfactual  : one that implies a smaller (65%) increase
in the port share of New Orleans, and one that implies a larger (85%) increase. As expected, a
smaller increase in land use leads to slightly higher welfare gains from containerization. In row
(6), we do not offset the relationship between exogenous transshipment costs and port depth in the
counterfactual. In rows (7) and (8), we choose CF to target different (30% and 20%, respectively)
changes in total transshipment costs. Finally, in row (9), we take the model with monopolistic
competition, presented in the Appendix B.7, to the data. The key difference relative to our base-
line setup is that port activity involves positive profits in the monopolistic competition model. The
welfare gains from containerization are fairly stable across these different specifications with wel-
fare effects ranging from 3.3 ­ 4.6. We conclude that the estimated effects would be similar had
we chosen slightly different parameter values for the shock.
7.4    Country-level effects
In this section, we investigate the country-level welfare effects of containerization implied by the
model. Appendix Figure A.13 plots the distribution of the welfare gains from containerization
across countries. As the figure demonstrates, these gains vary substantially around the worldwide
average (3.95%). For instance, 26% of countries see welfare gains below 2%, while 29% experi-
ence gains above 10%. Our goal in this section is to understand the sources of these cross-country
differences in the gains from containerization.
    Plotting the welfare gains from containerization against country GDP per capita prior to con-
tainerization, one can observe a negative relationship between these two variables (Appendix Fig-
ure A.14).77 That is, initially poorer countries benefited more from containerization on average.
Column (1) of Table 8 contains the estimated (standardized) coefficient in a regression of the wel-
fare gains on country GDP per capita. According to this estimate, a one standard deviation lower
GDP per capita is associated with 0.161 standard deviation higher gains. That is, the effect is
significant not only statistically, but also economically.
    What allows poorer countries to benefit more from containerization? In Table 8, we regress
the country-level welfare gains from containerization on a set of country-level covariates. From
column (1) to column (5), we gradually add covariates until the negative effect of GDP per capita is

  77
    We calculate country GDP per capita as the average of counterfactual GDP per capita across cities, weighted by
counterfactual city population. The results are similar if we use actual country GDP per capita prior to containerization
(1960).

                                                          40
fully soaked up by them. Column (5) shows that this is achieved by including the share of port cities
in the total set of cities, country population, average productivity and average pre-containerization
market access on the right-hand side.78 Finally, in column (6), we drop GDP per capita but keep
the other covariates. This is our preferred specification as GDP per capita and average productivity
are highly correlated (correlation coefficient 0.95), causing potential multicollinearity problems if
both variables are added simultaneously. Market access is also positively correlated with GDP per
capita, though much less strongly than productivity (correlation coefficient 0.05). Overall, these
findings suggest that poorer countries gained more from containerization because they had lower
average productivity (in non-port activities) and worse pre-containerization market access.79
    The result that countries with lower average productivity and worse pre-containerization mar-
ket access benefit more from containerization is intuitive. First, note that productivity refers to
productivity in non-port activities, suggesting that lower-productivity countries have a compara-
tive disadvantage in these sectors, and a comparative advantage in port-activities. Thus, it is no
surprise that they benefit more from a positive shock to the shipping sector. Second, note that
the containerization shock lowers shipping costs, which should benefit more peripheral countries
(those with initially worse market access). As shipping costs decrease, peripheral countries im-
prove their market access dramatically, while central countries already had good market access to
begin with. Moreover, we expect this force to be amplified by endogenous port development. If
peripheral countries are poorer and have lower land rents, then they should also benefit from the
possibility of developing their ports at a low cost, which leads to an additional reduction in their
shipping costs.
    To examine whether this intuition for the role of market access is correct, we compare the rela-
tionship between market access and the welfare gains from containerization in our two benchmark
models. Recall that these benchmarks do not feature endogenous port development at the city level.
Thus, our reasoning suggests that they should feature a negative but weaker relationship between
market access and the gains from containerization than our baseline model. This is precisely what
we find. Appendix Figure A.15 plots the gains from containerization against pre-containerization
market access in our baseline model, in Benchmark 1, and in Benchmark 2. Though each model
features a negative relationship between these two variables, the relationship is the strongest in our
baseline model.80
  78
      To isolate the part of market access that is a function of geography alone, the market access variable used for
                                                                                            1
this exercise does not include population. In particular, we use M Ageo,i = s=i E[T (i,s      )]-1
                                                                                                   as a measure of market
access for city i, where E [T (i, s)] is the expected pre-containerization trade cost between cities i and s. All our
results are robust to using more complex measures of market access that include the populations of other cities, s.
   79
      Table 8 also shows that the share of port cities and country population have a significant positive effect on country-
level gains. These variables are positively correlated with GDP per capita (with correlation coefficients of 0.18 and
0.17, respectively). Hence, they work against poor countries gaining more from containerization.
   80
      In Appendix Figure A.15, we show the association between the welfare gains and market access conditional on the
covariates in column (6) of Table 8. The results are qualitatively similar if we examine the unconditional association.

                                                            41
   In summary, poor countries gained more from containerization than rich ones. This section has
shown that this is driven in part by the novel forces our model includes. Two significant drivers be-
hind the relationship are productivity in non-port activities and pre-containerization market access.
The first drives endogenous specialization based on comparative advantage. Second, countries
with worse initial market access gained more from containerization, partly due to lower shipping
costs and partly as a result of endogenous port development.

8    Conclusion
The containerization shock studied in this paper allows us to shed light on the economic effects
of port development. Much like other transport infrastructure improvements, at the local level,
port development tends to make a location attractive for firms and workers through the standard
market access effect. However, different to many transport infrastructure improvements such as
roads and railways, the fact that ports occupy vast amounts of space in their host cities also leads
to a strong opposing force that tends to crowd out population. The paper has shown that in the case
of the containerization shock, this endogenous crowding out force is strong and has the potential
to matter for both the local and aggregate economic effects of port development.
    Though the analysis in this paper is positive, it offers some tentative implications for where port
development is likely to have the biggest beneficial impact. On the one hand, the recent aggressive
port development strategy followed by some developing country cities such as Colombo, Sri Lanka
seems promising. These are cities where the opportunity cost of land remains relatively low given
the low productivity of non-port activities. Our results suggest that port development could lead to
relatively large benefits for the entire country. On the other hand, our findings cast some doubt on
the wisdom of further developing or maintaining high levels of port activity in some of the world's
most expensive cities such as Hong-Kong and Singapore. While these cities arguably benefited
enormously from their position as important ports historically (at a time when they were also far
poorer relative to the rest of the world), subsequent productivity growth outside the port sector has
made the opportunity cost of the land occupied by the port extremely high. Our findings suggest
that the `Hong-Kongs' and `Singapores' of the world may benefit from following the path of cities
such as London (United Kingdom) ­ a city at the center of world trade for many decades, but one
that now houses Canary Wharf, an important second financial district, on redeveloped land once
occupied by the port.

References
Abe, K. and J. Wilson (2009). Weathering the Storm: Investing in Port Infrastructure to Lower
  Trade Costs in East Asia. World Bank.

In terms of statistical significance, the coefficient on market access is significant at a 10% level in our baseline model
(see column (6) of Table 8), but insignificant in both Benchmark 1 and Benchmark 2.

                                                           42
Allcott, H. and D. Keniston (2017). Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local Economic
  Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern America. Review of Economic Studies 85(2),
  695­731.
Allen, T. and C. Arkolakis (2014). Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129(3), 1085­1140.
Allen, T. and C. Arkolakis (2019). The Welfare Effects of Transportation Infrastructure Improve-
  ments.
Allen, T. and D. Atkin (2016). Volatility and the Gains from Trade.
Altomonte, C., I. Colantone, and L. Bonacorsi (2018). Trade and Growth in the Age of Global
  Value Chains. Technical report, BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Research Paper.
Anderson, J. (1979). A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation. American Economic
  Review 69(1), 106­116.
Armenter, R., M. Koren, and D. Nagy (2014). Bridges.
Bernard, A., J. Eaton, J. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and Productivity in International
  Trade. American Economic Review 93(4), 1268­1290.
Bernhofen, D., Z. El-Sahli, and R. Kneller (2016). Estimating the Effects of the Container Revo-
  lution on World Trade. Journal of International Economics 98, 36­50.
Bleakley, H. and J. Lin (2012). Portage and Path Dependence. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 127, 587­644.
Blonigen, B. and W. Wilson (2008). Port Efficiency and Trade Flows. Review of International
  Economics 16(1), 21­36.
Brancaccio, G., M. Kalouptsidi, and T. Papageorgiou (2020). Geography, transportation, and
  endogenous trade costs. Econometrica 88(2), 657­691.
Brooks, L., N. Gendron-Carrier, and G. Rua (2019). The Local Impact of Containerization.
Campante, F. and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018). Long-range Growth: Economic Development in
  the Global Network of Air Links. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1395­1458.
Ciccone, A. and R. Hall (1993). Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity. National
  Bureau of Economic Research (Working Paper 4313).
Co¸sar, A. and P. Fajgelbaum (2016). Internal Geography, International Trade, and Regional Spe-
  cialization. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 1(8), 24­56.
Conley, T. (1999). Gmm Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Economet-
  rics 92(1), 1­45.
Corbett, M. (2010). The History and Transformation of the Port of San Francisco, 1848-2010.
  San Francisco Architectural Heritage.
Corden, W. and J. Neary (1982). Booming sector and de-industrialisation in a small open economy.
  Economic Journal 92(368), 825­848.
Co¸sar, A. and B. Demir (2018). Shipping Inside the Box: Containerization and Trade. Journal of
  International Economics 114, 331­345.
Desmet, K. and J. Rappaport (2017). The Settlement of the United States, 1800­2000: The Long
  Transition Towards Gibrat's Law. Journal of Urban Economics 98, 50­68.
Donaldson, D. and R. Hornbeck (2016). Railroads and American Economic Growth: A "market
  access" Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 799­858.
Donaldson, D. and A. Storeygard (2016). The View from Above: Applications of Satellite Data in
  Economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(4), 171­98.
Ducruet, C., S. Cuyala, and A. E. Hosni (2018). Maritime Networks as Systems of Cities: The

                                              43
  Long-term Interdependencies Between Global Shipping Flows and Urban Development. Jour-
  nal of Transport Geography 66, 340­355.
Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2019). Urban Growth and its Aggregate Implications.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, Geography, and Trade. Econometrica 70(5), 1741­
  1779.
Eyre, J. (1964). Shipping Containers in the Americas. In Pan American Union: Recent Develop-
  ments in the Use and Handling of Unitized Cargoes, pp. 38­42.
Fajgelbaum, P. and S. Redding (2018). Trade, Structural Transformation and Development: Evi-
  dence from Argentina, 1869-1914.
Fajgelbaum, P. D. and E. Schaal (2020). Optimal transport networks in spatial equilibrium. Econo-
  metrica 88(4), 1411­1452.
Falvey, R. E. (1976). Transport Costs in the Pure Theory of International Trade. The Economic
  Journal 86(343), 536­550.
Fujita, M. and T. Mori (1996). The Role of Ports in the Making of Major Cities: Self-agglomeration
  and Hub-Effect. Journal of Development Economics 49, 93­120.
Ganapati, S., W. F. Wong, and O. Ziv (2020). Entrepôt: Hubs, Scale, and Trade Costs.
Gilman, S. (1983). The Competitive Dynamics of Container Shipping. Gower Publishing Com-
  pany.
Gomtsyan, D. (2016). Rise of the Machines: Evidence from the Container Revolution.
Haworth, R. B. (2020). Miramar ship index.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook, Volume 4
  of Handbook of international economics. Elsevier.
Heiland, I., A. Moxnes, K. H. Ulltveit-Moe, and Y. Zi (2019). Trade From Space: Shipping
  Networks and The Global Implications of Local Shocks.
Holmes, T. and E. Singer (2018). Indivisibilities in Distribution. National Bureau of Economic
  Research (Working Paper 24525).
Hummels, D. (2007). Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Global-
  ization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3), 131­154.
Jedwab, R. and A. Storeygard (2020). The Average and Heterogeneous Effects of Transportation
  Investments: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa 1960-2010. National Bureau of Economic
  Reserach (Working Paper 27670).
Kahveci, E. (1999). Fast Turnaround Ships and Their Impact on Crews.
Kennan, J. and J. Walker (2011). The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Deci-
  sions. Econometrica 79(1), 211­251.
Krugman, P. (1987). The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive Con-
  sequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale Economies.
  Journal of Development Economics 27 (1-2), 41­55.
Krugman, P. (2011). Comparative Advantage, Growth, And The Gains From Trade And Global-
  ization: A Festschrift in Honor of Alan V Deardorff. Technical report, Citigroup Foundation
  Special Lecture.
Levinson, M. (2010). The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the
  World Economy Bigger. Princeton University Press.
Maurer, S. and F. Rauch (2020). Economic Geography Aspects of the Panama Canal.
McKinsey & Company (1972). Containerization: A Five-Year Balance Sheet. Technical report,
  McKinsey & Company.

                                               44
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
  Productivity. Econometrica 71(6), 1695­1725.
Monte, F., S. Redding, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018). Commuting, Migration, and Local Employ-
  ment Elasticities. American Economic Review 108(12), 3855­90.
Moriconi-Ebrard, F. (1994). Geopolis.
Nagy, D. (2018). Trade and Urbanization: Evidence from Hungary.
Nagy, D. (2020). Hinterlands, City Formation and Growth: Evidence from the U.S. Westward
  Expansion.
New York Port Authority (1958). 1958 Annual Report. Technical report, New York Port Authority.
OECD (2014). The Competitiveness of Global Port Cities. Technical report, OECD Publishing.
Oi, W. (1996). The Economics of New Goods. In The Welfare Implications of Invention. University
  of Chicago Press.
Port of San Francisco (1971). San Francisco Port Needs, Shipping and Area Requirements. Tech-
  nical report, Port of San Francisco.
Rappaport, J. (2007). Moving to Nice Weather. Regional Science and Urban Economics 37 (3),
  375­398.
Redding, S. (2016). Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare. Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 101, 148­167.
Redding, S. and M. Turner (2015). Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization of Economic
  Activity, Volume 5 of Handbook of regional and urban economics, pp. 1339­1398. Elsevier.
Riffenburgh, R. (2012). A Project History of the Port of Long Beach 1970 to 2010. Technical
  report, Port of Long Beach.
Rodrigue, J. (2016). The Geography of Transport Systems. Taylor Francis.
Rua, G. (2014). Diffusion of Containerization.
Saiz, A. (2010). The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 125(3), 1253­1296.
Santamaría, M. (2020). The Gains from Reshaping Infrastructure: Evidence from the division of
  Germany.
Stock, J. and M. Yogo (2002). Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. In Essays
  in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg. Cambridge University Press.
UNCTAD (1971). Review of Maritime Transport. Technical report, United Nations Publication.
UNCTAD (2019). Review of Maritime Transport. Technical report, United Nations Publication.
Wong, W. F. (2017). The Round Trip Effect: Endogenous Transport Costs and International Trade.




                                              45
A   Tables


                     Table 1: Depth predicts shipping flows, but only after 1960

                                                      Dependent Variable: ln(Shipment)
     Independent Variables                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)

     Depth × post 1970                                                                            0.247***
                                                                                                    (0.059)
                                                                                                   {0.052}
     Depth × 1960                         -0.051         0.029         0.050          -0.055
                                         (0.063)        (0.069)       (0.066)        (0.068)
     Depth × 1970                       0.222***      0.233***       0.278***       0.213***
                                         (0.069)        (0.077)       (0.082)        (0.071)
     Depth × 1980                        0.188**       0.212**       0.291***        0.192**
                                         (0.079)        (0.085)       (0.090)        (0.081)
     Depth × 1990                       0.255***       0.222**       0.312***       0.283***
                                         (0.086)        (0.087)       (0.099)        (0.087)

     Observations                          2765          2765           2765          2360           2765
     R-squared                            0.126          0.248         0.131          0.142          0.126
     Number of cities                      553            553            553           472            553
     Year FE                                                                                           
     City FE                                                                                           
     Population 1950 × Year                                                                            
     Coastline × Year FE                                                                               
     Saiz × Year                                                                                       
     GDP pc (country) × Year                                                                           

     Notes: "Depth" indicates the port suitability measure. It is interacted with decade dummies or an indicator
    variable for decades including and after 1970, as indicated. Standard errors clustered at the city level in
    parentheses, Conley standard errors to adjust for spatial correlation in curly brackets. *** p<0.01, **
    p<0.05, * p<0.1 (significance refers to clustered standard errors).




                                                        46
     Table 2: The local causal effect of shipping on population is not distinguishable from zero

                                                 Panel regression                                       Long difference
                              (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)         (10)
Indep. Variables            ln(Pop) ln(Pop) ln(Ship) ln(Pop) ln(Ship) ln(Pop) ln(Pop) ln(Pop)  ln(Ship) ln(Pop)
ln(Shipment)               0.013*** 0.015
                           0.030*** 0.035
                            (0.005)   (0.049)
 ln(Shipment)                                                                                0.013     0.006
                                                                                             0.052     0.022
                                                                                             (0.009)   (0.073)
Depth                                                                                                            0.272***     0.002
                                                                                                                 0.134***     0.003
                                                                                                                 (0.086)     (0.020)
Depth × post 1970                               0.268*** 0.004
                                                0.143*** 0.005
                                                 (0.058)   (0.013)
Depth × 1960                                                             -0.042    -0.003
                                                                         (0.064)   (0.008)
Depth × 1970                                                         0.246*** 0.007
                                                                         (0.069)   (0.013)
Depth × 1980                                                         0.213*** -0.002
                                                                         (0.079)   (0.017)
Depth × 1990                                                         0.280*** 0.002
                                                                         (0.086)   (0.020)
Observations                 2734       2734      2734      2734          2734      2734      531       531        531         531
Number of cities              552       552       552        552          552       552
Year FE                                                                                                                         
City FE                                                                                                                         
Population 1950 × Year                                                                                                          
Population 1950                                                                                                                 
Specification                OLS       2SLS        FS        RF          dyn FS    dyn RF     OLS      2SLS        FS          RF
KP F-stat                              21.13                                                            9.98

 Notes: "Depth" indicates the port suitability measure. It is interacted with decade dummies or indicator variables for decades
including and after 1970, as indicated. Standardized coefficients in italics underneath the baseline coefficients. Notation for
specification as follows: `FS' refers to the first stage, `RF' to the reduced form, `dyn FS' to the fully flexible first stage and `dyn
RF' to the fully flexible reduced form. Standard errors clustered at the city level (Appendix Table A.8 reports Conley standard
errors for the main results). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                    47
Table 3: Containerization increased shipping more in low rent cities

                                                 ln(Shipment)
        Independent Variables                   (1)            (2)

        Depth × post 1970                   0.464***       0.566***
                                              (0.138)        (0.152)
                                             {0.094}        {0.118}
        Depth × Saiz × post 1970             -0.408*       -0.707**
                                              (0.220)        (0.323)
                                             {0.153}        {0.237}
        Saiz × post 1970                                      0.975
                                                             (0.804)
                                                            {0.588}

        Observations                           2765           2765
        R-squared                              0.128          0.129
        Number of cities                        553            553
        Year FE                                                 
        City FE                                                 
        Population 1950 × Year                                  
        Notes: "Depth" indicates the port suitability measure. "Saiz"
       is the Saiz land rent proxy defined in Saiz (2010). Each mea-
       sure is interacted with an indicator for decades including and
       after 1970, and we also include the triple interaction term in the
       regression, which is the coefficient of interest. Standard errors
       clustered at the city level in parentheses, Conley standard errors
       to adjust for spatial correlation in curly brackets. *** p<0.01,
       ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (significance refers to clustered standard
       errors).




                                      48
Table 4: Model-inspired specification: Disentangling market access effect and crowding out effect

                                  (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)
 Independent Variables      ln(Population)    ln(Population)   ln(Population)    ln(Population)   ln(Shipment)    ln(Market Access)

 ln(Shipment)                  0.015***           0.014            -0.001          -0.159**
                                (0.005)          (0.048)           (0.006)          (0.065)
                                {0.005}          {0.038}          {0.005}           {0.051}
 ln(Market Access)                                                1.512***         7.103***
                                                                   (0.536)          (0.795)
                                                                  {0.317}           {0.854}
 Depth × post 1970                                                                                  0.275***           0.007***
                                                                                                     (0.058)            (0.001)
                                                                                                     {0.051}            {0.001}
 Market Access IV                                                                                     7.188            1.927***
                                                                                                     (5.428)            (0.140)
                                                                                                     {5.748}            {0.188}

 Observations                    2696              2696             2696             2696             2696               2696
 R-squared                       0.718            0.718             0.735            0.417
 Number of cities                 544              544               544              544              544                544
 Year FE                                                                                                                   
 City FE                                                                                                                   
 Population 1950 × Year                                                                                                    
 Specification                   OLS              2SLS              OLS              2SLS              FS                 FS
 KP F-stat                                        22.07                               9.63
 Notes: "Depth" indicates the port suitability measure. It is interacted with an indicator variable for decades including and after
1970. "ln(Market Access)" is the empirical counterpart of the market access term defined in Section 5. "Market access IV" is the
instrument for the market access term defined in Section 5. Notation for specification as follows: `FS' refers to the first stage.
Standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses, Conley standard errors to adjust for spatial correlation in curly brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (significance refers to clustered standard errors).




                                    Table 5: Calibration of structural parameters

             Parameter        Target
              = 0.06          Agglomeration externalities (Ciccone and Hall, 1993)
              = 0.84          Non-land share in production (Desmet and Rappaport, 2017)
              = 0.15          Migration elasticity (Kennan and Walker, 2011)
             =4               Elasticity of substitution across tradables (Bernard et al., 2003)
              = 203           Idiosyncratic shipping cost dispersion (Allen and Arkolakis, 2019)
              = 0.074 Congestion externalities in ports (Abe and Wilson, 2009)



                                                                 49
Table 6: The causal effect of shipping on local population in the data, `baseline model', and
`benchmark models'

                                                              ln(Population)
                                           Data       Model      Benchmark 1         Benchmark 2
           Independent Variables            (1)         (2)             (3)                (4)
           ln(Shipment)                   0.006       0.001         0.015**            0.018***
                                          0.022       0.006         0.124**            0.140***
                                         (0.073)     (0.007)         (0.006)            (0.007)

           Observations                    531         553             553                553
           Specification                  2SLS        2SLS            2SLS               2SLS
           KP F-stat                       9.98      595.88          666.45              662.22
           Notes: Column (1) uses depth as IV for shipping, controlling for population in 1950, which
          is equivalent to using residualized depth as an IV. Columns (2) to (4) use residualized depth
          as IV, which is the variation that we feed into the model to simulate the counterfactual.
          Standardized coefficients in italics underneath the baseline coefficients. Robust standard
          errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




         Table 7: The aggregate welfare effects of containerization - Sensitivity analysis

 Model                                                                                    Welfare effect (%)
 1. Baseline                                                                                      3.95
 2. 20% higher  in inversion                                                                      3.98
 3. 20% lower  in inversion                                                                       3.94
 4. Counterfactual  implying 65% increase in port share of New Orleans                            3.97
 5. Counterfactual  implying 85% increase in port share of New Orleans                            3.93
 6. No depth-dependent change in  (r)                                                             4.30
 7. Larger CF : implies 30% change in total transshipment costs                                   4.60
 8. Smaller CF : implies 20% change in total transshipment costs                                  3.26
 9. Monopolistic competition                                                                      4.34




                                                      50
         Table 8: The determinants of the country-level welfare gains from containerization

                                                          Change in country-level welfare
 Independent Variables               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
 ln(GDP per capita)               -0.161**      -0.288***      -0.293***       -0.390*         0.216
                                   (0.068)       (0.061)         (0.065)       (0.235)        (0.383)
 Share of port cities                           0.693***       0.699***       0.699***      0.727***       0.723***
                                                 (0.071)         (0.064)       (0.064)        (0.072)       (0.070)
 ln(Population)                                                   0.015         -0.008        0.206*       0.144***
                                                                 (0.051)       (0.085)        (0.121)       (0.055)
 ln(Average Productivity)                                                       0.107         -0.575       -0.340***
                                                                               (0.264)        (0.432)       (0.071)
 ln(Average MAgeo )                                                                           -0.199        -0.156*
                                                                                              (0.137)       (0.086)

 Observations                        167           167             167            167           167            167
 R-squared                          0.026         0.490           0.490         0.491          0.504         0.503
 Notes: The table shows standardized beta coefficients. The change in welfare is measured in %. All independent variables
correspond to their counterfactual values. Country averages weighted by counterfactual city populations. M Ageo,i =
            1
  s=i E[T (i,s)]-1 . Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          51
B     Figures




Figure 1: The estimated effect of depth on shipping evaluated at different values of the Saiz land
rent proxy in the data


Notes: The figure shows the estimated  coefficient from equation (2) evaluated at different values of the Saiz land
rent proxy. The corresponding regression results are reported in column (2) of Table 3.




Figure 2: The estimated effect of depth on shipping evaluated at different values of the counterfac-
tual land rents in the model


Notes: The figure shows the estimated  coefficient from equation (14) evaluated at different values of the counterfac-
tual land rents. The corresponding regression results are reported in Appendix Table A.20.




                                                         52
