                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PRODUCTION NETWORKS AND INTERNATIONAL FISCAL SPILLOVERS

                                      Michael B. Devereux
                                         Karine Gente
                                         Changhua Yu

                                      Working Paper 28149
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28149


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020




We would like to thank Tommaso Monacelli, Rahul Mukherjee, Linda Tesar, Fabio Ghironi,
Daniele Sienna, Kim Ruhl, Laurent Ferrara, April Cai, Russell Cooper, Mikhail Dmitriev, and
Yann Bramoule for helpful comments. In addition, we thank seminar participants at Wuhan
University, the 2018 meeting of CCER summer institute, the 2018 ASSA meetings, the 2018
international conference on Macroeconomics at Tsinghua University, the National Bank of
Poland, the Bank of Korea conference, June, 2019, the 2019 ASSET meetings in Athens, and
Florida State University, 2020. We also thank Fabien Petit for outstanding research assistance.
Devereux gratefully acknowledges research support form SSHRC Canada. Yu gives thanks for
financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China. Karine Gente thanks the
French National Research Agency (grant ANR-17-EURE-0020) for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael B. Devereux, Karine Gente, and Changhua Yu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Production Networks and International Fiscal Spillovers
Michael B. Devereux, Karine Gente, and Changhua Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 28149
November 2020
JEL No. E23,E62,F20,F42,H50

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the impact of fiscal spending shocks in a multi-country model with
international production networks. In contrast to standard results suggesting that production
network linkages are unimportant for the aggregate response to macro shocks in a closed
economy, we show that network structures may place a central role in the international
propagation of fiscal shocks, particularly when wages are slow to adjust. The paper first develops
a simple general equilibrium multi-country model and derives some analytical results on the
response to fiscal spending shocks. We then apply the model to an analysis of fiscal spillovers in
the Eurozone, using the calibrated sectoral network structure from the World Input Output
Database (WIOD). In a version of the model with sticky wages, we find that fiscal spillovers
from Germany and some other large Eurozone countries may be large, and within the range of
empirical estimates. More importantly, we find that the Eurozone production network is very
important for the international spillovers. In the absence of international production network
linkages, spillovers would be only a third as large as predicted by the baseline model. Finally, we
explore the diffusion of identified German government spending at the sectoral level, both within
and across countries. We find that government expenditures have both significant upstream and
downstream effects when these links are measured by the direction of sectoral production
linkages.

Michael B. Devereux                              Changhua Yu
Department of Economics                          National School of Development
University of British Columbia                   Peking University
997-1873 East Mall                               5 Yiheyuan Rd, Haidian,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1                            Beijing, 100871
CANADA                                           China
and NBER                                         changhuayu@nsd.pku.edu.cn
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Karine Gente
Chateau Lafarge
Route des Milles
13290 Aix Les Milles
karine.gente@univ-amu.fr
    Keywords: Production Network, Fiscal Policy, Spillovers, Eurozone, Terms of Trade, Nominal

Rigidities

    JEL Codes: E23            E62    F20    F42   H50




1        Introduction

    During the global financial crisis, many countries initiated massive fiscal stimulus to boost their

domestic economies. In the wake of the current Covid-19 crisis, most countries have pushed fiscal

deficits to unprecedented levels. In the European Union, for instance, the EU leaders agreed in July

2020 to issue common EU bonds to finance a 750m euro recovery package. The US budget deficit this

year will approach 15 percent of GDP (see IMF Fiscal Monitor, October 2020). These fiscal stimuli

may have various impacts on other countries, through international trade and capital flows. Empirical

evidence shows that fiscal spillovers across borders can be large, depending on how fiscal shocks are

identified (e.g., Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012a; Amendola, Di Serio, Fragetta and Melina, 2020).

Nevertheless, most model based analyses suggest that fiscal spillovers across countries are negligible,

given the size of trade openness at the aggregate level.          1


    Recent research argues that production linkages between countries can have important implications

for aggregate co-movements, for instance see Burstein, Kurz and Tesar (2008), Giovanni and Levchenko

(2010), and Giovanni and Levchenko (2012). Motivated by this, our paper investigates the importance

of production networks in accounting for fiscal spillovers across countries. It has been well documented

that international trade is substantially dominated by trade in intermediate products. Firms in many

countries intensively use intermediate inputs produced by their own industry and also by other home

and foreign industries. These input-output linkages not only link production lines globally, but also

serve as important channels for shock propagation within a country and across borders. How do these

input-output linkages affect domestic and foreign fiscal multipliers? Can production networks account

for the discrepancy between fiscal spillovers in the data and models?

    Our baseline model is a multi-country version of Bigio and La'O (2020), which is a general equilib-

rium multi-sector model incorporating production distortions at the sectoral level. The main question

    1
        See for instance, Cwik and Wieland (2011), Goujard (2016) , and Ivanova and Weber (2011).


                                                             2
addressed is how the production network connections across sectors and countries affect the response

to fiscal policy shocks, both at the aggregate country-level as well as at the level of individual sectoral

responses.

   We employ two versions of the model. In one version, all prices and wages are flexible, and sectoral

shocks work through both supply and demand channels. In particular, in a multi-country setting, shocks

in one country will impact on relative factor prices across countries, and in turn these price changes cause

adjustments along the production network. In a second version of the model, we assume that nominal

wages are sticky, and cannot immediately adjust to fiscal policy shocks. In this version, fiscal shocks are

diffused through production networks solely through demand channels. Our results, described further

below, suggests that the distinction between the two models has major implications for the importance

of production networks in aggregate co-movements. We also examine how the responses to fiscal shocks

depend on the presence of production distortions (or 'wedges', in the language of Bigio and La'O (2020)),

and the sectoral composition of fiscal spending.

   The first section of the paper develops some simple theoretical results on the responses to fiscal policy

shocks in closed and open economies with production networks. In a closed economy, absent production

distortions, we show that the production network structure is irrelevant for the aggregate government

spending multiplier. Moreover, the spending multiplier is independent of the sectoral composition of

fiscal spending. This result mirrors well known conclusions from the literature on production networks

in closed economies (e.g. Hulten (1978)). By contrast, in a multi-country model, the production network

is always relevant for the response to fiscal spending. In the flexible price and wage version of the model,

the response to fiscal shocks depends crucially on the movements in the terms of trade across countries.

With sticky wages, the production network itself matters directly for the way in which shocks are

channeled across sectors and countries.

   We then apply the model to the data. We use the World Input Output Database (WIOD) for the

Eurozone countries over the period of 2000-2014 and consider German government expenditure shocks.

The model is simple enough that all the share parameters can be directly calibrated from the WIOD.

The focus on the Eurozone subsample is motivated by a number of factors. First, it is likely that

production networks within the European Union are more important than those among other less well

connected countries within the WIOD. Secondly, a large policy literature has developed on the role

of fiscal policy within the EU and the Eurozone, and there is quite a lot of empirical evidence on the

                                                     3
impact of fiscal shocks within this group of countries. Finally, and relatedly, the Eurozone has a common

monetary policy, so looking at the diffusion of fiscal shocks along the Eurozone production network does

not require us to take a stand on national monetary policies for each country.2

    We first note some features of production networks in the Eurozone. Although the Eurozone has more

production linkages than many other regions, we find that cross-country production network connections

are much more sparse than those in countries within the Eurozone. Network connectivity (defined in

various ways) has increased over the sample period, but production networks are still highly `home-

biased'. As is common in many countries, there is also very substantial home bias in private and

especially public spending.

    As noted, our main focus of interest is the impact of shocks to German fiscal expenditures. We first

explore this at the aggregate level, looking at the responses to spending shocks on aggregate GDP in the

calibrated model, both in the home economy and through cross-country spillovers. We find that there is a

major difference between the two versions of the model. In the model with fully flexible wages and prices,

supply and demand channels tend to work against one another in so far as cross-country spillovers are

concerned. The aggregate spillovers in the model are very small, and almost all the aggregate response to

fiscal shocks is felt within the domestic economy. We also find that the production network connections

across countries in the Eurozone has little effect on the responses to fiscal spending shocks. Recalibrating

the model to shut down international network has negligible effects on the predicted response to shocks.

    By contrast, when nominal wages are sticky, we find that spillovers working solely through the

demand channel can be large, and certainly within the range of empirical estimates of fiscal spillovers

in the Eurozone. Moreover, in this case the network linkages among countries has first order effects

on the response to fiscal shocks. When we solve a recalibrated version of the model shutting down the

international production network, the implied fiscal spillovers are reduced by more than two-thirds.

    A second empirical exercise explores the diffusion of fiscal shocks at the sectoral level, both within

and across countries. In this exercise, we ask how the production network determines the magnitude

and direction of shocks. We first measure German fiscal policy shocks using the SVAR identification

procedure of Blanchard and Perotti (2002). Following this, using the WIOD fiscal spending shares at the

country-sectoral level, we construct a measure of sectoral demand shocks using the approach of Acemoglu,

   2
    Fiscal multipliers critically depend on monetary policy regimes, see for instance recent studies Hagedorn, Manovskii
                              `
and Mitman (2019), Cloyne, Oscar     Jord`
                                         a and Taylor (2020).


                                                           4
Akcigit and Kerr (2015). Using a simple regression approach to both the model simulations and sectoral

data, we find strong support for the implications of the model at the level of sectoral responses to demand

shocks. A key aspect of this empirical approach is to distinguish between `downstream' and 'upstream'

effects of demand shocks. As shown by Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015), demand shocks should work

upstream in benchmark production networks. Our regression analysis strongly confirms this prediction.

    This paper links to three branches of literature. First, our paper contributes to the literature on

production networks and macroeconomic impact of shocks. Following the pioneering work of Gabaix

(2011) and Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-

Salehi (2017) investigate the propagation of microeconomic shocks through input-output linkages and

find that when input-output linkages are unbalanced, micro shocks can lead to sizable macroeconomic

tail risks. Baqaee and Farhi (2019) provide conditions that production networks can substantially am-

plify sectoral productivity shocks in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. They suggest to use

higher-order approximation techniques to solve dynamics models in order to capture the effect of pro-

duction networks.3 In a companion research, Baqaee and Farhi (2020) provide a general non-parametric

formula for aggregating microeconomic shocks in general equilibrium economies with distortions. In an

empirical setting, di Giovanni and Hale (2020) quantify the role of global production linkages in explain-

ing spillovers of U.S. monetary policy shocks to stock returns of 54 sectors in 26 countries, and find

that global production linkages contribute to most of the total impact of U.S. monetary policy shocks

on average country-sector stock returns. Flynn, Patterson and Sturm (2020) investigate a sticky-wage

economy with many sectors and regions, linked to one another through an arbitrary input-output struc-

ture, and find empirically that production network plays a role in shaping optimal policy. In most cases

the production network literature has focused on productivity shocks (see Bigio and La'O, 2020; Baqaee

and Farhi, 2019), with substantial attention to the idea that the networks may allow sectoral productiv-

ity shocks to propagate to the aggregate economy.4 Nevertheless, our focus is on demand shocks, and

specifically fiscal spending shocks.

    The most related papers are Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015) and Bigio and La'O (2020). Bigio

   3
      Pasten, Schoenle and Weber (2016) study a multi-sector Calvo model with intermediate inputs and explore the real
effects of monetary policy shocks. Based on first-order approximations, they find heterogeneity in input-output linkages
contributes only marginally to the real effects of monetary policy shocks. Following a similar approach, Bouakez, Rachedi
and Emiliano (2018) explore fiscal multiplier in a multi-sectoral closed-economy monetary model.
    4
      More recent works include Jones (2011); Atalay (2017); Luo (2020); Acemoglu and Azar (2020); Lim (2018); Dong
and Wen (2019) and Miranda-Pinto and Young (2018).


                                                           5
and La'O (2020) explore how production networks and distortions affect the propagation of sectoral

productivity shocks in a closed economy multi-sector real business cycle framework and apply the frame-

work to analyze shock propagation through the USA input-output linkages. Our paper takes use of a

similar framework as Bigio and La'O (2020), but there are several important differences between our

paper and theirs. First, we focus on the role of both domestic and international production networks

in a multi-country world economy. Second, we explore how the demand side shocks­fiscal spending

shocks­are propagated across borders through international input-output linkages. Third, our model

features nominal wage rigidities as in the literature (see Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                       e and Uribe (2016)). We find

that international production networks substantially increase fiscal policy spillovers across borders in a

model with nominal wage rigidities, while the spillovers are quite small in a model with flexible prices and

wages. Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015) explore the propagation of macroeconomic shocks through

input-output and geographic networks and they find that demand-side shocks propagate upstream and

supply-side shocks propagate downstream in a closed economy. Our paper features labor markets seg-

mentation across countries and we find that government expenditures have both significant upstream

and downstream effects when these links are measured by the direction of sectoral production linkages.

   Second, our paper is related to studies on intermediate inputs and business cycles. Basu (1995)

and Dupor (1999) incorporates multi-sector production structures into closed economy business cycle

models. Bouakez, Cardia and Ruge-Murcia (2009) explore the idiosyncratic sectoral dynamics in an

economy with heterogeneous production sectors in response to monetary policy shocks. Along interna-

tional dimension, Giovanni and Levchenko (2012) investigate how country size and international trade

affect macroeconomic volatility. Based on a cross-country, industry-level panel dataset of manufacturing

production and trade, Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) find that sector pairs that experience more bilat-

eral trade exhibit stronger comovement, particularly for cross-border industry pairs that use each other

as intermediate inputs. In a multi-country multi-sector world economy, Huo, Levchenko and Pandalai-

Nayar (2019, 2020) explore how productivity shocks contribute to international comovement and don't

find much comovement through propagation of productivity shocks. The input-output linkages in our

model are similar to those of the above papers, but we follow the recent literature that deviates from Hul-

ten's theorem (Hulten, 1978; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019) via introducing production wedges and especially

nominal rigidities into a multi-country world economy.

   Third, this study also provides a micro-foundation of fiscal spillovers. Theoretically, our results

                                                     6
indicate that the fiscal spillovers could be large or small, depending on which sectors a government

chooses to spend, how sectors are linked via various production networks, and how factor prices adjust.

This may provide a new angle to reconcile various empirical studies on fiscal spillovers, i.e., Beetsma,

Giuliodori and Klaassen (2008b), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012b), Corsetti and Muller (2013) and

Dabla-Norris, Dallari and Poghosyan (2017).5

    The structure of paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out the baseline model. Analytical results for

various versions of the model are presented in Section 3. Section 4 reviews the evidence on fiscal spillovers

in the Eurozone. The calibration of the model to the WIOD is discussed in section 5 and the quantitative

results of the model for the aggregate response to fiscal policy shocks follow next. Section 6 looks more

closely at the sectoral responses to fiscal shocks.



2       The model

    We consider a variant of Bigio and La'O (2020) economy with (a) constant return to scale production

technologies, (b) production wedges which distort firms' input choices, and (c) constant elasticity of

substitution among firms' intermediate inputs. Firms/sectors may face differences in (a) intermediate

input expenditure shares (production networks), (b) production wedges (or distortions) and (c) final

absorption by households and the government. This general model has the advantage that it can be

directly incorporated into the structure of production linkages within and between countries defined in

the World Input Output Database.

    There are K countries in the world economy. Country k has Nk sectors, each of which can be

represented by a competitive firm with constant elasticity of substitution production. Countries differ in

both sectoral production efficiency and size (output and employment). Labour is mobile across sectors

within each country but immobile across countries.6 Normalizing the total world population to unity,
                                                         K
we let country k have population nk , so that            k=1 nk   = 1.




    5
      Cacciatore and Traum (2020) study the role of international trade following unanticipated government spending and
income tax changes in a two-country environment. Auerbach, Gorodnichenko and Murphy (2020) estimate local fiscal
multipliers and spillovers for the USA and find strong positive spillovers across locations and industries. Section 5.5 below
provides a review of the empirical literature on fiscal spillovers within the Eurozone.
    6
      Although goods and labor markets are highly integrated in the Eurozone (Caliendo, Opromolla, Parro and Sforza,
2017b), spatial wage gaps still persist even within a country (Heise and Porzio, 2018).


                                                             7
2.1    Production

    Following the international trade literature (i.e., Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003; Allen, Arkolakis

and Takahashi, 2020; Caliendo, Parro and Tsyvinski, 2017a), we assume constant returns to scale in

production, so that for a competitive firm in sector i of country k , the technology is


                                                                      (1-ki )  ki
                                            Xki = exp(ki         ki ) ki      Mki                                             (1)


Xki denotes the gross output produced by the firm.                   ki   is a productivity term, and        ki   is employment.

ki captures the intermediate input cost share in production. Mki is the composite of intermediate

inputs,
                                                             K   Nm
                                                                          kimj
                                                 Mki =                 Xkimj
                                                            m=1 j =1

In the baseline model we assume an elasticity of substitution of unity across intermediate inputs, as in

Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015), and Bigio and La'O (2020).7 In particular, Xkimj represents the

use of country m sector j product by sector i in country k . The input-output matrix is denoted by W
                                 K        Nm
with entry kimj , where          m=1      j =1 kimj   = 1, with kimj  0.

    A representative firm in country k sector i faces the following problem

                                                                                     K   Nm
                              max ki = (1 - ki )Pki Xki - wk               ki   -              Pmj Xkimj                      (2)
                          {   ki ,Xki }
                                                                                    m=1 j =1


subject to the technology constraint (1). Pki is the product price, wk is the wage rate. Here, ki is

equivalent to a tax on the firm's revenue which plays the role of a production wedge, or distortion. Let
                                                                                                           K      Nm
sales in sector ki be Ski = Pki Xki and total expenditures on inputs Uki = wk                      ki +    m=1    j =1 Pmj Xkimj .

The optimality conditions are

                                                 wk    ki   = (1 - ki )Uki                                                    (3)

                                               Pmj Xkimj = ki kimj Uki                                                        (4)

                                                       Uki = ki Ski                                                           (5)



   7
     In Appendix C, we explore the results under a more general CES technology, estimating elasticities from the data. We
find that the results are quite similar to those of the baseline case.


                                                                 8
with ki  1 - ki . Profits can be written as ki = (1 - ki )Ski - Uki = 0, and with competitive markets,

profits are zero.


2.2      Households

   A representative household's preference in each country k has the form

                                                             (ck (1 - Lk )k )1-
                                             u(ck , Lk ) =
                                                                    1-

where Lk is total labour supply of the household and labour services are homogeneous within a country,

with total available labour supply normalized to unity. ck is a consumption aggregator, which has the

following Cobb-Douglas aggregation for the consumption basket,

                                                              K    Nm
                                                                          kmj
                                                    ck =                ckmj
                                                             m=1 j =1


                        K       Nm
where kmj  0,           m=1     j =1 kmj   = 1.8

   We abstract from all asset trade across countries, and assume that each country satisfies its within-

period budget constraint. In country k , the aggregate households' budget constraint is given by

                                             K     Nm                                 Nk
                                  Pk Ck =               Pmj Ckmj = wk Lk +                 ki + Tk                      (6)
                                            m=1 j =1                              i=1


where Tk represents lump-sum transfers from the government, and we have used the aggregate consump-

tion Ckmj = nk ckmj and labour supply Lk = nk Lk . A representative household chooses consumption

ckmj and labor supply Lk to maximize the lifetime utility. The optimality conditions for households in

country k become

                                                   Pmj ckmj = kmj ck Pk                                                 (7)

where Pk is defined as
                                                         K   Nm                 kmj
                                                                      Pmj
                                                 Pk =
                                                                      kmj
                                                        m=1 j =1




   8
       Appendix (C) generalizes the consumption aggregator to allow for non-unitary elasticity of substitution across goods.


                                                                  9
Optimal labour supply is characterized by the condition


                                                wk (1 - Lk ) = k Pk ck


Multiplying country size nk , yields,


                                      wk (nk - Lk ) = wk - wk Lk = k Pk Ck


where we define wk = wk nk as the country-size weighted wage rate in country k .


2.3    Government Policy

    Governments spend on goods in many sectors and many countries. Assume that governments have

access to lump sum taxation. The government budget constraint is then

                                              Nk                      K   Nm
                                       Tk =         (1 - ki )Ski -              Gkmj                                 (8)
                                              i=1                    m=1 j =1

The first term on the right hand side is the government revenue raised from the tax distortion, rebated

in lump sum back to households. The second term is the lump sum tax revenue raised to finance

government spending.


2.4    Monetary Policy

    In the model with fully flexible wages, monetary policy plays no role in determining real allocations.

But when wages are sticky, the stance of monetary policy makes a difference. We introduce money

into the model by assuming a simple quantity theory relationship between nominal consumption and

the money supply.      9   In addition, because our application below focuses on the fiscal spillovers within

the Eurozone, we assume that there is a monetary union among countries which can be described by

one monetary policy rule. But we also incorporates the `rest of the world' as the residual country, it

is necessary to allow for an independent monetary policy for the non-Eurozone residual country. To

describe this, assume that the Eurozone consists of the first K - 1 countries, while the K th country is

   9
     This can be given a more microeconomic foundation using a simple money in the utility function specification applied
to a static setting - e.g. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002).


                                                            10
the rest of the world. For the Eurozone countries and the rest of the world, respectively, then we have

                                                   K -1
                                          M ez =          Pk Ck , M row = PK
                                                                           row
                                                                               CK                                           (9)
                                                   k=1

where M represents money supply.
          row indicates the country K price in terms of country K currency. In what follows, we will
   Where PK

mostly express prices in terms of the currency of the first K - 1 countries. Assuming the law of one

price holds at the sectoral level across all countries, then we can define prices in the rest of the world

currency implicitly by the condition
                                                           row
                                                          Pmj  = Pmj

where  is the nominal exchange rate (Eurozone price of ROW currency). The assumptions governing

monetary policy will be specified more clearly below.


2.5   Market clearing conditions

   The labour market clearing condition reads

                                                                  Nk
                                                          Lk =          ki
                                                                  i=1


and market clearing condition for goods produced by sector ki reads,
                                                                    
                K                       Nm                                   K   Nm                           K
                      mki 
        Ski =             wm -                 mj (1 - mj )Smj  +                     mj mjki mj Smj +              Gmki   (10)
                      m
                m=1                     j =1                             m=1 j =1                             m=1


2.6   The competitive equilibrium

   Substituting labour market clearing conditions, government budget constraint, equation (3) and

households optimal labour supply into households' aggregate budget constraints, yields

                            Nk                           K   Nm                       Nk
                      k (         Ski (1 - ki ki ) -              Gkmj ) = wk -             ki (1 - ki )Ski                (11)
                            i=1                        m=1 j =1                       i=1


   Substituting demand for factor inputs into the production function, yields the total sales for sector




                                                               11
ki,
                                                                                (1-ki )
                                                            (1 - ki )ki Ski                ki
                          Pki Xki = Pki exp(ki      ki )                                  Mki
                                                                 wk
                                            K      Nm                          kimj
                                                           ki kimj ki Ski
                                  Mki =
                                                               Pmj
                                          m=1 j =1

which can be simplified as


                                                               -ki -1
                        Pki = exp(-ki     ki )(1   - ki )ki -1 ki ki wk 1-ki (Pki
                                                                               M ki
                                                                                  )                   (12)


with the price for intermediate inputs used by sector ki

                                                    K      Nm           kimj
                                        M                        Pmj
                                       Pki =
                                                                 kimj
                                                   m=1 j =1


In the competitive equilibrium, we have 2N + K + 1 unknowns Ski , Pki , and wk , for k = 1, · · · , K ,

i = 1, · · · , Nk , and the exchange rate between the K - 1 countries of the monetary union and the rest of

the world K , t . There are 2N + K + 2 equations (10), (11) and (12) and (9). One equation is redundant

by Walras' Law (we drop the last equation in (11)).


2.7     Sticky Nominal Wages

      The model above assumes that all prices and wages are flexible. In the application to the Eurozone,

this assumption is questionable. Substantial evidence from the Eurozone crisis and before attests to

the slow adjustment of wages to macro shocks (Schmitt-Groh´
                                                          e and Uribe, 2016). We will explore a

version of the model in which wages are pre-set in each period, and cannot adjust to unexpected fiscal

shocks. A full micro-foundation for this assumption can be developed based on a model in which labour

is differentiated and firms demand labour from each of a continuum of workers with elasticity of demand

 > 1 (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2002). In equilibrium each worker within a country sets the same wage

and has the same employment level. Here, we can state that the equilibrium wage setting equation is

characterized by


                                                            wk ^ ck k
                                    Euc (ck , Lk )Lk           -        =0                            (13)
                                                            Pk   1 - Lk



                                                            12
      ^=          
where             -1 .

     Given a fixed nominal wage in each country, we assume that employment is determined by labour

demand. The set of equilibrium prices then may be recovered using (12). This requires knowledge

not just of the wages (which are ex-post sticky) but also exchange rates. Following the discussion of

monetary policy above, we will assume that the first K - 1 countries consists of a monetary union, and

the K th country follows an independent monetary policy.

     The competitive equilibrium with sticky wages is described in a different way. Conditional upon

pre-set nominal wages (in domestic currency), we use the following three conditions,

                                    K                       K   Nm                             K
                            Ski =         mki Pm Cm +                 mj mjki mj Smj +               Gmki             (14)
                                    m=1                    m=1 j =1                            m=1



                                                  Nk                          K   Nm
                                        Pk Ck =         Ski (1 - ki ki ) -              Gkmj                          (15)
                                                  i=1                        m=1 j =1



                                                                       -ki -1
                              Pki = exp(-ki       ki )(1   - ki )ki -1 ki ki wk 1-ki (Pki
                                                                                       M ki
                                                                                          )                           (16)

                                                         row = P can be solved for S , C , P P row ,
     Along with (9), and the law of one price condition Pki     ki                  ki  k   ki ki

and  , for k = 1..K and i = 1..Nk .          10


     Before moving to the quantitative results of the model, we first explore analytically how production

networks affect the fiscal multiplier and international spillover of fiscal shocks. In the following section

3.1, we start with a closed economy with production network and investigate the domestic own fiscal

multiplier. In section 3.2, we extend tractable analysis to a multi-country environment.



3         The Fiscal Multiplier in Production Networks

3.1        A Closed Economy

     We set K = 1 in the above model. In the closed economy, there is a single wage, given labour market

mobility within the country. Assume that monetary rule (9) targets the CPI. Then it can easily be

shown from (12) that the nominal wage is independent of fiscal spending shocks. Moreover, this implies
    10
         Note that in (14)-(16), all nominal values are expressed in Eurozone currency, so the country K wage is defined as
  row                     row
 wK       = wK , where wK     represents the preset sticky wage in currency K .


                                                                13
that nominal prices for each sector don't respond to shocks and therefore are constant. As a result, we

can compute the real effects of fiscal shocks from the equilibrium of the N sales equations, repeated here

as (we drop country index k or m):

                                                                                     
                               N                                 n
                                                     i 
                        Si =          j j ji Sj +       w-             (1 - j )j Sj  + Gi ,    i = 1..N                 (17)
                                                     
                               j =1                             j =1

   We use variables without subscripts to denote the corresponding vectors. Define the effective Leontief

matrix as
                                                                                                -1
                                                                            
                               B        I - (eN  )  W  (eN  ) +              (  ((1 - ) )
                                                                            

with column vector eN whose entries are one,  represents the column vector with entry i ,  for the

column vector with entry i , and  denoting the Hadamard product (entrywise product). This effective

Leontief matrix is adjusted by heterogeneities in wedges across sectors and the indirect effect of labour

market clearing. Then (17) may be rewritten as

                                                                     w
                                                       S=B             +G                                               (18)
                                                                     

   For the special case with homogeneous wedges, so that i = , and equal labour shares i =  we
                                                                                                    11
can verify that the sum of entries in each column of matrix B equals                    (1-)+(1-) .

   First, focus on a special case where the labour share and the production wedge is equal across all

sectors, so that i =  and i =  for all i. Then we can sum the columns in the sales equation (18), to

express total sales as
                                              N                            n
                                                               w+          j =1 Gj
                                                     Sj =                                                               (19)
                                                            (1 - ) + (1 - )
                                              j =1

   Since the nominal wage is preset and prices are independent of spending shocks, we can equate GDP

to total nominal value added, or total sales less payments to intermediate inputs. In this case of uniform

 and , GDP is then

                                                        N                               n
                                                                     (1 - )(w +         j =1 Gj )
                                GDP = (1 - )                  Sj =                                                      (20)
                                                                        (1 - ) + (1 - )
                                                       j =1



  11
       But even in this special case, the sum of entries in each row of B is not constant unless W is a regular matrix (i.e.,
  n                                                                                     1
  i=1   ij = 1 for all j ), and households spend their income equally on all goods i = n  .


                                                                 14
Now, using (3) and (20), in combination with the labour market equilibrium, and normalizing w = 1,

we can solve for equilibrium employment as

                                                                    n
                                                (1 - )(1 +          j =1 Gj )
                                          L=                                                                            (21)
                                                  (1 - ) + (1 - )

    Given (20) and (21), we can state

Result 1. Given equal labour share and production wedges across all sectors, the government spending

multiplier in a network economy is independent of the network composition. This holds for both aggregate

government spending as well as any individual sector-specific spending.

    The aggregate impact of a sectoral government spending shock, which represents a demand shock in

our model, is the same, no matter how connected is the sector. With less connected sectors the aggregate

impact will be felt through the sector, while with more connected sectors the impact will be diffused

more generally, but in aggregate, there is no difference in terms of the full effect on GDP.

    While the aggregate multiplier in the uniform economy is independent of the network, it is clear from

(20) that the multiplier does depend on the production wedge. It is easy to see that the government

spending multiplier will be increasing, the higher is the common production wedge (the lower is ).

Intuitively, this arises due to the fact the production wedge lowers the equilibrium employment level, as

we see from (21).12

    Result 1 relies both on identical labour shares and identical production wedges across sectors. With

differential labour shares, the network composition will affect the fiscal multiplier even in the presence

of a uniform production wedge. But in the special case of zero production wedges, i.e. i = 1 for all i,

we can establish

Result 2. With zero production wedges in all sectors, the aggregate and sectoral government spending
                            
multipliers are equal to    +1 .


    Thus, without production wedges, the government spending multiplier is identical to that in an

economy without production networks, even though labour shares may differ across sectors.


  12                                                                                                               GDP
       Note that while nominal GDP given by (20) is increasing in the production wedge, real GDP, given by          P
                                                                                                                          , is
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                - 1-
decreasing in the wedge, since it is easy to show that the CPI will be related to the wedge in proportion to            . The
multiplier result described above pertains both to nominal and real GDP.


                                                          15
   In the more general case with non-zero and differential production wedges across sectors, then both

the aggregate and sectoral multiplier will depend on the network structure. To illustrate how the

production network makes a difference, we take two examples.

   Example 1: A closed economy
                       1
   Let n = 5, i =      5,   i =  for i = 1, · · · , 5. In addition, assume the production network is
                                                                 1          1
characterized by a symmetric regular matrix, given by ii =       ,   ij =   4 (1   -1
                                                                                     ), where  = 1, · · · , 5.

Thus,  measures the degree of connectedness of the production network, with  = 1 representing zero

connectedness, and  = 5 representing a symmetric network fully connected. In addition, assume that

i = 1 for i = 1, · · · , 4, but 5 < 1. Hence, only sector 5 suffers from a production wedge.

   We can then establish two properties of this example.

   1. The multiplier is higher in the distorted sector than in the undistorted sector.

                              dGDP   dGDP    20 (1 - )(1 - 5 )
                                   -      =-                   >0
                               dG5    dG1            

where  < 0.   13


   2. A more connected network increases the government spending multiplier in the undistorted sector

but reduces the multiplier in the distorted sector.

             d2 GDP   100(1 - )(1 - 5 ) [(1 - 5 ) + 5 (1 - )]
                    =                                         > 0, with i = 1, · · · , 4
              dGi d                      2

                      d2 GDP   -4005 (1 - )2 (1 - 5 )(1 + )
                             =                              < 0, with i = 5
                       dG5 d              2

   The first point follows intuitively from the results above - since production wedges raise the aggre-

gate government spending multiplier, a distortion in one sector will raise the multiplier relative to the

undistorted case, and spending in the more distorted sector will have a larger aggregate effect. Point

2 reveals that the production network plays an important role with heterogenous production wedges.

A more connected network leads spending in non-distorted sectors to have a greater influence on the

distorted sector, and thereby raising the aggregate spending multiplier.

   How do these results differ in the case of sticky wages? In fact, in the closed economy model where

the money rule targets the CPI, sticky wages do not matter for the responses to fiscal spending shocks.
  13
       In particular  = 52 5 +52 5 -252 5 +15-5 -252 5 +205 +16-20-45 +5+255 -16 .


                                                      16
This is clear from the above discussion. The equilibrium nominal wage is independent of government

spending shocks in the closed economy model. But this is not true with multiple countries, as we see

below.


3.2      The Multi-Country Model

    Now we move to a multi-country world economy and assume first that prices and wages are flexible.
                                                 K
With many countries, there are N =               k=1 Nk    conditions determining the equilibrium sales of each

sector in each country (equation (10)). In the one country case, given a monetary rule that targeted

the CPI, we saw that the nominal wage was independent of fiscal spending shocks. Therefore conditions

(17) alone determined the equilibrium vector of sales. But with K countries, there are K - 1 relative

wage rates which are determined in equilibrium given that labour markets must clear separately in each

country. Country level resource constraints give additional K conditions (equation (11)). In addition,

there must be a monetary rule which pins down nominal values. It is convenient in this case to assume

that the monetary rule targets the sum of nominal wages (weighted by country size).                        14   Thus, we
                  K
assume that       k=1 wk   = 1. For simplicity but without loss of generality, we assume that k =  hold for

all countries.

    The equilibrium conditions can be written as

                                                           w
                                                S=B          + G M eK                                                 (22)
                                                           

Matrix B has a similar definition to above except that it is defined across all K countries now and w is

the corresponding column vector for wk .

                                                                                       -1
                                                                           
                                B       IN - (eN  )  W  (eN  ) +            (  )
                                                                           

where IN is the identity matrix with dimension N ,  and  are corresponding vectors for ki , ki , and




  14
     This normalization makes it easier to illustrate the results of fiscal spending shocks in the multi-country case alge-
braically. With flexible prices and wages, the impact of spending on real magnitudes is independent of the monetary rule
in any case.


                                                            17
GM represents a matrix of government spending by country and sector.15

   Now however, there are K - 1 endogenous relative wage rates, satisfying (11). We can rewrite the

budget constraints as:


                                   w = (IK - (1 + )(  (IK - )) + ) S -  GM eN                                                            (23)


We drop the last equation of the constraints above due to Walras' law. Combining with the normalization
  K
  k=1 wk      = 1, we have N + K equations solve for N + K variables Ski and wk .

   Equations (22) and (23) determine the nominal sale values for each sector and each country, as well

as the wage rates wk , k = 1, · · · , K . But unlike the closed economy case, now the sectoral and country

prices are not determined by production efficiency alone, because wage rates are endogenous. As a

result, relative prices across sectors and countries are generally affected by government spending. This

is equivalent to saying that the terms of trade is endogenously determined. The implication of this as

we see below is that the structure of the production network will generically affect the fiscal spending

multiplier in the open economy model.

   Following the approach of the previous section, the vector of log product prices across all sectors and

countries may be written as:



                                                p = -D(  ) -  + D((1 - )  w
                                                                          ^N )                                                           (24)
  15
       In particular,

                   1,1 , · · · , 1,N1 ,                          ···                                                     ···
                                                                                                                                    
                                                    0                            0                    G11        G21           GK 1
                             0            2,1 , · · · , 2,N2 ,   ···             0                    G12        G22     ···   GK 2 
            =                                                                             ,    GM   = .
                                                                                                                                    
                              .
                              .                      .
                                                     .            .
                                                                  .               .
                                                                                  .                               .       .     .
                                                                                                      .           .       .     .
                                                                                                                                    
                              .                      .            .               .                    .          .       .     . 
                             0                      0            ···   K,1 , · · · , K,NK             G1N        G2N     ···   GKN

                (1 - 1,1 ), · · · , (1 - 1,N1 ),                                                ···
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                          0                                               0
                                0                         (1 - 2,1 ), · · · , (1 - 2,N2 ), · · ·                          0           
              =
                                                                                                                                      
                                 .
                                 .                                         .
                                                                           .                      .
                                                                                                  .                       .
                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                      
                                 .                                         .                      .                       .           
                                0                                         0                     · · · (1 - K,1 ), · · · , (1 - K,NK )
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                 1, · · · , 1,       0       ···         0
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                N1
                                                   ···
                                                                                                                                  
                             1,1          2,1             K,1                  
                                                                               
                                                                                       0       1, · · · , 1, · · ·       0 
                                                                                                                                  
                             1,2          2,2      ···    K,2                                                                     
                           = .                                  , IK =                              N2
                                                                                                                                  
                                           .        .       .
                             .             .        .       .
                                                                                                                                  
                              .            .        .       .                          .
                                                                                       .             .
                                                                                                     .         .
                                                                                                               .          .
                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                  
                             1,N          2,N      ···    K,N                  
                                                                                       .             .         .          .       
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                       0             0       · · · 1 , · ·  · , 1
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                 NK

Here we have assumed that government in any country may spend in any other country or sector.


                                                                          18
where D = (I - (eN )  W)-1 .16

     From (22), (23) and (24) we can compute real GDP for country k as

                                                                            Nk
                                                                                 Ski (1 - ki ki )
                                                            GDPk =                      GDP
                                                                                                                                              (25)
                                                                           i=1
                                                                                      Pk

                   GDP (Comparing purchasing power if deflated by CPI P ). We can establish some
with GDP deflator Pk                                                   k

general results from the multi-country case. Note that as before in the case where ki =  and ki = 
                                                                                                                                      
(as well as ) is common across all sectors and countries, the columns of B each sum to                                            (1-)+(1-) .
                                                                      K
Using this, along with the normalization                              k=1 wk     = 1 we can state the following result,



Result 3. Given equal labour shares and production wedges across all sectors countries, the impact of

government spending on world nominal GDP is independent of the network composition. This holds for

both aggregate government spending as well as any individual sector-specific spending.

     To show this, use the two properties of B and the wage rates just noted. Then we can establish that

                                     K    Nk                                                         K      N
                                                                             (1 - )(1 +              m=1    j =1 Gmj )
                                               Ski (1 - ki ki ) =
                                                                                         (1 - ) + (1 - )
                                   k=1 i=1


Result 3 establishes that the irrelevance of the production network for aggregate world nominal fiscal

multipliers extends to the case where labour is immobile across countries. Even though individual wages

may be affected by country specific shocks, in the aggregate the production links across sectors and

countries have no implication for the world response.

     In the case of zero production wedges, the extension of Result 2 applies, whereby the government
                                                                                            
spending multiplier for aggregate nominal GDP is equal to                                  1+ ,   even if factor shares differ across countries

and sectors. But now it is important to distinguish nominal from real GDP, because in general movements

in government spending will affect the sectoral prices and therefore the CPI.

     Aside from this, Result 3 is relevant only for world aggregates. When we focus on individual country

GDP as defined by (25) the production network will generically affect the impact of government spending

    16                 ~ with 
         We define  = D,      ~ ki = (1 - ki ) ln(1 - ki ) + ki ln(ki ) + ln(ki ) + ki                            K      Nm
                                                                                                                                kimj ln(kimj ), and
                                                                                                                  m=1    j =1
^N  [ln w1 , · · · , ln w1 , ln w2 , · · · , ln w2 , · · · , ln wN , · · · , ln wN ] .
w
                  N1                     N2                          NK



                                                                                 19
on GDP, irrespective of the presence or absence of production wedges or the composition of factor shares.

The reason is clear; from (22) and (23), government spending shocks will generically impact on country

specific wage rates, which from (24) determine individual countries terms of trade. But as we show

below the response of wages and the terms of trade, and hence GDP, will be impacted by the structure

of domestic and international production networks.

   Example 2: A two-country economy with flexible wages.

   Let K = 2, Nk = 1 for k = 1, 2, k = 1
                                       2 , i =  for i = 1, · · · , 2. In addition, assume the production

network is characterized by a symmetric regular matrix and define  as the common share of non-

domestic inputs in production for each country with   1/2. Hence  represents both the production

network and the extent of cross-country production linkages. In addition, let the production distortion

 be common across the two countries. Government expends on domestic goods only.

   We can establish the following three results.

1. The domestic government expenditure multiplier is positive but falling in the size of the cross-country

production linkages. Define nominal sectoral value-added as Y1  S1 (1 - ),


                          dY1   1 (1 - )((1 - ) + 2(1 - (1 -  ))
                              =                                  >0
                          dG1   2             1 2


                                        d2 Y1    (1 - )
                                              =-        <0
                                       dG1 d      2 2

where 1 = ((1 - ) + (1 - )), 2 = 1 - (1 - 2 ).

   Note that nominal prices in a multi-country model may vary with government expenditure shocks.
                                                   dPk
Fortunately, we can verify in this example that    dG1 |G1 =0   = 0 with k = 1, 2. That is, consumer prices

don't respond to government expenditure shocks when evaluating at G1 = 0. Therefore, nominal GDP

is identical to real GDP when deflated by CPI.
                                                                              1-         1-
2. The fiscal multiplier on foreign GDP is negative (positive) if  <          2    ( >   2 ).   The foreign

multiplier is increasing in the size of cross-country production linkages.


                                dY2    1 (1 - )(1 -  - 2 )
                                    =-                     0
                                dG1    2       1 2




                                                    20
                                             d2 Y2   (1 - )
                                                   =        >0
                                            dG1 d     2 2

3. The fiscal multiplier on foreign GDP is negative (positive) as the domestic terms of trade appreciates

(deteriorates).
                                                                            P1
   To see this, note that in this example the terms of trade is just        P2 .   But from the pricing functions,
                               w1
this must be proportional to   w2 .   Then, given the normalization w1 + w2 = 1, the terms of trade improves

(deteriorates) as w1 rises (falls). In this example we can show that


                                         dw1   1 (1 -  - 2 )
                                             =               0
                                         dG1   2      2

   This example establishes that the sign of the cross-country government spending multiplier coincides

with the sign of the terms of trade response. Moreover, the production network is a critical feature of

the size of the domestic spending multiplier and the sign and size of the foreign multiplier.

   Example 3: A two-country economy with sticky wages.

   Now take an example where wages are sticky, and the two countries are in a monetary union. In
                                                       1
particular, assume that K = 2, Nk = 1, k =             2,   i =  for i = 1, · · · , 2. Let  represent the same

parameter as in Example 2. Assume also that the home country fiscal shock falls on home (foreign) goods

in proportion g  1 (or (1 - g )). In addition, since the monetary rule of the previous example would be

redundant with sticky nominal wages, we assume that monetary policy stabilizes nominal consumption.
                         K
Thus, we assume that     k=1 Pk Ck      is constant.

   Note that from equation (16), sticky wages in a monetary union imply sticky prices. Therefore,

nominal GDP equals real GDP when deflated by CPI in this example, and we can establish the following

results:

1. The own-country and foreign country multipliers for this example are

                                         dY1   (g (1 - ) + )
                                             =               >0
                                         dG1           2

                                      dY1   ((1 - g )(1 - ) + )
                                          =                     >0
                                      dG2               2

   Both the home and foreign country multipliers are strictly positive, so long as part of the home



                                                            21
spending falls on foreign goods (g < 1), and/or there are production linkages between countries ( > 0).

By contrast, when  = 0 and g = 1, the own (foreign) multiplier is unity (zero).

    The simple economics of this example captures the intuition that demand side factors are the critical

features of the fiscal spillover when wages, and hence relative prices do not respond to fiscal spending

shock.
                                                                                              1
2. The own (foreign) multiplier is increasing (decreasing) in production distortions when g > 2 .


                         d2 Y1    (1 - 2g )               d2 Y2     (1 - 2g )
                               =            < 0,                =-            > 0,
                        dG1 d      2 2                   dG1 d       2 2

    The key distinction between Example 2 and Example 3 is the absence of endogenous supply responses

in the spillover from fiscal spending across countries. We see that this difference represents the major

factor in computing quantitative estimates of fiscal spillovers in the Eurozone in the next section.



4    Evidence on international fiscal spillovers

    We first review some recent empirical and quantitative studies of fiscal spillovers. One result that

emerges from this literature is a discrepancy between some of the empirical studies, which find significant

spillovers, and quantitative DSGE models based mostly on trade linkages, which tend to find very small

spillovers.

    A considerable empirical literature has estimated fiscal policy spillovers with the European Union

and the Eurozone. Alcidi, M¨
                           a¨att¨
                                anen and Thirion (2016), define a fiscal spillover as the influence of

fiscal policy measures (such as taxes or government spending) in one country (source country) on another

(recipient country) country. Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2006) employ a two-block approach to

investigate the trade spillovers of fiscal policy in EU. In the first step, they estimate the response of output

to fiscal shocks in a panel VAR model (fiscal block). In the second step, they consider a dynamic version

of gravity model to estimate the effects of domestic output on bilateral exports (trade block). Combining

the estimates from both blocks, they are able to calculate the effect of fiscal shocks on bilateral exports

and thereby on foreign output. Their results indicate that fiscal spillovers are economically significant.

But the magnitude of spillovers varies with the size of the source country in which the fiscal shock

originates and with the intensity of trade between the source country and recipient countries. A fiscal

stimulus of 1% GDP in Germany leads to an average increase of 0.15% of foreign GDP for a spending

                                                      22
increase, and 0.05% for a tax cut. In contrast, a fiscal stimulus in Greece increases foreign GDP by an

average of 0.01% (0.005%) for a spending increase (a tax cut).

   Empirically, there is little consensus on how the real exchange rate responds to domestic fiscal shocks.

Kim and Roubini (2008) and Monacelli and Perotti (2010) find that the real exchange rate depreciates,

while Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2008a) report real exchange rate appreciation, though with a

delay. More recently, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2016), using high frequency data of U.S defense

spending, find that the exchange rate appreciates in response to spending announcements, but not to

actual fiscal outlays.

   B´
    enassy-Qu´
             er´
               e and Cimadomo (2006) examine the fiscal spillovers from Germany to the seven largest

European Union economies over the period 1971-2004, using a Factor Augmented VAR model. They find

that expansionary fiscal polices in Germany, especially tax cuts, have a positive effect on neighbouring

countries, but less so for remote ones.

   Using narrative data on fiscal adjustments identified by Pescatori, Leigh, Guajardo and Devries

(2011), Hebous and Zimmermann (2013a) find that the international transmission of fiscal consolidations

works mainly through trade linkages, rather than financial linkages. The reaction of the interest rate

to fiscal consolidations is insignificant, whereas the response of exports to foreign fiscal consolidations

is negative, particularly for European countries, although the U.S seems to be insulated from foreign

fiscal consolidations. Despite these empirical findings, model-based estimations tend to suggest a limited

scope of fiscal spillovers. Simulating four major macroeconomic models, Gros and Hobza (2001) find

that effect of fiscal spillovers is quite small. A government spending shock of 1% of GDP in Germany

has an average spillover effect in the whole euro area between -0.03% and +0.04% on impact. Similarly,

Attinasi, Lalik, Vetlov et al. (2017), simulating the consolidation episodes of 2010-2013 in euro area

countries in the New Multi-Country Model, find that the overall fiscal spillovers are limited.

   Using a multi-country model to evaluate the spillover effect of German fiscal stimulus plan for 2009

and 2010 on France and Italy, Cwik and Wieland (2011) find that spillover effects are negligible. For

Italy, the effect actually turns negative after one year. They argue that the negative effect is due to the

appreciation of the common currency euro following the fiscal expansion in Germany, which reduces the

competitiveness of member countries with respect to the rest of the world.

   Goujard (2016) find that the short-term effect of fiscal consolidation within a currency union is more

negative than between countries with flexible exchange rates. However, in the medium term, negative

                                                    23
spillovers become larger between countries with flexible exchange rates.

   Taking a simple analytical framework, Ivanova and Weber (2011) simulate the effect of actual fiscal

consolidation plans in 20 countries for years 2011 and 2012, using estimates of fiscal multipliers and

import elasticities from other studies. They find that aggregate spillovers through trade channels from

synchronized consolidation plans are quite small compared to the impact of domestic fiscal policy. How-

ever, for small open economies such as Ireland, Belgium, Netherlands and Austria, spillovers are rather

substantial.

   Favero, Giavazzi and Perego (2011) examine the effects of fiscal policy among OECD countries

controlling for country heterogeneity in the styles of fiscal policy (tax-based v.s. expenditure-based), fiscal

reaction functions (implied debt-deficit dynamics) and degrees of openness. Using a Global VAR model,

they find that international fiscal spillovers are important but the output response to fiscal consolidations

differ significantly across countries, ranging from expansionary to contractionary. Similarly, Hebous and

Zimmermann (2013a) also report notable heterogeneity in output dynamics across member countries in

the euro area following a fiscal shock.

   Another way to deal with heterogeneity in fiscal multipliers is to follow the approach of Dabla-Norris,

Dallari and Poghosyan (2017). They estimate a GVAR model using quarterly data on 10 Euro countries:

Germany, France, The Netherlands, Belgium Austria, Italy, Spain, Ireland, Finland and Portugal over

the period 1999-2016. With this approach, they can deal with country heterogeneity in the response to

the fiscal shock. They show that larger economies generate larger spillovers. Closer trade links between

countries (country of origin of the shock- country receiving the shock) imply as well higher spillovers.

Regressing the size of spillovers on pair of country's links, they show that trade links seems to matter

more than financial links to explain the size of spillovers. Fiscal spillovers are the highest when Germany

or France are the country originating the fiscal shock (cumulative spillovers higher than 1.4). Finally,

fiscal multipliers are positive and higher than 0.5 in Germany, France, the Netherlands, Italy and Ireland.

   In the subsequent analysis, we will compare our theoretical results on multipliers and spillovers to

some of these empirical estimates.




                                                      24
5        Application to World Input Output Database

     To the best of our knowledge, none of the above studies of fiscal spillovers have used detailed mea-

sures of European production networks to investigate the size and direction of fiscal spillovers. In this

section, we pursue this question using an application of the World Input Output Database (WIOD)

to the Eurozone. In particular, we explore the quantitative predictions of Eurozone fiscal spillovers by

implementing a mapping between the above multi-country model and the WIOD. The system (22) and

(23), along with (24), gives an integrated world economy consisting of K countries and Nk sectors per

country, with an equilibrium value of sectoral output levels, sectoral prices, and country specific wage

rates when prices and wages are flexible (similarly, the system (14)-(16) for sticky wages). This system

can be directly applied to the WIOD in order to calibrate the parameters of the production network,

private and government spending shares, labour shares, and relative country size. Given this calibration

we can explore the domestic and spillover effects of government spending shocks both in the aggregate

and the sectoral level.


5.1      WIOD description

     The WIOD is a time-series of world input output tables (WIOT) and Socio-Economic Accounts

which covers 43 countries over the period 2000-2014. The WIOT is an integrated system of input-output

tables for 56 sectors identically defined for all countries, expressed in current value US dollars. We focus

on the first 54 sectors only.17 The coverage is for 28 EU countries and 15 other major economies.

     The WIOD Socio Economic Accounts give sectoral gross output, value added, employment, labour

compensation and prices. The sectoral breakdown in the Socio Economic Accounts is identical to that

in the WIOT, and the two data bases can be combined to identify key parameters of the model.

     We focus on a data set of 11 Euro area countries, with the rest of the world (ROW) as a residual.

The focus on the Eurozone allows us to focus on the role of production networks in the transmission

of fiscal policy without having to take a stand on heterogeneity in monetary policy responses to fiscal

shocks. In addition, the Eurozone represents an integrated economic area within which intermediate

trading linkages are likely to be substantially greater than among other economies. Moreover, by using

    17
     The last two sectors in the WIOT are sector 55 "Activities of households as employers; undifferentiated goods- and
services-producing activities of households for own use" and sector 56 "Activities of extraterritorial organizations and
bodies", both of which account for a tiny fraction of gross output. We omit these two sectors due to data availability.


                                                          25
the time series of input output tables over the 2000-2014 period, we can investigate how the evolution

of production networks within the Eurozone has changed the pattern of fiscal spillovers implied by the

model.


5.2    Calibration

    To implement the equilibrium model defined by the system of equations given by (22)-(24) (or (14)-

(16)), we need to calibrate the intermediate input coefficients kimj , the labour share parameters 1 - ki ,

the spending parameters from preferences, kmj , the government spending shares, gkmj , the production

wedges ki , and the labour supply parameters k . Given the assumption of Cobb-Douglas production

and unit elasticity of substitution among consumption goods, all parameters can be directly measured

from the WIOD except for k when prices and wages are flexible.18

    Column ki, row mj in the WIOT Tables gives expenditure by sector i in country k on intermediate

inputs from sector j in country m. From the assumption of Cobb-Douglas production, the demand for

intermediate input mj by sector ki is Pmj Xkimj = ki kimj Pki Xki = ki kimj Ski . Dividing by the total
                                                                                                 Pmj Xkimj
demand for intermediate inputs (using homogeneity), we can write kimj =                    K       Nm             .   Doing
                                                                                           m=1     j =1 Pmj Xkimj

this for all countries and sectors gives us the transpose of the matrix W, following the notation from

section 2 above. Note that rows of W sum to unity.               19


    The WIOT also gives private consumption expenditure for each sector-country by each country

Pmj Ckimj . Our static model does not contain investment. To account for this, we add to private

consumption expenditure a share of gross fixed capital formation. To determine the private sector share

of gross fixed capital formation we use World Bank data, which gives for each country a decomposition of

gross fixed capital formation into private and public sectors. Again using the Cobb-Douglas specification,
                             Pmj Ckmj
we obtain kmj =        K       Nm            ,   where consumption is now measured including a share gross fixed
                       m=1     j =1 Pmj Ckmj

capital formation at the sectoral level.

    To compute government spending we use the column in the WIOT tables reporting final government

consumption expenditure by each country on each country-sector, and add to that the share of gross

  18
      In the Appendix, we depart from the assumption of Cobb-Douglas production and unit elasticity of substitution in
consumption, estimating elasticity parameters directly from the data for each country. The results are similar to those
below.
   19
      The WIOT tables include a measure for inventory adjustment by each country for each sector-country. To incorporate
this in our model, which lacks inventories, we add inventory adjustment to intermediate goods demand for each sector mj
in proportion to the share of demand coming from each country-sector ki.


                                                            26
fixed capital formation attributable to government. Let Gk represent the total nominal government

spending of country k , including government investment. Then from the WIOT matrix we can construct
                    Gkmj
the shares gkmj =    Gk ,   which describes the share of country k government expenditures going to sector

j in country m.

   Each parameter above can be calibrated for each year from 2000 to 2014 from the WIOD tables.

The composition of the input-output tables did change over this period, although, as shown below, the

changes did not fundamentally alter the predictions of the model for fiscal spillovers. Hence, we first

report the results using an average of all shares over the 2000-2014 period. In the discussion below, we

report how the predicted evolution of the effects of fiscal shocks changes year by year over the sample.

   Combining labour compensation from WIOD Socio-Economic Accounts wk lki with intermediate con-

sumption Xkimj Pmj , we can compute labour income shares and production wedges. Total expenditure

by firms in sector ki is
                                               K   Nm
                                       Uki               Xkimj Pmj + wk lki
                                              m=1 j =1

and total sales is (column `total output' at WIOT)

                                          K   Nm                   K                   K
                       Ski  Pki Xki                Pki Xmjki +           Pki Cmki +         Gmki
                                        m=1 j =1                   m=1                m=1


                                                                          wk lki
The sectoral labour income share is then defined as ki = 1 -               Uki .   We measure the production wedge

following the strategy of Bigio and La'O (2020). In particular, if the firm is profit maximizing and

competitive, in the absence of wedges, then sales should equal costs. Given this, the production wedge

can be inferred by the implied markup of sales over costs. Under this interpretation, the production
                                                           Uki
wedge implied by the model is defined as, ki =             Ski .   With a zero wedge in country-sector ki, we

have ki = 1. As we have shown in previous sections, parameter  can completely pin down the fiscal

multiplier in some special circumstances in section 3. We take  = 7 in the baseline model, implying the

own fiscal multiplier would be around /(1 + ) when prices and wages are flexible.

   The effects of fiscal spending shocks at the aggregate level is measured by the response of real GDP.

Real GDP is measured as nominal GDP divided by the GDP deflator, using value added per sector.

In particular, define RGDPk,t as real GDP for country k , and RGDP Dk,t as the GDP deflator. In




                                                         27
particular, we define
                                                                     GDPk,t
                                                  RGDPk,t =
                                                                    GDP Dk,t

where
                                        Nk                             Nk
                            GDPk,t =          Ski,t (1 - ki ki ) =           Pki,t Xki,t (1 - ki ki ),
                                        i=1                            i=1

and
                                                           Nk
                                                           i=1 Pki,t Xki,t (1 - ki ki )
                                      GDP Dk,t =           Nk
                                                           i=1 Pki,0 Xki,t (1 - ki ki )

where t = 0 represents the `base year' for evaluation. In practice, we will measure changes in GDP using

the pre-shock prices as the base year prices.

   We can also measure GDP using a CPI based measure. This is equivalent to a PPP adjusted measure

of GDP. In particular, we define GDP CP Ik,t as follows

                                      Nk                                                        K   Nm           kmj
                                      i=1 Pki,t Xki,t (1   - ki ki )                                     Pmj,t
                 GDP CP Ik,t =                                         , with Pk,t =
                                                 Pk,t                                                    kmj
                                                                                            m=1 j =1


   One clear feature of the input output tables is the degree of home bias in spending patterns. This

can be seen clearly in the country-specific shares in Figure 1. The Figure shows, for each country, the

share of total government and private sector spending falling on domestic sectors, and in addition, the

share of total intermediate input demand falling on domestic sectors.20 For all countries, government

spending is heavily biased towards the domestic sector, with a share in excess of 90 percent. Private

sector spending is less home biased than government spending, but the share in all countries exceeds

70 percent. Intermediate input usage is less domestically biased, but for the large European economies

intermediate inputs still displays over 70 percent home bias.

   Figure 2 shows how the home bias in government spending and intermediate production network has

evolved over the sample. Overall, across countries there is very little change in the strong domestic bias

of government spending. By contrast, the production network has become more international, while still

remaining heavily domestically biased.

   An alternative perspective on the degree of production linkages across countries can be seen from

network measures of centrality. Figure 3 presents a network centrality measure based on the number


  20                                                                           Nk
       The latter share is computed, for each country k, as k = meani (        j =1   kikj ).


                                                               28
of incoming edges to each node, the in-degree centrality, for the year of 2000, 2007 and 2014. This

in-degree centrality measure lies between 0 and 1. A zero means that the node is not connected to any

other, while a 1 means that the node is connected to all the other nodes of the networks. Figure 3 shows

that the 54 sectors of the 11 countries of the Eurozone become increasingly connected between 2000 and

2014. The 2014 yellow curve depicts a double peak compared to 2000 and 2007, suggesting that the

number of sectors with a high in-degree centrality has largely increased between 2007 and 2014, with an

important number of sectors between 0.96 to 1. However, the home bias measure above indicates that

this large number of very "central" sectors hides low weights of input-output matrix coefficients at the

cross country level. In Appendix A, Figure A-2 illustrates this more clearly in the form of a `heatmap'

of sectoral linkages across sectors and countries.

    Figure 4 shows the model equilibrium levels of GDP by country for all 11 countries, plus the rest

of the world. Note that GDP levels are not directly calibrated, but are determined by the equilibrium

of the model given government and private sector spending patterns, as well as the production matrix

W. In this case, we see that the model does a good job in accounting for relative GDP levels among

countries.


5.3    Fiscal Spillovers in the Baseline Model with Flexible Wages

    Using the flexible price and wage version of the model, Table 1 shows the response of the two

alternative measures of real GDP growth to a shock to German government spending approximately

equal to one percent of German GDP. The Table reports in each case the responses using the baseline

model, as well as a re-calibrated version of the model where all cross-country production linkages are

removed.     21


    The response of German GDP indicates that the own multiplier is approximately 0.9 for GDP. This

falls slightly in the case of zero cross country production linkages. But the Table also indicates that in

the baseline model, the spillover effects to GDP are completely negligible. The highest spillover is to

Austria, where a one percent of GDP spending increase in Germany increases Austrian GDP growth

by only .05 of one percent. In the absence of cross-country production linkages, the fiscal spillover is

effectively zero. These results indicate that the cross-country production network does increase the fiscal

  21
     In this case, we rescale the within-country input-output production function for all countries, so that the production
function is constant returns to scale in within-country intermediates and labour.


                                                            29
                           Country       gY    gY,nn    gY cpi   gY cpi,nn   gY,=1
                            Aut         0.05    0.01    0.07       0.08        0.05
                             Bel        0.01    0.00    0.03       0.03        0.01
                             Ger        0.83    0.79    0.88       0.83        0.90
                             Esp        0.01    0.00    0.01       0.01        0.01
                             Fin        0.00   -0.01    0.02       0.02        0.00
                             Fra        0.00   -0.01    0.01       0.02        0.00
                             Grc        0.01    0.00    0.01       0.01        0.00
                             Irl       -0.01   -0.03    0.03       0.03       -0.02
                             Ita        0.01    0.00    0.01       0.01        0.01
                             Nld        0.01    0.01    0.03       0.03        0.01
                             Prt        0.01    0.00    0.01       0.01        0.01

Table 1: The table shows the response of real GDP growth to a one-percent of GDP increase in German
Government spending. The first and second column shows real GDP measured using the GDP deflator,
respectively with and without international production connections. The third and fourth columns show
the same responses, but using the CPI deflated measure of real GDP. The final column shows the response
of GDP (using the GDP deflator), in the absence of production distortions.


spillover across countries, but quantitatively the impact of the production network is negligible.

   When GDP is measured in terms of the CPI, the domestic response is somewhat smaller, and spillover

effects larger. When measured in terms of CPI, each country gains from a lower price of German goods

(see below). But again, the overall effects are still very small. The final column in the Table 1 shows the

eliminating production distortions (setting ki = 1 for all ki) has little impact on the model prediction

for the impact of fiscal spending shocks. Appendix B shows that the results are very similar when we

simulate a spending shock in France or Italy; the own effects are substantial, but the spillover effects are

very small, whether or not there are cross-country production linkages.

   Table 2 gives some further insight into the results of Table 1. We show the response of national

PPI's and employment to the German government spending shock. Prices in Germany fall sharply, and

employment rises. By contrast, prices in other countries rise, and employment falls slightly. The key

factor in this response is the income effect on labour supply - German consumers have a strong negative

income effect as taxes rise to finance the spending increase. This increases labour supply, driving down

the wage and German producer prices, while increasing employment. In the rest of Europe prices increase

slightly, and employment falls by a small amount.




                                                       30
                                   Country      gRER     gRER,nn        gL     gL,nn
                                    Aut          0.03      0.02       -0.01    -0.01
                                     Bel         0.04      0.03       -0.01    -0.01
                                     Ger        -0.60     -0.22        0.99     0.90
                                     Esp         0.03      0.02       -0.01     0.00
                                     Fin         0.09      0.07       -0.02    -0.01
                                     Fra         0.04      0.03       -0.01    -0.01
                                     Grc         0.06      0.05       -0.01    -0.01
                                     Irl         0.13      0.12       -0.03    -0.02
                                     Ita         0.02      0.02        0.00     0.00
                                     Nld         0.02     -0.01        0.00     0.00
                                     Prt        -0.01     -0.01        0.00     0.00

Table 2: The table shows the response of the real exchange rate and employment to a one-percent of
GDP increase in German Government spending. The first and second column shows the growth in the
real exchange rate, respectively with and without international production connections. The third and
fourth columns show the same responses for employment growth.


5.4    Fiscal Spillovers in the Sticky Wage Model

    We have seen that in the baseline model, firstly, fiscal spillovers are small, and secondly, cross-country

production networks have almost no relevance for fiscal spillovers. Is this result robust to alternative

formulations of the model? We saw also that a key mechanism governing the response to fiscal shocks

in the baseline model is the response of labour supply. But evidence from the Eurozone suggests that

wages are slow to respond to shocks. With sticky wages, labour supply plays no short run role in the

response to a fiscal shock. To see how this alternative specification affects the results, we now analyze

the fiscal shock in the sticky wage version of the model.

    Now, Table 3 illustrates the results of a fiscal shock in Germany, measured in the same manner

as before, but assuming nominal wages are sticky, and monetary policy targets the value of nominal

consumption in the Eurozone, as described in section 2 above.22 The Table shows both the response

in the model using the calibrated international production network, as well as the case where there are

no international production linkages, recalibrating the model as described in above. We also show the

implied results when government spending in Germany falls only on domestic sectors, recalibrating the

model in a similar way.

    The most striking feature of Table 3 is the very large cross-country spillovers of fiscal policy shocks,

  22
     It is assumed that the rest of the world follows a similar monetary policy, targeting rest of the world consumption,
and the exchange rate between the Eurozone and the rest of the world is flexible. Different assumptions about the rest of
the world monetary policy make little differences to the results of the Table


                                                           31
while at the same time the substantial fall in the own country multiplier. For a one percent of GDP

fiscal expansion in Germany, German GDP grows by 0.53 percent (indicating a multiplier of about 0.5).

But the response of all other country's GDP is substantial, particularly relative to the baseline case

with flexible wages. The spillover effects range from 0.18 percent in Italy to 0.27 percent in Ireland. By

contrast with the flexible price and wage version of the model, these spillovers are in the range estimated

by Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2006).

    The key difference from the baseline case is the predominance of the demand channel of fiscal spend-

ing. In the baseline case, the main response to fiscal shocks is supply driven - through movements in

labour supply. But with sticky wages, and profit maximizing firms, prices are not directly affected by

fiscal shocks - thus the main response is through demand effects.            23   In combination with the monetary

rule which targets nominal consumption, this implies that a fiscal shock in Germany diffuses throughout

the Eurozone, raising output in all countries.

    A second result from Table 3 concerns the importance of the cross-country production network. The

second column shows the response to the same sized shock, but assuming the absence of international

production networks. In this case, the own country multiplier is increased by fifty percent, but the cross

country demand effects are much less important, and the spillover effects from the German fiscal shock

are substantially lower. Hence, the production network plays a key role in the cross country propagation

of fiscal shocks in the environment where the demand channel is predominant, i.e. in the case with sticky

wages.

    But the table also shows that the pattern of government spending is important. Holding the in-

ternational production network constant, a redirection of government spending towards only domestic

sectors raises the domestic multiplier almost as much as does the eliminating of international production

networks, and at the same time reduces international spillovers in the same dimension. Interestingly,

even though government spending is substantially biased toward domestic goods in the data, the combi-

nation of government spending spillovers to foreign goods and an international production network lead

to significant spillovers in the case of sticky wages, where demand shocks play a predominant role.

    These results are based on a model calibrated to the average WIOT and Socioeconomic Accounts

  23
     It is not quite true that prices are constant. Because the model includes the 'rest of the world' (ROW), and assumes
that monetary policy in ROW targets nominal consumption, in fact the nominal exchange rate between the Eurozone
and the ROW will depreciate. This raises prices of ROW goods in the Eurozone. This adjustment is incorporated in the
responses described in Table 3. But in fact these adjustments are very minor.


                                                           32
over the 2000-2014 period. But there have been some changes in the distribution of the shares over this

time. The overall pattern of international production network connections increased, as shown in Figure

3 above. To explore how these changes affect the quantitative predictions of the model for spillovers,

we show the evolution of fiscal responses when the model is calibrated separately for each year in the

2000-2014 sample.

    Figure 5 shows the time variation in model predictions for the response to a fiscal spending shock in

Germany when the model is calibrated separately year by year to the corresponding WIOD. The domestic

spending multiplier and the predicted spillovers vary somewhat over the sample, but for the most part

remain at the same orders of magnitude as reported in Table 3. The Figure also reports the implied

responses if the cross-country production network was held constant at the 2000 value. The striking

feature of this is that it makes very little difference to the quantitative predictions for fiscal spillovers.

While the production network is quantitatively very important for the magnitude of spillovers (as shown

in Table 3), changes in the network over the sample period make little difference to the quantitative size

of spillovers.

    Figure 6 presents a similar comparison, but now exploring how changes in the composition of govern-

ment spending make a difference to the predictions of the model. In this case, we see that the domestic

spending multiplier would have remained larger, and the international spillover effects would have been

smaller, had the composition of German government spending been frozen at the 2000 value. This is

particularly true for the middle years of the sample. Figure 7 helps to explain this. The home bias in

German government spending fell significantly towards the middle of the sample, and then rose again

over the end of the sample.


5.5    Comparing the model with empirical estimates

    How do the spillovers from the sticky wage model compare with those of empirical estimates described

in section above? We focus on estimates from Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2006) and Dabla-Norris,

Dallari and Poghosyan (2017), who provide empirical measures of spillovers for the countries used in our

calibrated model. In each case, the comparison is one where there is a one percent of GDP fiscal shock

in the origin country - we use three countries as originators - Germany, France, and Italy. The spillover

measures are equivalent to the percent of GDP responses in the neighbouring countries.

    Figure 8 shows that for a shock to German government spending both the own multipliers and the

                                                     33
                                     Country       gY    gY,nn    gY,G    gY,=1
                                      Aut         0.20   0.09     0.11     0.23
                                       Bel        0.20   0.09     0.11     0.23
                                       Ger        0.53   0.80     0.74     0.45
                                       Esp        0.19   0.08     0.09     0.22
                                       Fin        0.23   0.13     0.13     0.26
                                       Fra        0.20   0.09     0.09     0.23
                                       Grc        0.21   0.11     0.11     0.24
                                       Irl        0.27   0.17     0.09     0.30
                                       Ita        0.18   0.08     0.10     0.21
                                       Nld        0.17   0.05     0.10     0.20
                                       Prt        0.16   0.06     0.09     0.18

Table 3: The table shows the response of real GDP growth to a one-percent of GDP increase in
German Government spending when nominal wages are sticky in all countries. The first and second
column shows real GDP measured using the GDP deflator, respectively with and without international
production connections. The third column shows the same responses, but assuming that all government
spending in Germany is targeted towards domestic sectors only. The final column shows the response in
the absence of production distortions.


spillover multipliers are in the range of empirical estimates, and mostly in between the estimates of

Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2006) and Dabla-Norris, Dallari and Poghosyan (2017)                   24 .   Some of

the spillovers from the model are somewhat larger than estimated from the data (e.g. Spain, France and

Finland), while others are smaller (Ireland, Netherlands), but on average the predictions of the model

are quite close to those of the empirical estimates for Germany.

    Figure 9 shows the same comparison for a French government spending shock of 1 percent of GDP.

The two key features of this Figure are a) the spillovers from the data are substantially smaller than

those from the German shock (except for Ireland), and b), the model matches very well the size of the

spillovers, since the spillovers from France in the model are smaller than those from Germany.

    Finally, Figure 10 shows the effect of a model generated shock to Italian government spending and

compares this with the empirical estimates. Both the model and the data predict substantially smaller

spillover effects than those of Germany or France, but again, the model predictions are very close to

those of the data.




  24
    Beetsma, Giuliodori and Klaassen (2006) do not provide an estimate of the own multiplier for Germany, so we use the
multiplier from Blanchard and Perotti (2002) , which uses a similar identification approach.


                                                          34
6     Government expenditures and input linkages with other sectors

    So far we have only looked at aggregate responses to fiscal spending shocks. We now turn to more

detailed sectoral responses, both domestic and cross-country. This will clearly depend on a) the sector

which receives most of the government spending, and b) the linkages, both domestic and international,

between these sectors and other sectors.

    In this vein, we first explore which sectors a government spends on most and how these sectors

are linked with other sectors in the rest of the economy. Figure 12 shows that the governments in

the Eurozone have a similar expenditure pattern. Overall government spending is highly concentrated

in a small number of sectors. Three sectors constitute the bulk of government spending: sector 51

"Public administration and defence, compulsory social security", sector 52 "Education" and sector 53

"Human health and social work activities". Other sectors which receive significant but smaller shares

are: sector 30 "Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles", sector 47 "Scientific research

and development" and sector 54 "Other service activities". These sectors in total account for a very

large fraction of total government expenditures.

    Figure 13 looks at the correspondence between German government spending in the Eurozone, and

the sectoral output responses in each sector, country by country. Although the sectoral spending shares

of German government spending outside Germany are very small, there is a close correspondence between

spending shares and output responses, as would be expected. In particular, sector 12 ("Manufacture of

basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations") in many Eurozone countries receives

a significant share of government spending from Germany.


6.1   Sectoral linkages of fiscal responses

    We now develop an empirical strategy to explore the impacts of German fiscal shocks at the sectoral

level, and ask how this depends on the production linkages across sectors. Our approach follows closely

the method of Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015).

    Following the definitions of Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015), we define two ratios

                   Expendituremj ki                              Expenditurekimj         Umj
          akimj                     = ki kimj ,         akimj                    = amjki
                    Expenditureki                                 Expenditureki          Uki




                                                   35
where akimj reflects the propagation of shocks from sector mj to sector ki, while akimj captures the

propagation of shocks from sector ki to sector mj . We write the overall downstream effect of shock

propagation as D = (I - A)-1 , with A  (eN )  W. The overall upstream effect of shock propagation

as D = (I - A)-1 , with A  A  (eN U )  /(U eN ), where U is a column vector for sectoral total

expenditures.

   We define two measures for downstream and upstream propagation of shocks:


                         Downstreamki,t =          (Input%ki,mj,t-1 - 1mj =ki ) Gc,mjt
                                             m,j


where Input%ki,mj,t-1  dkimj,t-1 , d is an element of matrix D and 1mj =ki is an indicator function which

equals one if mj = ki.



                         U pstreamki,t =         (Output%ki,mj,t-1 - 1mj =ki ) Gc,mjt
                                           m,j

                                      ^ is an element of matrix D.
where Output%ki,mj,t-1  dkimj,t-1 and d

   In order to look at the sectoral responses to fiscal shocks, we first need to identify exogenous fiscal

spending. We follow the approach of Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and use quarterly data to estimate

government expenditure shocks in Germany. Figure 11 shows the time line of estimated government

expenditure shocks.

   We then aggregate the shocks to the annual frequency, since the WIOD data is annual. Using

the estimated fiscal shocks, the matrix of government spending weights and upstream and downstream

measures country by country from WIOD, we construct a country-sector-time panel of government

spending shocks from the source countries and take use of the following specification,


                 Yki,t = 0 Gc,ki,t + 1 U pstreamki,t + 2 Downstreamki,t + Zt + uki,t                   (26)


where Yki,t can be sectoral real value added and Gc,ki,t is the constructed spending shock to country

k , sector i, at time t from the center country c. The Gc,ki,t variable is constructed from the final public

absorptions from the WIOD, which gives the share of spending of c country aggregate government




                                                       36
spending that is spent on sector i, country k good in time t. Call this share gc,ki,t . Then


                                           Gc,ki,t = gc,ki,t-1 Gc,t


where Gc,t is the aggregate spending shock in the centre country. 0 is a measure of the spillover

multiplier at the sectoral level. 1 captures the upstream effects from all other sectors (and countries),

while 2 captures the downstream effects. Zt includes controls and country, sector and time fixed effects.

   Note that we only have demand side shocks in our model. In the closed economy with Cobb-Douglas

specifications, we show in section 3.1 that product prices don't respond to government expenditure

shocks. The downstream effect will disappear 2 = 0 since the government expenditure doesn't change

product price and input costs for the downstream sector but changes demand for intermediate inputs

in that sector. Consequently, government expenditure shocks work upstream only, captured by 1 .

Following the closed economy model, we still take use of Downstreamki,t and U pstreamki,t in a multi-

country environment. When labour is immobile across borders, government expenditures are able to

change the labor costs wk,t , which in turn change country-sectoral product prices and terms of trade

across countries. Therefore, government expenditures have both upstream and downstream effects.

   We do the following two exercises. First, we construct variables on both sides of specification (26)

based on the WIOD directly. We use labour income distribution across country sectors, the input-output

table, sectoral expenses on intermediate inputs, and government expenditure distribution in year t - 1 to

construct upstream and downstream measures on the RHS of specification (26). The LHS of (26) uses

sectoral real value-added from the WIOD. Second, we construct the model counterparts of specification

(26). Given the calibration and government expenditure shocks, we solve the model and compute the

change of value-added for each country sector, Yki,t and the RHS variables of specification (26).

   Table 4 reports three sets of regression results for specification (26). The results in columns labeled

'Data' are obtain directly from the WIOD, while results from `Flexible Wages' and `Sticky Wages' are

obtained from the corresponding model simulations. Results from both the model and data show that

German government expenditure shocks can directly boost not only domestic sectoral value-added but

also foreign sectoral value-added on average. The effect of government expenditure on domestic economy

is stronger than its spillover to other countries. The production network plays an important role in

affecting the direction of shock propagation. The results state that government expenditure shocks work


                                                     37
                    Table 4: Production network         and government expenditures
                                    Data                    Flexible Wages         Sticky Wages
       Variable                (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)      (5)          (6)
       Gov-shock            0.201*** 0.211**            0.409*** 1.259*** 0.240***         1.256***
                             (3.962)    (2.183)           (8.767)    (19.680)   (7.053)    (19.668)
       Upstream             0.691***     0.608*         0.094*** 0.460**       0.066***     0.381*
                             (3.663)    (1.653)           (5.951)     (2.246)   (4.474)     (1.869)
       Downstream          -2.294*** -4.085**           0.304***       -0.743 -0.532***      -0.684
                            (-3.196)    (-2.228)         (11.164) (-1.406) (-19.445)       (-1.304)
       Constant             0.111***     0.048             0.000       -0.008 -0.006***      -0.001
                            (13.192)    (1.345)           (0.791)    (-0.811) (-19.255)    (-0.113)
       Country FE             YES                          YES                   YES
       Year FE                YES         YES              YES          YES      YES          YES
       Sector FE              YES         YES              YES          YES      YES          YES
       Adjusted R-squared     0.531       0.456            0.219       0.582     0.588        0.546
       Observations           6,402        591             6,404        583      6,403         583
       Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. The odd column (1),
       (3) and (5) are for the whole sample of Euro-11 (the rest of world is excluded from the regression
       analysis). The even column (2), (4) and (6) are for Germany only. The first two columns report
       regression results based on the data, the following two columns (3) and (4) are for the model with
       flexible wages and the last two columns are for the model with sticky wages. Gov-shock is for
       government expenditure shocks and FE denotes the fixed effect. Both the model and data are
       censored at the top and bottom 1% of total observations for sectoral real value-added. All of
       regressions are weighted by sectoral sales.


upstream positively but work downstream negatively. Higher government expenditure increases demand

for goods produced by sector ki, for instance. Firms in sector ki expand their output by hiring a higher

amount of intermediate inputs. Consequently, gross output and value-added rise in the upstream sectors

along the production network. On the other hand, higher demand for goods in sector ki may drive up

the equilibrium good price Pki and labour cost wk . The rise of input costs faced by the downstream

sectors would lead to lower employment and production, and consequently lower value-added in the

downstream sectors.



7    Conclusion

    This paper analyzes the impact of fiscal shocks on domestic and foreign productions in a model with

production network. Using a simple theoretical setting, we show that, in a closed economy, neither the

production network structure nor the sectoral composition of fiscal spending are relevant for the aggregate

government spending multiplier. By contrast, in a multi-country model, the production network is



                                                      38
always relevant for the response to fiscal spending. In the flexible price and wage version of the model,

the response to fiscal shocks depends crucially on the movements in the terms of trade across countries.

With sticky wages, the production network itself matters directly for the way in which shocks are

channeled across sectors and countries.

   We calibrate the model using the World Input Output Database (WIOD) for the Eurozone countries

over the period of 2000-2014 and consider German government expenditure shocks. In the model with

fully flexible wages and prices, supply and demand channels in response to fiscal shocks tend to work

against one another making aggregate spillovers very small. By contrast, when nominal wages are sticky,

spillovers working solely through the demand channel can be large, and certainly within the range of

empirical estimates of fiscal spillovers in the Eurozone. Moreover, in this case the network linkages

among countries have first order effects on the response to fiscal shocks. When we solve a recalibrated

version of the model shutting down the international production network, the implied fiscal spillovers

are reduced by more than two-thirds.

   We then explore the diffusion of fiscal shocks at the sectoral level, both within and across countries.

We measure German fiscal policy shocks using the SVAR identification procedure of Blanchard and

Perotti (2002), and sectoral demand shocks using the approach of Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2015).

We find that government expenditures have both significant upstream and downstream effects when

these links are measured by the direction of sectoral production linkages.




                                                   39
Figure 1: Shares of government spending, private sector spending, intermediate input spending falling
on domestic sectors, listed by country.


                                                 40
Figure 2: Shares of government spending and intermediate input spending falling on domestic sectors,
by year, averaged over countries.


                                                41
                        45
                                                                       2000
                                                                       2007
                        40                                             2014


                        35


                        30
 Kernel Estimated pdf




                        25


                        20


                        15


                        10


                         5


                         0
                         0.75   0.8   0.85      0.9       0.95   1            1.05
                                             In-Degrees



Figure 3: A centrality measure of production network for the Euro zone over time.




                                              42
Figure 4: Model predictions for GDP levels, compared with measured relative GDP.



                                      43
Figure 5: Model predictions for GDP responses to a German government spending shock equal to 1
percent of GDP, evaluated year by year based on WIOD data year calibrations. The blue line uses the
WIOD directly. The Red line shows the predictions when the international production network is held
constant at 2000 values.




                                                44
Figure 6: Model predictions for GDP responses to a German government spending shock equal to 1
percent of GDP, evaluated year by year based on WIOD data year calibrations. The blue line uses
the WIOD directly. The Red line shows the predictions when the composition of German government
spending is held constant at 2000 values.




                                              45
Figure 7: The evolution of home bias in German government spending over the 2000-2014 period.
                                             46
Figure 8: Comparing spillovers in the model versus empirical estimates for Germany.




 Figure 9: Comparing spillovers in the model versus empirical estimates for France.

                                        47
Figure 10: Comparing Spillovers in the model versus empirical estimates for Italy.




                                          Government expenditure shocks in Germany
     0.80%



     0.60%



     0.40%



     0.20%



     0.00%
              1999   2000   2001   2002   2003    2004    2005   2006   2007    2008     2009    2010   2011   2012    2013   2014   2015   2016   2017

     -0.20%



     -0.40%



     -0.60%



     -0.80%



     -1.00%



     -1.20%

                                                 egt-t1-g2-a      egt-t1-g2-b          egt-t2-g2-a       egt-t2-g2-b




               Figure 11: The estimated German fiscal expenditure shocks.



                                                                               48
49




     Figure 12: Government expenditure shares in domestic sectors in the Euro 11 countries. Sector code can be found in the WIOD.
Figure 13: German government expenditure shares by sector in each country (right axis %) and sectoral
growth rate in response to a German government spending shock (left axis %)




                                                 50
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pablo D. Azar (2020) `Endogenous Production Networks.' Econometrica
  88(1), 33­82

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2017) `Microeconomic Origins of
  Macroeconomic Tail Risks.' American Economic Review 107(1), 54­108

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr (2015) `Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Em-
  pirical Exploration.' In `NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, Volume 30' NBER Chapters (National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc) pp. 276­335

Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) `The Net-
  work Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.' Econometrica 80(5), 1977­2016

Alcidi, C, N M¨
              a¨att¨
                   anen, and G Thirion (2016) `Cross-country spillover effects and fiscal policy coordi-
  nation in emu'

Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Yuta Takahashi (2020) `Universal Gravity.' Journal of Political
  Economy 128(2), 393­433

Amendola, Adalgiso, Mario Di Serio, Matteo Fragetta, and Giovanni Melina (2020) `The euro-area
  government spending multiplier at the effective lower bound.' European Economic Review

Anderson, James E., and Eric Van Wincoop (2003) `Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
  Puzzle.' American Economic Review 93(1), 170­192

Atalay, Enghin (2017) `How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?' American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 9(4), 254­280

Attinasi, Maria Grazia, Magdalena Lalik, Igor Vetlov et al. (2017) `Fiscal spillovers in the euro area a
  model-based analysis.' Working Paper Series 2040, European Central Bank, March

Auerbach, Alan J, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012a) `Measuring the output responses to fiscal policy.'
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 1­27

Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012b) `Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy.'
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 1­27

Auerbach, Alan J, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2016) `Effects of fiscal shocks in a globalized world.' IMF
  Economic Review 64(1), 177­215

Auerbach, Alan, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Daniel Murphy (2020) `Local Fiscal Multipliers and Fiscal
  Spillovers in the USA.' IMF Economic Review 68(1), 195­229

Baqaee, David Rezza, and Emmanuel Farhi (2019) `The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic
  Shocks: Beyond Hulten's Theorem.' Econometrica 87(4), 1155­1203

                                                  51
  (2020) `Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium.' The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  135(1), 105­163

Basu, Susanto (1995) `Intermediate goods and business cycles: Implications for productivity and welfare.'
  American Economic Review 85(3), 512­31

Beetsma, Roel, Massimo Giuliodori, and Franc Klaassen (2006) `Trade spill-overs of fiscal policy in the
  european union: a panel analysis.' Economic policy 21(48), 640­687

  (2008a) `The effects of public spending shocks on trade balances and budget deficits in the european
  union.' Journal of the European Economic Association 6(2-3), 414­423

Beetsma, Roel, Massimo Giuliodori, and Franc Klaassen (2008b) `The Effects of Public Spending Shocks
  on Trade Balances and Budget Deficits in the European Union.' Journal of the European Economic
  Association 6(2-3), 414­423

B´
 enassy-Qu´
          er´
            e, Agn`
                  es, and Jacopo Cimadomo (2006) `Changing patterns of domestic and cross-border
  fiscal policy multipliers in europe and the us.' Working Papers 2006-24, CEPII research center, De-
  cember

Bigio, Saki, and Jennifer La'O (2020) `Distortions in production networks.' Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 135, 2187­2253

Blanchard, Olivier, and Robert Perotti (2002) `An empirical characterization of the dynamic effects of
  changes in government spending and taxes on output.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1329­1368

Bouakez, Hafedh, Emanuela Cardia, and Francisco J. Ruge-Murcia (2009) `The Transmission Of Mone-
  tary Policy In A Multisector Economy.' International Economic Review 50(4), 1243­1266

Bouakez, Hafedh, Omar Rachedi, and Santoro Emiliano (2018) `Sectoral Heterogeneity, Production
  Networks, and the Effects of Government Spending.' Technical Report

Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar (2008) `Trade, production sharing, and the interna-
  tional transmission of business cycles.' Journal of Monetary Economics 55(4), 775­795

Cacciatore, Matteo, and Nora Traum (2020) `Trade Flows and Fiscal Multipliers.' NBER Working Papers
  27652, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, August

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2017a) `Distortions and the structure of the
  world economy.' Working Paper 23332, National Bureau of Economic Research, April

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Luca David Opromolla, Fernando Parro, and Alessandro Sforza (2017b) `Goods
  and Factor Market Integration: A Quantitative Assessment of the EU Enlargement.' NBER Working
  Papers 23695, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, August
                  `
Cloyne, James S., Oscar Jord`
                            a, and Alan M. Taylor (2020) `Decomposing the Fiscal Multiplier.' NBER
  Working Papers 26939, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, April

                                                   52
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Gernot J. Muller (2013) `Multilateral Economic Cooperation and the Inter-
  national Transmission of Fiscal Policy.' In `Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic
  Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century' NBER Chapters (National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc) pp. 257­297

Cwik, Tobias, and Volker Wieland (2011) `Keynesian government spending multipliers and spillovers in
  the euro area.' Economic Policy 26(67), 493­549

Dabla-Norris, Era, Pietro Dallari, and Tigran Poghosyan (2017) `Fiscal spillovers in the euro area:
  Letting the data speak.' Technical Report

di Giovanni, Julian, and Galina B Hale (2020) `Stock Market Spillovers via the Global Production
  Network: Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy.' CEPR Discussion Papers 15404, C.E.P.R. Discussion
  Papers, October

Dong, Feng, and Yi Wen (2019) `Long and Plosser meet Bewley and Lucas.' Journal of Monetary
  Economics 102(C), 70­92

Dupor, Bill (1999) `Aggregation and irrelevance in multi-sector models.' Journal of Monetary Economics
  43(2), 391­409

Favero, Carlo, Francesco Giavazzi, and Jacopo Perego (2011) `Country heterogeneity and the interna-
  tional evidence on the effects of fiscal policy.' IMF Economic Review 59(4), 652­682

Flynn, Joel P, Christina Patterson, and John Sturm (2020) `Fiscal policy in a networked economy.'
  Working Paper, University of Chicago, August

Gabaix, Xavier (2011) `The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.' Econometrica 79(3), 733­772

Giovanni, Julian Di, and Andrei A. Levchenko (2010) `Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
  Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement.' American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2), 95­
  124

  (2012) `Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular Economies.' Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 120(6), 1083 ­ 1132

Goujard, Antoine (2016) `Cross-country spillovers from fiscal consolidations.' Fiscal Studies

Gros, Daniel, and Alexandr. Hobza (2001) `Fiscal policy spillovers in the euro area: Where are they?'
  CEPS Working Document No. 176, November 2001

Hagedorn, Marcus, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman (2019) `The Fiscal Multiplier.' NBER Working
  Papers 25571, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, February

Hebous, Shafik, and Tom Zimmermann (2013a) `Estimating the effects of coordinated fiscal actions in
  the euro area.' European Economic Review 58, 110­121

                                                   53
Heise, Sebastian, and Tommaso Porzio (2018) `Why do spatial wage gaps persist? evidence from the
  enduring divide between east and west germany.' Working paper, University of California, San Diego

Hulten, Charles R. (1978) `Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs.' Review of Economic Studies
  45(3), 511­518

Huo, Zhen, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2019) `International Comovement in the
  Global Production Network.' NBER Working Papers 25978, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, June

Huo, Zhen, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2020) `Utilization-Adjusted TFP Across
  Countries: Measurement and Implications for International Comovement.' CEPR Discussion Papers
  14438, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers, February

Ivanova, Anna, and Mr Sebastian Weber (2011) Do fiscal spillovers matter? number 11-211 (Interna-
  tional Monetary Fund)

Jones, Charles I. (2011) `Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development.'
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(2), 1­28

Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini (2008) `Twin deficit or twin divergence? fiscal policy, current
  account, and real exchange rate in the us.' Journal of international Economics 74(2), 362­383

Lim, Kevin (2018) `Endogenous production networks and the business cycle.' Working paper, Unviersity
  of Toronto

Luo, Shaowen (2020) `Propagation of Financial Shocks in an Input-Output Economy with Trade and
  Financial Linkages of Firms.' Review of Economic Dynamics 36, 246­269

Miranda-Pinto, Jorge, and Eric R. Young (2018) `Flexibility and frictions in multisector models.' CAMA
  Working Papers 2018-24, Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis, Crawford School of Public
  Policy, The Australian National University, May

Monacelli, Tommaso, and Roberto Perotti (2010) `Fiscal policy, the real exchange rate and traded goods.'
  The Economic Journal 120(544), 437­461

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (2002) `Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary
  Rules.' The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2), 503­535

Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber (2016) `Production networks and the propagation
  of monetary policy shocks.' Manuscript, University of Chicago

Pescatori, Andrea, Mr Daniel Leigh, Jaime Guajardo, and Mr Pete Devries (2011) A new action-based
  dataset of fiscal consolidation number 11-128 (International Monetary Fund)

Schmitt-Groh´
            e, Stephanie, and Mart´
                                  in Uribe (2016) `Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency pegs,
  and involuntary unemployment.' Journal of Political Economy 124(5), 1466­1514

                                                  54
Xing, Wenpu, and Ali Ghorbani (2004) `Weighted pagerank algorithm.' Technical Report




                                               55
Technical Appendix

A     Measures of production network

    The WIOD network is a weighted directed network. To determine whether we really need to conduct

an analysis of the directed network we follow FRS(2007) testing for symmetry measuring the number

of bilateral links in the network, and comparing the adjacency matrix and its transpose. The degree of

symmetry of the matrix is the percentage of reciprocal links we have. We observe that 95.05% of the

links are reciprocal and that the degree of symmetry of the matrix is 48% (comparing each element of the

adjacency matrix with its transpose, this number would be 100% in the case of a symmetric matrix)).

This degree of symmetry indicates that the direction of the network is quite important.

    We can use different measures of centrality: pagerank, in-degree or out-degree (number of outcoming

edges to each node). Since we deal with government shocks, we consider in-degree rather than out-

degree. Figure A-1 shows that the evolution of the network across time through the kernel density of

the pagerank centrality. Similar to Figure 3 in the text, the 2014 yellow curve depicts a double peak

compared to 2000 and 2007, suggesting that the number of sectors with a high pagerank centrality has

largely increased between 2007 and 2014. However, this large number of very "central" sectors hides low

weights of input-ouptut matrix coefficients. These low coefficients are depicted in Figure A-2, a heatmap

of the input-output matrix for 11 countries of the Eurozone in 2014, with 54 sectors in each country.

    The colors indicate the logarithms of the input-output linkage weights. Lighter colors reflect more

intensive input usage while darker colors reflect less intensive input usage. We observe light colors on the

diagonal which means that many intermediate trade take place within the intermediate sector itself. We

find as well a high concentration of light colors on the last row, wich represents the Rest of the World.

    Another measure of centrality that can be considered is the "country centrality", given by figure A-3

below. This depicts the average "country centrality" based on the average of in-degree centrality over

the 54 sectors for each country and across time. Alternatively, figures A-4 and A-5 depict the "country

centrality" based respectively on pagerank and betweenness to indicate how important the "average"

sector by country is in terms of connecting other sectors. For example, France is the more central country

in terms of betweenness which means that French sectors are more often than other countries on the

path relating one foreign sector to another foreign sector.



                                                    56
                                              14000
                                                                                           2000
                                                                                           2007
                                                                                           2014
                                              12000



                                              10000
                       Kernel Estimated pdf


                                              8000



                                              6000



                                              4000



                                              2000



                                                 0
                                                  1.2   1.3   1.4     1.5      1.6   1.7          1.8
                                                                    Pagerank                 10 -3




                                 Figure A-1: Kernel density of pagerank centrality across time.


B        Shocks in other Eurozone Countries

    Here we show that the results of Table 3 for German government spending shocks are quite robust

to different assumptions about the source of the spending shock. Table A-1 shows that spillovers are

significant for French government spending shocks in the sticky wage model (although not as large as

spillovers from German shocks shown in Table 3.). Spillovers from Italian government spending shocks

in Table A-2 are smaller. In both cases, spillovers are much smaller in the absence of cross-country

production networks, or when government spending is fully concentrated in domestic sectors.

    Figure A-6 represents aggregate spillovers divided by country size following a symmetric shock in

country i (all sectors of country i) against average weighted pagerank of country i. This positive rela-

tionship shows that spillovers divided by country size are lower when the country originating the shock

has a lower weighted pagerank. The weighted pagerank measure of centrality does not only consider

the average position of the country's different nodes in the network but also the weight on these nodes.
A-25 .   Notice that there is no clear relationship between average pagerank and aggregate spillovers which

suggests that both the direction of the network as well as the intensity of the relationships matter. Table
 A-25
     The Weighted PageRank algorithm (WPR) takes into account the importance of both the inlinks and the outlinks of
the nodes and distributes rank scores based on the utilization of the nodes (See Xing and Ghorbani (2004)). It consists in
multiplying each edge's probability by its weight vector.)


                                                                    57
                                Country     gY    gY,nn   gY,G   gY,=1
                                 Aut       0.15   0.07    0.07    0.17
                                  Bel      0.13   0.05    0.08    0.15
                                  Ger      0.14   0.06    0.07    0.16
                                  Esp      0.10   0.03    0.06    0.12
                                  Fin      0.16   0.08    0.08    0.18
                                  Fra      0.39   0.79    0.66    0.29
                                  Grc      0.16   0.07    0.08    0.18
                                  Irl      0.18   0.11    0.06    0.19
                                  Ita      0.14   0.06    0.08    0.16
                                  Nld      0.13   0.05    0.07    0.14
                                  Prt      0.11   0.03    0.07    0.13

Table A-1: The table shows the response of real GDP growth to a one-percent of GDP increase in
French Government spending when nominal wages are sticky in all countries. The first and second
column shows real GDP measured using the GDP deflator, respectively with and without international
production connections. The third column shows the same responses, but assuming that all government
spending in France is targeted towards domestic sectors only. The final column shows the response in
the absence of production distortions.




                                Country     gY    gY,nn   gY,G   gY,=1
                                 Aut       0.09   0.02    0.06    0.11
                                  Bel      0.10   0.03    0.05    0.12
                                  Ger      0.09   0.03    0.05    0.11
                                  Esp      0.09   0.03    0.05    0.12
                                  Fin      0.11   0.05    0.05    0.13
                                  Fra      0.10   0.03    0.05    0.12
                                  Grc      0.10   0.03    0.06    0.13
                                  Irl      0.11   0.05    0.05    0.14
                                  Ita      0.58   0.86    0.76    0.49
                                  Nld      0.09   0.03    0.05    0.11
                                  Prt      0.10   0.02    0.06    0.12

Table A-2: The table shows the response of real GDP growth to a one-percent of GDP increase in
Italian Government spending when nominal wages are sticky in all countries. The first and second
column shows real GDP measured using the GDP deflator, respectively with and without international
production connections. The third column shows the same responses, but assuming that all government
spending in Italy is targeted towards domestic sectors only. The final column shows the response in the
absence of production distortions.




                                                  58
                  AUT
                         0


                        54




                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -5




                  DEU
                        108
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -10

                        162




                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -15
                        216
                  FIN

                        270                                                                                                                                                                                                 -20
                  FRA




                        324
                  GRC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -25

                        378
                  IRL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -30
                        432
                  ITA




                        486                                                                                                                                                                                                 -35
                  NLD




                        540
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -40
                  PRT




                        594
                  ROW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -45
                        648
                              0                54               108               162               216               270           324           378          432         486         540         594         648
                                  AUT               BEL               DEU               ESP               FIN               FRA           GRC           IRL          ITA         NLD         PRT         ROW




                        Figure A-2: Production network (logarithm) in the Euro zone in 2014.

                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2014



                        0.99




                        0.98




                        0.97




                        0.96




                        0.95




                        0.94
                                        AUT               BEL               DEU               ESP               FIN               FRA           GRC           IRL          ITA         NLD         PRT         ROW




                                              Figure A-3: Average country centrality based on indegree.


A-3 compares average Pagerank and average Weighted Pagerank for each country. Germany is among

the more central          A-26                and connected countries, which means that Germany's sectors use a large variety

of inputs coming from different sectors (higher Pagerank), but the intensity of these links is quite low

(low weighted Pagerank). Finally, Portugal has a lower pagerank but a higher weighted pagerank score

suggesting that Portugal uses less diversified inputs with a more intense connection. This more intense

connection seems to matter more for the size of spillovers than the simple existence of a link.




A-26
     The presence of sectors with self loops, using their own production as inputs, increases the average pagerank score of
the country.


                                                                                                                                   59
                       10 -3
                 1.8
                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                      2014

                1.75




                 1.7




                1.65




                 1.6




                1.55




                 1.5




                1.45




                 1.4
                               AUT       BEL   DEU    ESP      FIN    FRA        GRC   IRL        ITA   NLD   PRT   ROW




                                     Figure A-4: Average country centrality based on pagerank.

                       10 -4
                  3
                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                      2014



                 2.5




                  2




                 1.5




                  1




                 0.5




                  0
                               AUT       BEL   DEU    ESP      FIN    FRA        GRC   IRL        ITA   NLD   PRT   ROW




                               Figure A-5: Average country centrality based on betweenness.


C     General CES specifications

    This appendix extends the analysis in the main text to a general specification for production and

consumption. We assume that the composite of intermediate inputs Mki has a following CES form,

                                                                                                 
                                                                 K   Nm                          -1
                                                                             1       1
                                                                             
                                                                                  1- 
                                                     Mki =                  kimj Xkimj 
                                                            m=1 j =1


where  is the elasticity of substitution among intermediate inputs.




                                                                       60
                          Country   Av. Pagerank                Av. Weighted Pagerank
                           Aut         0.0015                          0.0019
                            Bel        0.0015                          0.0016
                            Ger        0.0015                          0.0010
                            Esp        0.0015                          0.0014
                            Fin        0.0015                          0.0021
                            Fra        0.0017                          0.0012
                            Grc        0.0015                          0.0021
                            Irl        0.0016                          0.0018
                            Ita        0.0015                          0.0013
                            Nld        0.0015                          0.0014
                            Prt        0.0015                          0.0024

Table A-3: This Table shows for each country the average of the Pagerank score for the 54 sectors of
the counrty and the average of the weighted Pagerank score for the 54 sectors of the country. It uses
figures for 2014.


   The optimality conditions for production read


                                         wk       ki   = (1 - ki )Uki                             (C.1)


                                               M
                                              Pki Mki = ki Uki                                    (C.2)
                                                                    1-
                                                          Pmj
                                 Pmj Xkimj =               M
                                                                         ki kimj Uki              (C.3)
                                                          Pki

                                                      K    Nk
                               Uki  wk   ki   +                 Pmj Xkimj = ki Ski                (C.4)
                                                  m=1 j =1

   The price for intermediate input composite Mki is linked to prices of intermediate inputs as

                                                                                          1
                                              K       Nm                                 1-
                                  M
                                 Pki =                     kimj (Pmj )1- 
                                          m=1 j =1


   Similarly, the consumption basket for a representative household has the following CES aggregation,

                                                                                    
                                                  K       Nm                        -1
                                                                1           1
                                                                
                                                                         1- 
                                     ck =                      kmj ckmj 
                                              m=1 j =1


 is the elasticity of substitution among varieties in the consumption basket.




                                                           61
            Figure A-6: Average spillovers by country against average weighted pagerank


   The optimality conditions for households in country k become

                                                               1-
                                                       Pmj
                                      Pmj ckmj =                    kmj ck Pk                 (C.5)
                                                       Pk

with consumer price index Pk
                                                                              1
                                                 K   Nm                      1-

                                      Pk =                kmj (Pmj )1- 
                                              m=1 j =1

   The market clearing condition for goods produced by sector ki now becomes,
                                                                                           
                             K              1-                  Nm
                                      Pki        mki 
                     Ski =                           wm -              mj (1 - mj )Smj  +     (C.6)
                                      Pm         m
                             m=1                                j =1


                             K   Nm              1-                             K
                                        Pki
                                         M
                                                      mj mjki mj Smj +              Gmki
                         m=1 j =1
                                        Pmj                                   m=1




                                                          62
C.1    Estimation of elasticities

   We use price information, input output table and private consumption expenditure distribution from

WIOD to estimate elasticity of substitution among intermediate inputs and elasticity of substitution in

a consumption basket. Data construction is delegated to the appendix.

   The WIOD provides useful information to recover the elasticity parameters  and  . First we define

the intermediate input share of sector mj in sector ki in year t

                                                                                                 1-
                                               Pmj,t Xki,mj,t                           Pmj,t
                   IIshareki,mj,t        K        Nm
                                                                         = ki,mj         M
                                         m=1      j =1 Pmj,t Xki,mj,t
                                                                                        Pki,t


which can be calculated directly from the WIOT and the second equation comes from (C.3).

   We define the relative intermediate input share across periods as

                                                                                        1-
                                          IIshareki,mj,t            Pmj,t /Pmj,s
                           RIIki,mj,ts                   =            M /P M
                                          IIshareki,mj,s            Pki,t   ki,s


Taking logs on both sides, yields

                                                                                   M
                                                                                  Pki,t
                                                             Pmj,t
                           ln RIIki,mj,ts = (1 - ) ln                    - ln      M
                                                                                                      (C.7)
                                                             Pmj,s                Pki,s

   We take a similar approach to pin down the elasticity in consumption  . First, we define the share

of consumption expenditure on each variety, which can be obtained from WIOT

                                                                                          1-
                                                 Pmj,t Ck,mj,t                  Pmj,t
                    CEsharek,mj,t          K        Nm
                                                                         =                     k,mj
                                           m=1      j =1 Pmj,t Ck,mj,t
                                                                                Pk,t

The relative consumption expenditure share

                                                                                          1-
                                           CEshareki,mj,t            Pmj,t /Pmj,s
                          RCEki,mj,ts                     =
                                           CEshareki,mj,s             Pk,t /Pk,s

Taking logs on both sides, yields

                                                                 Pmj,t             Pk,t
                          ln RCEki,mj,ts = (1 -  ) ln                     - ln                        (C.8)
                                                                 Pmj,s             Pk,s




                                                        63
   The socio-economic database of WIOD provides constant sectoral prices for intermediate inputs and

gross outputs. We use "price levels gross output (2010=100)", GO-PI, to measure Pmj,t /Pmj,s , and
                                                                      M /P M , with m, k = 1, · · · , K ,
"price levels of intermediate inputs (2010=100) ", II-PI, to measure Pki,t ki,s

i, j = 1, · · · , Nk , t = 2, · · · , T . Regressing the LHS on the RHS of the above equation (C.7) yields the

estimate ^. Taking the country level CPI data to measure Pk,t /Pk,s (2010=100) from eurostat or OECD

database, regressing the LHS on the RHS of the above equation (C.8) yields the estimate ^ . Figure A-7

shows the estimated ^ and ^ based on year over year regressions. We take the average value in the data

sample ^ = 0.87 and ^ = 0.77 in the following analysis.


                                                  Estimate of
                    1.1
                              Estimate
                              -1.5std
                      1
                              +1.5std

                    0.9


                    0.8


                    0.7


                    0.6
                      2000     2002      2004    2006      2008     2010     2012          2014



                                                  Estimate of
                    1.5
                                                                                Estimate
                                                                                -1.5std
                                                                                +1.5std
                      1




                    0.5




                      0
                      2000     2002      2004    2006      2008     2010     2012          2014




                                   Figure A-7: Estimation of elasticities


   Note that the constant input-output matrix W and consumption expenditure shares  in the model

are not directly observed from WIOT under general production and preference specifications. But we

                                                     64
know that without any shocks, kimj captures the steady state input-output linkages and kmj for the

steady state consumption expenditure shares. We use the following information to pin down kimj and

kmj
                                                 T
                                                 t=1 IIshareki,mj,t
                                       kimj =
                                                         T
                                                 T
                                                 t=1 CEsharek,mj,t
                                       kmj =
                                                         T

Similarly we can calibrate other parameters including intermediate income share ki , government ex-

penditure share gkmj and production wedge ki .


C.2    Fiscal multipliers and spillovers

   Table A-4 presents fiscal multipliers and spill overs for the Euro countries facing German government

increases fiscal expenditures when prices and wages are flexible in all countries. Similar to the Cobb-

Douglas specification in the main text, fiscal spillover under flexible prices and wages is negligible.

Shutting down international production network could significantly reduces spillovers when real GDP

is deflated by GDP deflator. But real GDP deflated by CPI doesn't change much with international

production network. Production wedge again doesn't play a significant role as in the Cobb-Douglas

specification.

             Country     gY    gY nn   gY,nsym   gY,=1        gcpi   gcpi,nn   gcpi,nsym   gcpi,=1
              Aut       0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.02        0.03     0.00       0.01       0.03
               Bel      0.00   -0.01    -0.01     0.01        0.01     0.00       0.00       0.02
              Deu       0.85    0.91     0.91     0.82        0.81     0.88       0.88       0.78
               Esp     -0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.00        0.00    -0.01      -0.01       0.01
               Fin      0.00   -0.02    -0.02     0.01        0.01    -0.01       0.00       0.02
               Fra     -0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.00        0.00    -0.01       0.00       0.01
               Grc     -0.01   -0.02    -0.02     0.00        0.00    -0.01      -0.01       0.01
               Irl      0.01   -0.02    -0.01     0.01        0.02     0.02       0.02       0.01
               Ita     -0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.00       -0.01    -0.01      -0.01       0.00
               Nld     -0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.00        0.00    -0.01      -0.01       0.01
               Prt     -0.01   -0.01    -0.01     0.00       -0.01    -0.01      -0.01       0.00

Table A-4: Fiscal multipliers (CES). The table shows the response of real GDP growth to a one-percent
of GDP increase in German Government spending with flexible prices and wages in all countries. The
first to fourth columns show real GDP measured using the GDP deflator, respectively with and without
international production connections. `nn' denotes no international trade in intermediate inputs. `nsym'
denotes no trade in intermediate inputs and a symmetric input structure. Column with  = 1 is for
the case without production wedges. The fifth to eighth columns show the same responses, but GDP is
deflated by CPI.


                                                   65
