                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                     THE CHILDREN OF HOPE VI DEMOLITIONS:
                NATIONAL EVIDENCE ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                      John C. Haltiwanger
                                       Mark J. Kutzbach
                                      Giordano E. Palloni
                                       Henry Pollakowski
                                        Matthew Staiger
                                        Daniel Weinberg

                                      Working Paper 28157
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28157

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2020

Any opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed (q.v. U.S. Census Bureau Disclosure Review
Board numbers: DRB-B0038-CED-20190405, DRB-B0071-CED-20190829, and CBDRB-FY20-
CED0060029). Much of the work for this analysis was done while Mark Kutzbach was an
employee of the Census Bureau. John Haltiwanger was a Schedule A (part-time) employee and
Matthew Staiger a Pathways Intern of the U.S. Census Bureau at the time of the writing of this
paper. This research has been supported by grant number 98082 from the "How Housing
Matters" research program of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, by NSF
grant number 1730108, by a Research Partnership grant from the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, and by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation. This research
uses data from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics
Program, which was partially supported by the following National Science Foundation Grants:
SES-9978093, SES-0339191, and ITR-0427889; a National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854;
and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The authors want to thank Mark Heller for
valuable research assistance and Lydia Taghavi of HUD for data assistance. We thank James
Spletzer, Erika McEntarfer, Katherine O'Regan and Amy Ellen Schwarz as well as participants
at the Urban Economics Association, American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association,
Association for Public Policy and Management, and Southern Economics Association meetings
for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano E. Palloni, Henry Pollakowski,
Matthew Staiger, and Daniel Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Children of HOPE VI Demolitions: National Evidence on Labor Market Outcomes
John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano E. Palloni, Henry Pollakowski, Matthew
Staiger, and Daniel Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28157
November 2020
JEL No. I38,J13,J31,J62,R23

                                          ABSTRACT

We combine national administrative data on earnings and participation in subsidized housing to
study how the demolition of 160 public housing projects--funded by the HOPE VI program--
affected the adult labor market outcomes for 18,500 children. Our empirical strategy compares
children exposed to the program to children drawn from thousands of non-demolished projects,
adjusting for observable differences using a flexible estimator that combines features of matching
and regression. We find that children who resided in HOPE VI projects earn 14% more at age 26
relative to children in comparable non-HOPE VI projects. These earnings gains are strongest for
demolitions in large cities, particularly in neighborhoods with higher pre-demolition poverty rates
and lower pre-demolition job accessibility. There is no evidence that the labor market gains are
driven by improvements in household or neighborhood environments that promote human capital
development in children. Rather, subsequent improvements in job accessibility represent a likely
pathway for the results.

John C. Haltiwanger                              Henry Pollakowski
Department of Economics                          Graduate School of Design
University of Maryland                           Harvard University
College Park, MD 20742                           Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         hpollakowski@gsd.harvard.edu
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
                                                 Matthew Staiger
Mark J. Kutzbach                                 Department of Economics
Center for Financial Research                    University of Maryland
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation            College Park, MD 20742
550 17th Street NW, MB-2127                      mstaiger@umd.edu
Washington, DC 20429
mkutzbach@fdic.gov                               Daniel Weinberg
                                                 Principal, DHW Consulting
Giordano E. Palloni                              2501 Lisbon Ln.
International Food Policy Research Institute     Alexandria, VA 22306
1201 Eye St.. NW                                 dhweinberg@gmail.com
Washington, DC 20005
g.palloni@cgiar.org




An online appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28157
1.      Introduction
        The concern that placement in subsidized housing, especially large public housing projects
in high-poverty neighborhoods, could negatively affect children has been the focus of a substantial
literature.1 Based partly on this rationale, the last 30 years of federal assisted housing policy has
sought to deconcentrate subsidized housing participants, mainly through the provision of Housing
Choice Vouchers (hereafter, vouchers) that subsidize low-income families to live in market-
supplied housing. A significant effort to spur the dispersion of these households has focused on
the demolition of public housing projects paired with support for existing residents to find
alternative housing, most notably under the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development's (HUD's) HOPE VI program.2 Despite the growing availability of vouchers and the
continued funding of programs intended to reduce the population living in low-quality public
housing projects, there is little representative evidence about how these demolitions affect short-
or long-term outcomes for exposed children and adults; much of the existing research on
subsidized housing is conducted in a limited number of large metropolitan areas and it is not clear
how these findings apply to other contexts in the U.S.
        This paper explores how the HOPE VI Demolition program affected the adult labor market
outcomes of children who resided in demolished projects. Using a unique dataset available at the
U.S. Census Bureau--which links administrative data on earnings and participation in subsidized
housing--we identify approximately 18,500 children exposed to 160 HOPE VI demolitions in
diverse environments across the U.S. Our empirical strategy for estimating the causal impacts of
the program is based on the observation that even though the HOPE VI program systematically
targeted the "worst" public housing projects, there were many similarly distressed projects in
equally disadvantaged neighborhoods that were not demolished. We leverage the richness and size
of the data by using a stratification with regression estimator (Imbens and Rubin 2015), which
combines features of both matching and regression in order to flexibly account for observable
differences between the 160 HOPE VI projects and 8,800 public housing projects unaffected by
the program.




1
 For example, Oreopoulos (2003), Jacob (2004), Chetty et al. (2016), Andersson et al. (2018a), and Chyn (2018).
2
 The HOPE VI program, originally known as the Urban Revitalization Demonstration, was the sixth of the Housing
Opportunities for People Everywhere Grants, funded by P.L. 102-389 (HUD 2007).

                                                      1
         Our main finding is that exposure to the HOPE VI Demolition program between the ages
of 10 and 18 produced substantial long-run labor market benefits, increasing age 26 earnings by
14.2% relative to comparable children from non-HOPE VI projects. Interestingly, we find that the
positive impacts are driven by children from projects in neighborhoods served by the larger
housing authorities typically located in large metro areas. For example, we estimate that HOPE VI
increased earnings by 19.5% in large (greater than 2,500 units) Public Housing Authorities
(PHAs), compared to a statistically insignificant 4.5% increase in smaller PHAs.
         We start our investigation of mechanisms by studying the short- and medium-term impacts
of the program. The demolitions led to large changes in housing circumstances, forcing most
HOPE VI households out of their initial projects and into other public housing projects or the
voucher program. While households exited subsidized housing at a higher rate in the year after the
demolition, there is no evidence that the program displaced households from subsidized housing
entirely in later years.3 Despite the changes in project and subsidy type, the HOPE VI-induced
moves did not produce measurable changes in school quality, neighborhood economic and
demographic characteristics, or the labor market outcomes of parents. Furthermore, we find no
evidence of larger impacts for children who were younger at the time of a demolition. Together,
these results suggest that the long-term labor market benefits of HOPE VI demolitions are not
driven by increased exposure to better neighborhoods during childhood, at least as such
neighborhood effects are characterized elsewhere in the literature (Chetty et al. 2016).
         Rather, the strongest evidence suggests that HOPE VI improved long-run labor market
outcomes by affecting the characteristics of the neighborhoods where the children moved to and
ended up living as adults. Specifically, we find that HOPE VI led to a significant improvement in
measures of the geographic proximity of job opportunities--jobs per person, average commute
time, and a job proximity index constructed by HUD--in the neighborhoods that the children were
living in 2010, 7-13 years after the demolitions.4 Improved job proximity can reduce job search
and commuting costs and therefore reduce job search duration (Andersson et al. 2018b) and
encourage individuals on the margin between working and not working to increase search effort


3
  While it is quite common for residents of HOPE VI projects to exit subsidize housing, they are no more likely to do
so relative to residents of other similarly distressed projects that were not exposed to the HOPE VI program.
4
  Our results point to a spatial concept of job accessibility which we refer to as job proximity. While it is also possible
that the program could have moved children into neighborhoods that provided better access to jobs through labor
market networks, we find no evidence that this is the case.

                                                            2
and participate in the labor market (Smith and Zenou 2003). Consistent with job accessibility being
an important mechanism, we find that an important part of the observed earnings gains are driven
by an extensive margin labor supply response.
           The data suggest that improvements in job accessibility occurred through two distinct
channels. First, the demolitions transformed the neighborhoods in which the HOPE VI projects
were originally located. Public housing projects, particularly those served by large PHAs, often
provide housing to many individuals in geographically concentrated areas. This results in
neighborhoods that provide limited access to jobs, with many job searchers competing for nearby
jobs. The demolition of public housing projects drastically reduced population density with no
corresponding decrease in the number of jobs in the neighborhood. Thus, on average, children that
remained near the location of their original project, experienced an improvement in job proximity.
           Second, HOPE VI increased the likelihood that households moved, and destination
neighborhoods provided better access to jobs, even though these neighborhoods were typically
geographically close (within the same county) and similarly poor. This pattern of moves is
explained by two features in the data: 1) HOPE VI projects in large PHAs were located in
neighborhoods that were especially disadvantaged in terms of both poverty rates and job
accessibility relative to surrounding areas; and 2) housing prices increase sharply with reductions
in neighborhood poverty but there is no similar price gradient with respect to job accessibility.
Together, this suggests that while local moves induced by HOPE VI were likely to generate
improvements in job accessibility, financial constraints may have prevented reductions in
neighborhood poverty. The latter observation is consistent with existing research on the Voucher
program (Patterson et al. 2004; Eriksen and Ross 2013; Jacob, Ludwig, and Miller 2013; Collinson
and Ganong 2018; Andersson et al. 2018a).
           In relation to previous work, an important contribution of this paper is to obtain estimates
of the long-term impact of a large assisted housing program that are more representative of the full
population of affected projects. Much of the relevant prior empirical research relies on data from
a limited set of large metropolitan areas. Figure A.1 plots the distribution of the size of PHAs that
participated in three important randomized controls trials including the HUD Moving to
Opportunity (MTO) experiment (Ludwig et al. 2013), the Gautreaux program (Rosenbaum 1995),
and the Effects of Housing Choice Voucher on Welfare Families project (Mills et al. 2006).5

5
    Similarly, non-experimental research on the consequences of changes in access to vouchers or increases in voucher

                                                           3
Approximately half of all public housing units are located in small PHAs but only two of the ten
PHAs in this previous research are located in small PHAs. In contrast, over two thirds of the PHAs
that received HOPE VI funding are located in small PHAs. Thus, our results are likely to be more
representative of the effects for the broader population in public housing. Chicago is the third
largest PHA and is shown separately in Figure A.1 as it is the setting for Chyn (2018), the closest
existing paper to our work. Chyn (2018) studies the long-term earnings impacts of public housing
project demolitions in Chicago and also finds substantial long-term benefits; estimating that
demolitions increased earnings for children in affected buildings by 16% relative to unaffected
children who resided in the same projects. 6 Our results provide additional evidence on the long-
term benefits of the demolitions of distressed public housing projects in contexts beyond Chicago
and provide more insight into the mechanisms through which these demolitions affected long-term
labor market outcomes.
         Our results also shed light on an open puzzle in the existing literature: Does inducing
households to move to new neighborhoods have to occur while children are still young in order to
have long-run benefits? Chyn (2018) and the results in our paper suggest that demolitions do
produce long-run benefits for older children (older than 13 at the time of the demolition).
Conversely, in their analysis of the MTO experiment, Chetty et al. (2016) find no evidence of long-
run gains for older children who transitioned from public to voucher housing. 7 One explanation
for this discrepancy suggested by Chyn (2018) is that the projects in his study were in much more
disadvantaged neighborhoods relative to those in MTO. If older children only benefit when the
origin neighborhood is especially distressed, this could reconcile the findings from MTO, Chyn
(2018), and this paper. We exploit the variation in pre-demolition neighborhood characteristics


generosity, identifies treatment effects for a small set of non-representative cities, as in Collinson and Ganong (2016).
An exception is a companion paper--Anderson et al. (2018a)--which uses a household fixed-effects identification
strategy and finds long-term benefits of time spent in public and voucher housing between the ages of 13 and 18.
Anderson et al. (2018a) use data from nearly the universe of assisted housing participants so that the results capture
the typical effect of participating in the public housing or voucher program. In contrast, the current paper focuses on
a population that is more disadvantaged relative to the subsidized housing population as a whole.
6
  Chyn (2018) measures earnings between the ages of 19 and 32 whereas we focus on labor market outcomes measured
at age 26. Some of the projects studied in Chyn (2018) and Jacob (2004), who studied the short-run impacts of the
same demolitions, were demolished under the HOPE VI program.
7
  The MTO study randomly assigned 4,600 households living in public housing projects to a control group, a "Section
8" group which was offered standard vouchers, or an experimental group which was offered vouchers that could only
be used in census tracts with a 1990 poverty rate below 10%. The primary comparison made by Chetty, et al. (2016)
is between this experimental group and the control group. Their results thus rely on moves to lower poverty
neighborhoods, a case in which it makes sense that younger children should benefit more. Survey and administrative
data have provided means of evaluating the impact of the two treatments (Ludwig et al. 2013).

                                                           4
and find that HOPE VI had the largest impact on age 26 earnings for projects located in
neighborhoods that had higher poverty rates, were more densely populated and had lower measures
of job proximity. Intuitively, large distressed public housing projects create an environment in
which there are many more people looking for work relative to the jobs available nearby, and this
creates barriers to employment. The children located in these neighborhoods--even if they were
exposed to the program only later in adolescence--still benefited from the HOPE VI intervention.
         The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the HOPE VI program
and related research and discusses the potential mechanisms through which public housing
demolitions could affect the long-term well-being of children in displaced households. Section 3
describes the data sources and sample construction. Section 4 highlights challenges for the
identification of unbiased treatment effects and discusses the stratification with regression
estimator. Section 5 presents the empirical results, and Section 6 concludes.


2.       Background and Anticipated Impacts of the Program
         HUD launched the HOPE VI initiative in response to the report by the National
Commission on Severely Distressed Public Housing (NCSDPH), which, in 1992, found that
86,000 of the 1.4 million public housing units nationwide qualified as "severely distressed"
(NCSDPH 1992, HUD 2007). HOPE VI consisted of two main programs designed to address this
issue: (1) the Demolition program, which provided funding for the demolition of public housing
projects and the relocation of affected residents, and (2) the Revitalization program, which
provided funding to redevelop neighborhoods with public housing into low-density, mixed-income
communities. The focus of our paper is strictly on the Demolition program and unless otherwise
noted, any mention of HOPE VI refers solely to this program.8 Between 1996 and 2003, HUD
awarded $392 million through 285 HOPE VI grants for the demolition of more than 57,000 public
housing units. Displaced households were typically either offered an apartment in another public
housing project, a voucher, or they were forced out of subsidized housing altogether (Popkin et al.
2004).9 Research tracking the former residents of a limited set of demolished public housing


8
  There is some overlap between the Revitalization and Demolition programs so that some recipients of a Demolition
grant later received a Revitalization grant. However, the Revitalization intervention typically began years after the
demolition occurred. As we discuss in Appendix B, we find no evidence that our estimated impact of the Demolition
program is affected by the Revitalization program.
9
  Displaced households could also be offered a unit in a revitalized HOPE VI site, but substantial lags were involved.

                                                          5
projects estimates that about half of displaced households moved to a new public housing project,
a third were provided with a voucher and the remainder exited subsidized housing altogether
(Kingsley et al. 2003; Popkin et al. 2009).
         HOPE VI Demolition grants were awarded based on a competitive process in which HUD
posted a notice of funding availability, PHAs submitted applications and HUD selected a limited
set of awardees (Murphy 2012). Any PHA was eligible to submit an application for the demolition
of severely distressed public housing developments (using the NCSDPH criteria). However, at
least in the earliest year, HUD explicitly differentiated between PHAs of various sizes in their call
for funding (2,500 units or less, between 2,501 and 10,000 units, and over 10,000 units); applicants
were evaluated within these groups and group size determined the amount of funding for which
PHAs were eligible. Our analysis often differentiates between large (more than 2,500 units) and
small (2,500 or fewer units) PHAs based on these cutoffs.10 Each year, HUD classified applicants
into one of four priority groups, and grants were awarded (conditional on eligibility and approval)
on a first-come, first-served basis by priority group until funds were exhausted. 11 Given limited
funding, both the number of applicants and eligible projects exceeded the number of awards.12
Furthermore, many eligible projects never applied for funding while some non-distressed projects
received funding, leaving many distressed-projects unaffected by HOPE VI. Indeed, Turner et al.
(2007) estimate that there were between 47,000 to 82,000 severely distressed units that remained
in public housing inventory as of 2007 (four years after the last demolition grant award). We return
to these points later in our discussion of the empirical strategy.
         It is not obvious how we should expect HOPE VI to affect the long-term labor market
outcomes of displaced children. A primary goal of the program was to move families out of
environments characterized by a "high incidence of crime," physical deterioration "that renders



10
   We do not further differentiate the large PHA sample because there are too few HOPE VI projects in PHAs that
exceed 10,000 units in our sample to analyze separately.
11
   Different sources give slightly different accounts of the award process. However, the Congressional Research
Service Report RL32236, describes the first-come, first-served process and notes that the "priority groups are, in order
of priority, (1) approved for a 202 conversion, (2) applied for a 202 conversion, (3) approved for a Section 18
demolition, or (4) approved for a HOPE VI revitalization grant. Section 202 Mandatory Conversion is the conversion
of public housing developments to Section 8. If it costs less to give the residents a Section 8 voucher, rather than
maintain the low rent public housing building, the building is shut down and the residents are given Section 8
vouchers."
12
   On average only 53% of applicants were funded each year. The percentage is based on the authors' calculation using
publicly available data (HUD 2007) and the statistic excludes data from 1996, for which we do not know the number
of applicants.

                                                           6
the housing dangerous to the health and safety of its residents" and "limited opportunities for
meaningful employment of residents."13 Based on these stated objectives, demolitions could have
shaped the development of children by improving the home and neighborhood environments they
were exposed to while young. This would be consistent with recent empirical evidence suggesting
that neighborhood conditions in childhood can affect the development of human capital, which in
turn affect long-term labor market outcomes (Chetty et al. 2014, 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018).
Alternatively, the program could have affected adult labor market outcomes by changing access
to jobs in the neighborhoods where children end up living as young adults. Theory highlighting
the potential importance of job accessibility dates back to Kain (1968), arguing that the geographic
location of jobs and job seekers can have important implications for labor market outcomes; recent
empirical evidence in Andersson et al. (2018b) supports this hypothesis.
          The program also could have had an adverse effect. Home and neighborhood environment
could have worsened if the program forced people from their homes without providing proper
relocation support. In addition, by dispersing residents that previously lived close to one another,
the program could have disrupted social networks. Indeed, this was a major concern for residents
like George Moses, a former long-time resident of public housing and the Chair of the Board of
Directors of the National Low Income Housing Coalition, who spoke in objection to the HOPE VI
program at a congressional hearing in 2007: "in my neighborhood, people would gather to talk,
watch one another's children, and form strong bonds. When we tear these neighborhoods apart,
[...] the impact is both immediate and long-lasting."
          The existing empirical research on HOPE VI is largely descriptive but it suggests that the
program had limited success in achieving its short-term goals. Popkin et al. (2004; 2009) find that
households affected by HOPE VI experienced large changes in housing and most households
moved to neighborhoods with lower poverty rates and less crime, and reported being more satisfied
with their new neighborhoods, particularly if they received vouchers. However, most research
finds little evidence that HOPE VI affected the short-term labor market outcomes of adults (Goetz
2010; Jones and Paulsen 2011; Popkin et al. 2009) or the health, education or behavioral outcomes
of the children (Gallagher and Bajaj 2007). A limitation of this research is that it primarily
documents how outcomes changed over time for households exposed to the program. This is



13
     Quotes are from NCSDPH (1992).

                                                  7
particularly problematic in the HOPE VI setting because, even in absence of demolitions,
households in public housing exhibit a high degree of residential mobility (McClure 2018).
       Jacob (2004) is an exception to this descriptive work, obtaining credible causal estimates
of the demolition of public housing projects by comparing outcomes for children who resided in
buildings that were demolished to children who resided in buildings that were not demolished but
were located within the same project. Jacob (2004) finds no evidence of short-term gains in
educational outcomes. In the only research on the long-term outcomes of demolitions for children,
Chyn (2018) uses a similar empirical strategy and finds positive impacts on adult labor market
outcomes. These results suggest that a lack of short-term impacts does not preclude the possibility
of longer-term effects on labor market outcomes. However, the results from Jacob and Chyn may
not be representative of the HOPE VI program as a whole since their sample is limited to public
housing residents in Chicago. An important contribution of our paper is to obtain more
representative estimates of the impact of the HOPE VI program by studying 160 demolitions that
occurred in diverse environments across the U.S. In contrast to Jacob (2004) and Chyn (2018), we
observe a great deal of variation in project and neighborhood characteristics within our empirical
sample. This enables us to empirically assess how the impact of the HOPE VI program differed
across projects located in heterogeneous pre-program contexts.


3.     Description of the Data
       The data requirements for this project are substantial. We need to be able to identify
children and parents affected by public housing project demolitions, track exposed and non-
exposed residents as they move across subsidized housing programs and neighborhoods, and
match the children's housing and residential experiences to their labor market outcomes as adults.
We overcome these challenges by combining two key data sources: (1) HUD-PIC (Public and
Indian Housing Information Center) administrative records of participation in subsidized housing,
and (2) the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Infrastructure
Files, an administrative records system for employer-employee matched data. Below, we describe
these sources and discuss how we integrate them to construct our sample.
3.1 Data Sources
       HUD-PIC tracks public housing and voucher recipients during our study period. As part of
their housing occupancy verification process, PHAs provide HUD with the identities of residents,

                                                8
which HUD then compiles into an annual relational database. Absent the coverage limitations we
discuss below, these files record every individual participating in public or voucher housing in
each year between 1997 and 2010. Our analysis makes use of the individual- and household-level
files, which include indicators of housing type (public or voucher), identifiers for housing
authorities and projects, as well as some individual- and household-level demographic
information. HUD provides a public use summary of these data through the HUDUSER web tool,
which we use to calculate PHA-level characteristics.
         Data from the LEHD program are based on two sources provided by states on a quarterly
basis: (1) unemployment insurance (UI) wage records, providing the earnings of each worker at
each employer, and (2) employer account reports providing establishment-level data, also known
as the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (and formerly as the ES-202 program).14 The
state-provided data cover more than 95% of wage and salary civilian jobs, including both private
sector and state and local government workers. Some omissions remain, including the armed
forces, earnings through self-employment, the postal service, family workers, federal workers, and
some non-profit and agricultural workers (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 1997, 2017).
Nevertheless, the LEHD earnings data enable us to track a large set of children into adulthood and
measure their earnings and employment outcomes as well as these outcomes for the parents of
these children.15 The coverage extends from the beginning of state reporting through the last
quarter of 2016.16
         Another strength of our data is our ability to track the residential location of households
who leave subsidized housing. We do this using two sources of data. First, we use a measure of
annual residential location from the Composite Person Record (CPR), a Census Bureau file created



14
   The LEHD program, a partnership that has been established between the Census Bureau, all 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, produces public use data tabulations that are widely used
by state and local governments such as: Quarterly Workforce Indicators, LEHD Origin-Destination Employment
Statistics (LODES), and Job-to-Job Flows. For a description of the LEHD Infrastructure Files, see Abowd et al. (2004).
For a description of files available in the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, see Vilhuber (2018).
15
   Specifically, we measure outcomes for the head of households as identified in the HUD-PIC data. Most children
(92%) grow up in single-parent households in the HOPE VI sample.
16
   We code earnings as missing if the state in which their project is located was not yet reporting in the LEHD.
However, the vast majority of states are reporting to the LEHD by 2005, which is the earliest year in which we measure
age 26 earnings for the children. For the small fraction of children who have missing age 26 earnings, we impute these
values using earnings from later years. Specifically, we use a panel of non-missing earnings data for all children
between ages 18 and 30 to estimate a regression of annual earnings on an individual fixed effect and a third order
polynomial in age interacted with gender. We use the estimates to impute missing earnings data at ages 18-26.

                                                          9
from several federal administrative datasets, which begins in 1999.17 We identify a residence
census tract for each child and adult from 1999-2010 where available (approximately 10% of
children are missing a CPR residence in each year). Second, we use responses from the 2010
Decennial Census to identify where individuals lived in April 2010. These responses provide an
additional data source covering geographic residence of each individual, and also allow us to
determine whether that individual is incarcerated in 2010.
         We also draw on a number of different publicly available data sources. Most importantly,
we characterize the neighborhoods in which individuals live and projects are located using a
number of different files including: census tract-level characteristics drawn from the 1990, 2000,
and 2010 Decennial Censuses and five-year-average data from the American Community Survey
collected between 2008 and 2012; 18 county-level unemployment rates from the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Local Area Unemployment Statistics program; area median income and
characteristics of PHAs in 1997 from HUD USER; the number of jobs per census tract in 2010,
by workplace and residence, from LODES; school proficiency and jobs proximity indexes
constructed using data from 2013-2014 and provided through HUD Open Data (the job proximity
index is based on LODES); land areas as well as crosswalks between various measures of
geographies from the U.S. Census Bureau's Geography Relationship Files; and the Census Bureau
Gazeteer files to measure the latitude and longitude of the centroid of census tracts.19 We use the
Consumer Price Index-Urban to convert all dollar amounts into 2000 dollars.
3.2 Integration and Sample Selection
         Our sample construction begins by using the HUD-PIC records to identify children
between the ages of 10 and 18 who lived in public housing between 1997 and 2001. The range of
years is selected because 1997 is the earliest year when reliable HUD microdata are available and
2001 is the date of the last HOPE VI demolition. 20 The age range is chosen to allow us to observe
earnings up through age 26 for all children in the sample.21 We choose to focus on age 26 earnings

17
   The LEHD uses the CPR for imputation models and for the residence component of the LEHD Origin-Destination
Employment Statistics (LODES) data (for more information on the sources contributing to the CPR, see Graham et
al. 2017).
18
   Obtained from the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS) from IPUMS; see Ruggles et al.
(2019).
19
   In a small number of cases, neighborhood-level data are missing for certain variables. In order to avoid changes in
the sample composition based on the variables used in the analysis, we impute using higher levels of geography. For
example, if a variable is missing for a given census tract, we impute the value with county-level value.
20
   As discussed later in this section, we set the "demolition date" two years prior to the award date.
21
   There is one cohort of children, 10-year-olds who appear in public housing in 2001, for whom we do not observe

                                                         10
in our main results since most children will have completed their education by this date and work
by Chetty et al. (2014) finds that outcomes measured at this age are strongly predictive of later-
life measures of labor market success. We then attach data from the LEHD, CPR and 2010
Decennial Census to each record from the HUD-PIC data.22 An analogous dataset is constructed
using the household heads of the children in the sample.
         We construct a dataset of public housing projects that describes characteristics of the
residents and the neighborhoods in which they are located. To identify the set of projects that
received a HOPE VI demolition grant, we start from publicly available data that lists all 285 HOPE
VI demolition grant awards. 23 We make several sample restrictions to the full list of projects to
exclude those that are not well-suited for our study design (such as excluding senior housing).
These sample restrictions, described in Table A.1, reduce the analysis sample to about 160 projects
that received HOPE VI demolitions awards.24 Implementing a similar set of restrictions produces
a sample of about 8,800 non-HOPE VI projects. 25
         Our primary analysis dataset combines the project- and individual-level data to create a file
in which the unit of observation is at the individual-year level, where an individual will appear in
the sample for every year that they appear in public housing. We define the "reference year" as the
year in which the individual appears in public housing. We drop individual-year observations that
appear in the HOPE VI projects in years in which the demolition did not occur whereas we retain
all observations from non-HOPE VI projects.26 Thus, the reference year for the HOPE VI sample


age 26 earnings because our earning data are only available through 2016. For this cohort, we use observed earnings
up through age 25 to impute their earnings at age 26. Specifically, we use a panel of non-missing earnings data for all
children between ages 18 and 30 to estimate a regression of annual earnings on an individual fixed effect and a third
order polynomial in age interacted with gender. We use the estimates to impute missing earnings data at age 26.
22
   Individuals are identified by a "Protected Identification Key" (PIK) generated by the Census personally identified
information, allowing us to attach LEHD data to other data sources. PIKs are linked to approximately 98% of person
records in the HUD-PIC member file for our study period and we drop the 2% of individuals that are not assigned a
unique PIK.
23
   For the HOPE VI demolition grant list, see: HOPE VI DEMOLITION GRANTS: FY 1996 - 2003 (available at
https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/DOC_9890.PDF, dated October 2004).
24
   Throughout the paper we often report rounded numbers to limit risk of disclosure.
25
   Specifically, based on the restrictions defined in Table A.1, we apply the following sample restrictions to the non-
HOPE VI projects: 1, 5, 6, and 7. Data from HUDUSER indicate that in 1997 there were about 13,400 projects in the
U.S. (excluding territories) and about 10,100 projects that were within our size range (between 15 and 3,000 occupied
units) that were not senior citizen housing. Thus, even though we lack data on some PHAs that participated in the
Moving To Work (MTW) demonstration, our sample appears to cover most of the comparable public housing projects.
26
   We drop projects that received a HOPE VI Revitalization grant but did not receive a HOPE VI Demolition grant,
as households in these projects were treated by a different, but closely related program. For the non-HOPE VI sample,
we drop individual-year observations who previously appeared in a HOPE VI project. This restriction prevents us
from using individuals who moved out of HOPE VI projects and into other public housing projects as control

                                                         11
is simply the year of the demolition. This produces a sample with 1,682,000 child-year
observations and 1,023,000 household head-year observations.
        To identify treated individuals, we need to determine who was living in the project at the
time of the demolition. However, identifying the timing of the demolition is complicated by the
fact that the PHA may have started to move households out of the project prior to the physical
demolition of the building. To address this possibility, we classify households as treated if they
resided in a HOPE VI project two years prior to the award date. 27 To simplify language, we refer
to the two years prior to the award date as the year in which the demolition occurred. We view this
definition of timing as conservative as it minimizes the chances that our estimated treatment effects
are contaminated by selection out of the project prior to the demolition while potentially
underestimating the effect if the demolition does not occur until a later time. To evaluate this
definition, Figure 1 presents changes in project size relative to this demolition date. 28 The figure
shows similar trends in project size for HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI projects prior to demolition,
with HOPE VI projects declining in size for several years thereafter.
        Another related issue apparent from Figure 1 is that some of the projects were only partially
demolished. While a substantial portion of the households in HOPE VI projects were forced out
within five years of the demolition, our sample does include some households who resided in
undemolished units and remained in their original housing units. We include these households in
the sample as our view is that they are still "treated" by the program since the demolition could
have affected the people or characteristics of the neighborhood in which the HOPE VI project was
located.29


4.      Empirical Strategy
        Our primary goal is to estimate the average effect of HOPE VI demolitions on young adult
(age 26) labor market outcomes for children affected by the program--the average treatment effect


observations.
27
   Because the HUD-PIC data start in 1997, any HOPE VI projects that have an award date prior to 1999 are assigned
a demolition year of 1997. The decision to retain the early awardees is in part motivated by reports that there were
longer delays between grant awards and demolitions for these projects (GAO 2003). In Appendix B we show that our
results are robust to how we treat projects that received HOPE VI grants prior to 1999.
28
   We measure changes in project size using the number of occupied units in the HUD-PIC household file.
29
   Indeed, in Section 5 we find that the neighborhood in which the project was located is affected in important ways
by the demolitions. Furthermore, we find no evidence that the impacts on adult earnings are different for complete
versus partial demolitions (see Appendix B).

                                                        12
on the treated. The challenge is that, by design, the projects demolished under HOPE VI were
systematically different from those that were not. This is readily apparent from Table 1, which
presents the mean and standard deviations of baseline characteristics for projects and residents of
HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI projects as well as the differences between two samples. Along
almost every observable dimension, children growing up in HOPE VI projects are more
disadvantaged. For example, HOPE VI projects are in census tracts with 52% higher poverty rates,
the residents have 20% lower total annual household income and are almost 50% less likely to
have a married head of household.
        Given these pronounced observable differences and the lack of experimental variation, our
empirical strategy aims to estimate causal impacts by accounting for observable baseline
differences between HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI projects. We argue that this is a reasonable
approach in our context because the number of distressed, eligible projects greatly exceeded the
number of HOPE VI awardees and our data infrastructure enables us to observe and characterize
the conditions in nearly all public housing projects in the U.S. Thus, there is a large sample of non-
HOPE VI projects that are informative of what would have happened to the residents of HOPE VI
projects had there been no demolitions. In order to estimate the causal impacts of the Demolition
program, we employ the stratification with regression estimator proposed by Rosenbaum and
Rubin (1983, 1984) and discussed at length in Imbens and Rubin (2015) and Imbens (2015). The
method combines features of both matching and regression in the following steps: (1) nearest-
neighbor matching to trim the sample, (2) groups similar observations into distinct strata based on
an estimated propensity score, (3) estimates strata-level treatment effects using Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) regressions with controls within strata, and (4) calculates aggregate treatment
effects as a weighted average of the stratum-level estimates.
        There are three principal advantages of the stratification with regression estimator over the
more traditional OLS estimator. First, trimming the sample and using the stratification structure
helps us relax the linear functional form assumptions implicit in OLS. As a rule of thumb, linear
regression techniques will tend to be sensitive to the specification when the value of normalized
differences between the treatment and control groups exceed one-quarter (Imbens and Woolridge
2009).30 Table 1 demonstrates that many important baseline variables have normalized differences


30
  Let   and  be the mean and standard deviation of the variable x for the HOPE VI (d=1) and non-HOPE VI (d=0)
                                                                               2    2
samples, respectively. Then the normalized difference is defined as (1 -  0 )/(1 + 0  )/2.

                                                     13
that exceed this threshold. 31 Second, many choices on how to adjust for observable differences
between HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI projects are governed by the data, which helps mitigate
concerns that the choice of specification is influenced by ex-post analysis of results. Third, the
stratification with regression methodology presents a number of ways in which we can evaluate
the plausibility of the identifying assumptions, some of which are specific to the method and have
no clear analogue under OLS. These are discussed in Section 5.3.
         Construction of the strata is implemented in three steps. First, we trim the sample of non-
HOPE VI projects to reduce the observable differences between the HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI
samples. To do so, we start with a project-level dataset that includes all projects after imposing the
restrictions mentioned in Section 3.32 We use a project-level, as opposed to an individual-level
dataset because the treatment is assigned at the project-level. For each HOPE VI project, we use
nearest neighborhood matching to identify and retain the five nearest neighbors among the non-
HOPE VI projects. Matching is conducted with replacement; distance is measured using the
Euclidean distance metric based on observable project and neighborhood characteristics (see
Appendix C for list of variables used in matching); and we require exact matching on the size
(large or small) of the PHA. The resulting dataset, which we refer to as the matched sample,
contains all 160 HOPE VI projects and a subsample of 570 matched non-HOPE VI projects, which
we refer to as control projects.
         We thus drop non-HOPE VI projects that are fundamentally different and unlikely to be
informative of counterfactual outcomes for HOPE VI residents. The dashed line in Figure A.2
illustrates the success of this trimming by presenting the distribution of the normalized differences
of all baseline variables in the matched sample. The differences are much smaller relative to those
calculated in the full sample with nearly all smaller than one-quarter. The final three columns of
Table 1 make a similar point by presenting summary statistics and difference measures for HOPE
VI and matched controls for a subset of important baseline variables. This step does not reduce the
external validity of the estimates since we retain all HOPE VI projects and our goal is to estimate
the average treatment effect on the treated.



31
   The solid line in Figure A.2 makes a similar point by presenting the distribution of the normalized differences for
all baseline variables calculated on the full sample.
32
   Project-level characteristics are measured in the year of the demolition for HOPE VI projects, whereas for non-
HOPE VI projects they are equal to the average of observed values between 1997 and 2001.

                                                         14
         In the second step, we estimate a project-level propensity score defined as the probability
that a project receives a HOPE VI Demolition grant, conditional on observable characteristics. To
determine the covariates included in the propensity score model, we use a data-driven method
described by Imbens and Rubin (2015). Specifically, we start by estimating a logistic regression
of receipt of HOPE VI on a set of covariates that we think are important for predicting treatment
(average household income and the proportion of household heads who are black non-Hispanic).
Next, we estimate a separate logistic regression for each baseline variable that we consider adding
to the model and calculate the log likelihood for each logistic regression. If the value of the log
likelihood ratio test statistic for a given set of covariates is larger than it is for the models with the
other potential covariates and sufficiently greater than the initial log likelihood, then we include
the covariate in the model.33 We iteratively apply this procedure until no more covariates are
selected. We then create interaction terms between all the selected covariates and repeat this
process to determine which second-order terms to include in the model. Figure 2 plots the
distribution of the linearized estimated propensity score for HOPE VI and control projects. 34 The
figures indicate that there is good overlap between the estimated propensity scores of the treated
and control projects.
         In the third step we use a data-driven method to group projects into distinct strata based on
the estimated propensity score. We start by separating the projects into two strata based only on
PHA size (small and large). This distinction is motived by the fact that HUD differentiated between
these PHAs in the application process. However, it also has the added benefit of avoiding
comparisons between individuals who reside in fundamentally different economic environments
(e.g., a comparison of someone living in a rural county to an individual living in major
metropolitan area). We then expand the number of strata for each initial large- and small-stratum.
The adequacy of the existing strata is assessed by calculating a t-statistic for each stratum where
the null hypothesis is that the average value of the estimated linearized propensity score is the
same for the treated and control projects in that stratum. If the null hypothesis is rejected (i.e. the
absolute value of the t-statistic exceeds 1.645), then the stratum is split into two new strata by



33
   We include additional first-order (second-order) terms only if the likelihood ratio statistic for the test of the null
hypothesis that the additional covariate is equal to zero exceeds 2.5 (4.21).
34
   As a confidentiality protection measure, we Winsorize each distribution at the 5 th and 95th percentiles, which
overstates the lack of overlap at the tails of the distribution.

                                                          15
grouping projects above and below the median linearized propensity score. 35 The newly generated
strata are required to have at least 3 HOPE VI and control projects and 50 total projects in order to
prevent issues related to small sample sizes in the analysis.36 The process is then repeated until
either the null hypothesis of no difference between treatment and control projects in the linearized
propensity score is not rejected for any stratum, or splitting the stratum at the median treatment
project's linearized propensity score would result in too few projects in one of the newly generated
strata. This process divides the sample into seven distinct strata. On average, each stratum contains
about 18,000 unique children from 100 different projects, 15% of whom reside in HOPE VI
projects. The boundary points of the strata are depicted by the vertical lines in Figure 2 and Table
A.2 presents the sample size within each stratum.
        This procedure does an excellent job of eliminating differences in observable
characteristics between control and treatment groups within each stratum. To demonstrate this
point, we regress 92 different baseline variables on an indicator for HOPE VI within each of the
seven strata and calculate a t-statistic to summarize the differences between control and treatment
observations (standard errors are clustered at the project level). We plot the distribution of the
absolute value of the resulting 644 t-statistics in Figure A.3 and compare it to the distribution one
would expect from the absolute value of t-statistics from a standard normal distribution. The figure
illustrates that, if anything, there is more balance within stratum than would be expected from
random assignment. Table A.3 provides a more detailed view by presenting the proportion of test
statistics that have a p-value of less than 0.10 for neighborhood-, project- and individual-level
characteristics. If balance were good, we would expect that the share of significant test statistics
would be approximately 10%. For the most part, we find that this pattern applies. For example,
column 6 of Table A.3 suggests that only 12% of the 276 p-values calculated within the large PHA
sample had a p-value of less than 0.10 and only 6.2% of 368 p-values calculated within the small
PHA sample had a p-value of less than 0.10.37
        An advantage of this methodology is that many of the choices about how to adjust for
observable differences between HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI projects are determined by the data.
However, the method does depend on six tuning parameters, which must be defined by the


35
   Let p denote the propensity score, then the linearized propensity score is defined as ln(p/(1-p)).
36
   We require 50 total projects in each stratum because we cluster standard errors at the project level.
37
   Without making any adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing, we should observe slightly more than 10% of tests
rejected at the 10% level.

                                                        16
researcher.38 We chose a set of tuning parameters that robustly eliminates baseline differences
between HOPE VI and control projects within strata. 39 There are two important considerations to
note here. First, the criteria used for selecting tuning parameters are only based on how well the
method eliminates observable differences between HOPE VI and control projects and do not use
the outcome variables. Thus, we avoid concerns of specification search. Second, in practice our
main findings are robust to alternative choices of tuning parameters (see Appendix B).
         Using the stratification structure, we implement our estimator in two steps. First, we
separately estimate the following OLS specifications within each of the strata:
                                   {Eq. 1}  =  +   +   + 
where y is a labor market, neighborhood, or household outcome; i is the individual; t is the year in
which that individual appears in public housing; p is the project; s is the stratum the project was
assigned to in the first stage; D is an indicator equal to one if the project received a HOPE VI
demolition award; X is vector of observable individual-, household-, project-, and neighborhood-
level characteristics; and  is an error term which we cluster at the project level. 40 Because the
specifications are run within each stratum, all of the estimated coefficients are stratum-specific.
         All specifications include controls for the year in which the individual appears in public
housing (with the HOPE VI individuals only appearing in one year), and a standard set of project-
level controls that include characteristics of the project (average total income of resident

38
   These parameters are: (1) the number of matches to use when trimming the sample, (2) the threshold for the
likelihood ratio test to include first-order terms for the estimation of the propensity score, (3) the threshold for the
likelihood ratio test to include second-order terms for the estimation of the propensity score, (4) a threshold for the
test statistic used to determine whether the estimated propensity scores of control and treated projects are sufficiently
similar within strata, (5) the minimum number of control projects that must be included in each stratum and (6) the
minimum number of treated projects that must be included in each stratum. We view the first three tuning parameters
as both the most consequential, since they determine which projects serve as controls for each HOPE VI project, and
the most likely to require values specific to applications that differ in number of observations and heterogeneity within
the sample. Thus, we use standard values for the fourth through sixth tuning parameters but select "optimal" values
for the first through third parameters.
39
   To do this, we implement the stratification 33 different times using different values of the number of matches (3, 5
or 7) and different values of the second and third tuning parameter. (As a rule of thumb, Imbens and Rubin (2015)
find 1.00 and 2.71 work well for the values of the second and third tuning parameters. We vary the value of the second
tuning parameter from 1.0 to 6.0 and set the value of the third tuning parameter to 1.71 higher than the second.) We
then create a score for each iteration based on the resulting balance of all baseline covariates across HOPE VI and
control observations. We find balance is achieved most robustly when using five matches. Thus, we opt to use the
specification that delivers the best balance of baseline covariates (lowest-ranked score) when using five matches.
40
   There are a small number of cases in which the outcome variable is missing. To avoid disclosure issues related to
releasing results from multiple sample, we impute these missing values with the mean value in the control group and
then include an interaction between an indicator for this imputation and treatment status in the regression. In this way
imputed values do not contribute to the identification of the treatment effect. In unreported results we estimate all
specifications with missing data without this imputation and confirm that the results are not materially different.

                                                          17
households, proportion black non-Hispanic, and proportion of household heads that are female);
area median income in 1990; characteristics of census tract in 1990 (proportion on public
assistance, median income, and poverty rate); and the county-level unemployment rate in 1996.41
The standard vector of individual-level covariates included in the specifications estimated on the
child-level dataset includes the interaction between sex and mutually exclusive race/ethnicity
categories (black non-Hispanic, white non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other race or race not specified
non-Hispanic); the number of dependents in the household; household size; an indicator for
disability; a fixed effect for age at the time of appearing in public housing; an indicator for whether
the head of household has a disability; an indicator for whether the household head is female; the
marital status of head of household; the age of the head of household, and total household income. 42
While individuals from HOPE VI projects only appear once in the sample, individuals from control
projects may appear multiple times in the sample with an observation for each year they appear in
public housing between 1997 and 2001. Nearly all of these individuals appear in the same project
and thus clustering standard errors at the project level allows us to take these "duplicate"
observation into account when calculating standard errors with each stratum. 43
         The stratum-specific treatment effects are then aggregated across strata, using the stratum's
share of the total of treated individuals as weights. Let  be the number of treated individuals in
stratum  and  be the total of treated individuals across all strata including both the large and
                                                                                      
small PHA groups. The weight for each stratum is given by  =                             , and the estimate of the
                                                                                      

average treatment effect on the treated,   , and the corresponding standard error, (  ), are
given as:
                                            {Eq. 2}         = 
                                                                 
                                                              =1(   )


                                     {Eq. 3}      (  ) =     
                                                         =1(( )   )
                                                                    2


where the weighted averages are taken across all S strata (S=7 for the main specification). 44

41
   The large number of individuals within each stratum allows us to include a large set of individual-level controls in
our stratum-level regressions. Since the number of projects per stratum is more limited, we are careful to include a
smaller number of project-level controls in the regression analysis.
42
   The standard vector of individual-level covariates included in the specifications estimated on the household head-
level dataset includes age, race, sex, number of dependents, household size, disability status, marital status, and total
household income.
43
   Appendix B shows that our main results are robust to dropping all observations that appear in more than one project
and shows that the standard errors are not significantly affected by the presence of these individuals.
44
   The implicit assumption needed to construct the standard errors is that observations across strata are independent.

                                                          18
         Our methodology will produce unbiased estimates of the average treatment effect on the
treated under the Conditional Independence Assumption; conditional on the covariates and
stratification in the model, assignment of a HOPE VI demolition is as good as random. While this
assumption is not empirically testable, we conduct a number of analyses to assess its plausibility.
Our method successfully eliminates observable differences between HOPE VI and control
projects, which provides some initial support for the Conditional Independence Assumption. After
presenting the main results we discuss other checks intended to assess the validity of the empirical
approach.


5.       Results
5.1 Long-Run Effects on Children
         Table 2 presents the main finding of the paper. On average, exposure to a HOPE VI
demolition led to substantial improvements in the long-run labor market outcomes of the children
who resided in those projects. Panel A presents the results pooling across large and small PHAs.
Columns 1-4 correspond to the estimates for four different labor market outcomes measured in the
year that the child turns 26: the number of quarters worked, an indicator equal to one if earnings
are strictly positive in all four quarters, total earnings divided by 1,000, and the inverse hyperbolic
                                         45
sine (IHS) of annual earnings.                All coefficients are estimated using the stratification with
regression methodology, and the standard set of covariates used in the stratum-level regressions.
We find that, on average, the HOPE VI program increased age 26 earnings by 14.2%, annual
earnings by $622, the number of quarters worked by 0.057, and the probability that an individual
worked all four quarters by 1.6 percentage points. HOPE VI clearly had important positive impacts
on adult labor market outcomes.
         While the overall impact of the program was positive, there is heterogeneity across
different housing environments. Panels B and C of Table 2 present results separately for large and
small PHAs. The positive impacts are generally stronger in large PHAs, with differences that are
often economically important in size. For example, the IHS earnings specification suggests a

We argue that this is reasonable based on the fact that no project appears in more than one stratum and standard errors
are clustered at the project level.
45
   We use the IHS of earnings rather than the more traditional log of earnings because estimated coefficients can be
interpreted in the same way as with a log-transformed dependent variable but, unlike with the log of earnings, IHS is
defined for zero earnings. The IHS is defined as log[yi+(1+yi^2 )^0.5 )] where yi is total earnings for individual i (see
Burbidge et al. 1988).

                                                          19
19.5% increase in age 26 earnings for children in large PHAs and only a 4.5% increase for those
in small PHAs.46 We provide additional evidence below that there is meaningful heterogeneity by
PHA size in the effect of the program.
         We explore heterogenous effects by child age at the time of the demolition, race, and sex
by estimating a model in which the indicator for HOPE VI is interacted with these characteristics.
Table 3 presents the resulting estimates for large PHAs.47 Column 1 indicates that the impacts of
the program are no different for older and younger children. 48 Specifically, children exposed to
HOPE VI when they were 10 years old experienced an earnings gain of 20.5% while this gain is
18.9% for 18-year-olds; a difference that is neither economically or statistically significant. This
offers some initial evidence that the impacts of the program are not driven by differences in human
capital accumulation from exposure to neighborhoods of varying quality, at least through the
exposure model typically considered in this literature (as in Chetty et al. 2016; Chetty and Hendren
2018). Column 2 indicates that males experience significantly larger earnings benefits while
column 3 suggests that non-white children also benefit more. While we do not have enough power
to estimate a model with the full set of interactions between race and sex, column 4 presents
estimates from a specification in which we compare the effects for non-white males to all other
children. We find that non-white males appear to be the primary beneficiaries of the program.
5.2 Short- and Medium- Run Effects for Head of Households
         To better understand the mechanisms through which HOPE VI demolitions affected long-
term labor market outcomes, we explore the short- and medium-term effects of the program,
starting with housing outcomes for households one, three, and five years after the demolition. In
Table 4, column 1 shows that HOPE VI led to a 15 and 18 percentage point reduction in the
probability that the household head lives in the same housing project five years after the demolition
in large and small PHAs, respectively (relative to 33% and 28% of control households remaining
in their original project). Column 2 and 3 indicate that HOPE VI pushed households into both


46
   The long-run benefits found in large PHAs are robust to measuring earnings at alternative times. Figure A.4 in
Appendix A presents estimates of the effect of HOPE VI on the IHS of earnings measured between ages 18 and 26.
The effect of the program grows over time, starting around zero at age 18 and rising to about 0.2 by age 23, after
which point the effects stabilize through age 26.
47
   Not surprisingly, we also find little evidence of heterogeneous effects in small PHAs. The one exception is that
there is some evidence that white children may have benefited more than non-white children in small PHAs. See
Appendix B for details.
48
   In unreported results we also find that the lack of heterogeneous effects by age is robust to estimating alternative
specifications that employ project or household fixed effects.

                                                         20
voucher and other public housing with a slightly larger shift into voucher housing. Five years after
the demolition, HOPE VI households in large housing authorities are 9.8 percentage points (98%)
more likely to be in voucher housing and 5.9 percentage points (70%) more likely to be in a new
public housing project; the analogous figures in small housing authorities are 10.7 percentage
points (106%) and 9 percentage points (134%) for voucher housing and new public housing
projects, respectively.
         Column 4 of Table 4 illustrates that while there is evidence that households were displaced
from assisted housing one year after the demolition in large PHAs, HOPE VI did not push
households out of subsidized housing in the longer-run.49 We emphasize that many households in
HOPE VI projects did end up leaving subsidized housing within a five-year period, but that the
rate at which they did so was similar in the control group--48.5% and 54.9% of control household
heads departed assisted housing within five years in large and small PHAs, respectively. This
finding is consistent with other work that finds high rates of turnover in low-quality public housing
projects (McClure 2018).
         In addition to altering the type of housing, HOPE VI also increased the likelihood of
migration to new neighborhoods. Column 6 of Table 4 indicates that HOPE VI increased the
probability of moving to a new census tract five years after the demolition by 13.0 and 17.2
percentage points in large and small PHAs, respectively. Column 5 indicates that these moves to
new neighborhoods were typically occurring without moves across county boundaries. The HOPE
VI-induced residential mobility is therefore extremely local.
         Given this increased mobility of HOPE VI households, we examine the average
characteristics of the neighborhoods in which they resided between one and five years after the
demolition.50 Table 5 illustrates that, in both large and small PHAs, HOPE VI did not lead
households to move to higher quality neighborhoods as measured by census tract school quality
and poverty rate, or to demographically distinct neighborhoods as measured by the share of

49
   The category "other public" refers to individuals who appear in the HUD -PIC files but are not in the same project
or in voucher housing. The vast majority of these individuals are actually in public housing but there may be a small
percentage who participate in the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Program, which is the other assisted housing
program covered by the HUD-PIC files. In addition, the category "non-subsidized" refers to individuals who do not
appear in the HUD-PIC files. The HUD-PIC files cover both the public housing and voucher programs, which are by
far the largest programs subsidizing housing costs for renters. Thus, while there may some households in this group
that participate in other subsidized housing programs not covered in the HUD-PIC data, the numbers are likely to be
very small.
50
   We find similar patterns if we instead use the timing as in Table 5 and measure characteristics of neighborhoods 1,
3, and 5 years after the demolition.

                                                         21
residents that are White non-Hispanic. The estimated impacts on the school proficiency index are
not statistically distinguishable from zero and less than 1% of the magnitude of a control group
standard deviation; similarly, while the point estimates for census tract poverty rates are negative
in both small and large PHAs, we are unable to reject the null of no effect and they are only around
4% of the control group mean poverty rate in both PHA size groups. This is partially consistent
with existing evidence from Chicago: Chyn (2018) finds evidence of short-term moves to more
advantaged neighborhoods, but he also finds that these effects fade quickly over time.
       Finally, we estimate the effect of HOPE VI on labor market outcomes for the head of
household. Table 6 presents estimates of the impact of the program on the number of quarters
worked and the IHS of annual earnings measured five and ten years after the demolition for the
heads of household. We find no evidence that HOPE VI improved or depressed labor market
outcomes for the parents. Together, none of the results in this section suggest that the long-run
benefits for children are driven by measurable improvements in the home or neighborhood
environment that would be likely to affect human capital accumulation while young.
5.3 Assessing the Validity of the Empirical Strategy
       As stated above, our ability to interpret the estimates as causal relies on the Conditional
Independence Assumption. While we have previously shown that the methodology does a good
job eliminating observable differences between HOPE VI and control projects, it is still possible
that the results are biased by unobserved differences or functional form assumptions implicit in
the stratum-level regressions. In this section we implement three types of analyses to address these
concerns: "pseudo treatment," "pseudo outcome," and "sensitivity/robustness" analyses.
       First, we implement a pseudo treatment analysis in which we define a group of projects
that were not affected by HOPE VI as pseudo treatment projects. We then estimate pseudo
treatment effects by re-implementing the full trimming and stratification with regression method
with the pseudo treatment group in place of the true treatment group and omitting the true treatment
group from the sample. Estimating null effects for projects that, a priori, should not have
systematically different potential outcomes for resident children from comparable projects
provides evidence that the methodology is able to adequately correct for baseline differences. This
analysis is most convincing if the pseudo treatment projects are, absent exposure to the HOPE VI
program, more similar to the true HOPE VI treatment projects than the full set of control projects.
Thus, we implement the pseudo treatment analysis using the set of projects that applied for but

                                                22
never received funding for the HOPE VI Demolition or Revitalization programs.51 Table A.4
presents the estimated effects of the pseudo treatment, which are never statistically different from
zero and standard errors are similar in size to those from our main results in Table 2. The results
indicate that after the matching methodology is applied to the group of failed applicants, there is
no evidence of positive bias.52 Thus, the pseudo treatment analysis bolsters confidence in the
validity of our methodology.
         Second, we implement pseudo outcomes analyses. Here we select a variable measured
prior to the demolition, designate it as a pseudo outcome, and re-implement the trimming and
stratification process after excluding any variable that is derived from the pseudo outcome from
being included in any other part of the matching or regression analysis. For example, if household
income were the pseudo outcome, we would implement the matching and estimation of the
propensity score without using the average income at the project level. We then use the
stratification with regression estimator to estimate a pseudo outcome effect in which the pseudo
outcome is the outcome variable and we include the full set of controls (excluding the pseudo
outcome). The results from these analyses are displayed in Table A.5. Each row presents the results
for one of the 18 pseudo outcomes, with columns 1-3 presenting estimates for the large, small, and
pooled samples, respectively. Overall, the results confirm the ability of the methodology to remove
differences between HOPE VI and control projects. Column 3 indicates that only 2 of the 18
pseudo outcome estimates are statistically significant when pooling across housing authority sizes.
We do, however, reject the null of no pseudo outcome effect for household income. This likely
indicates that household income is a critical variable in the matching process for which there is not
a close substitute.


51
   There were too few failed applicants identified in the public data for only the demolitions program, so we pooled
applicants across the two programs. However, given that the two programs targeted a similar group of projects and
that the projects look similar along observable characteristics at baseline, we argue that this is an informative exercise.
Figure A.5 provides evidence to show that failed applicants had similar observable characteristics to the HOPE VI
demolition awardees at baseline. Note that failed applicants were subject to the same set of restrictions as all other
non-HOPE VI projects (see footnote 25).
52
   If anything, there appears to be a negative pseudo treatment effect, which could suggest that HOPE VI projects are
negatively selected relative to counterfactual projects and our main estimates may provide lower bounds on the true
effect of HOPE VI. Alternatively, these negative (statistically insignificant) associations could be explained if the
applicant projects were exposed to alternative, less effective programs in place of HOPE VI. The fact that they might
have been exposed to other programs complicates the interpretation of the estimated effect of HOPE VI when the
failed applicants are included in the set of controls. While we include the failed applicants in our set of potential
controls, in practice they make up only small portion of the matched sample used to estimate the main results. Indeed,
our results are robust to excluding failed applicants from the set of matched controls.

                                                           23
         Third, we assess the robustness of the estimates to alternative variables used in the
regression adjustment. Table A.6 presents estimates of the effect of HOPE VI for four different
specifications that either (1) use the baseline stratification structure or simply define two strata by
large and small PHAs and (2) do or do not include covariates in the model. Column 3 and 4 use
the baseline stratification structure but do and do not include covariates in the model, respectively.
For large PHAs, the estimated effect of HOPE VI on the IHS of earnings at age 26 is 0.157 without
controls compared to 0.195 with controls.53 For small PHAs, estimates with and without controls
are similarly small across the two specifications (0.005 and 0.045). Thus, once the stratification
structure is implemented, the main role of the covariates in the model is to increase precision. This
finding suggests that the choice of which covariates are included in the stratum-level regressions
and how they are included (functional form) are not driving the results. In addition, the similarity
between the standard errors in column 2 and 4 mitigates concerns related to inadequate sample
sizes for clustering standard errors at the project level within strata and to individuals in control
projects appearing in multiple projects across distinct strata. 54
5.4 Mechanisms
         What are the mechanisms through which HOPE VI affected long-run labor market
outcomes? In other research that finds long-term labor market benefits of exiting public housing
when young, Chyn (2018) and Chetty et al. (2016) find evidence of an exposure model:
environment shapes the development of human capital with an influence that is increasing in the
duration of exposure and particularly important for young children. However, the evidence
presented in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 is inconsistent with the exposure model in our context.
Specifically, we find no direct evidence that HOPE VI improved childhood environment by
increasing the earnings of parents or improving neighborhood quality along the dimensions
typically considered by the literature. Furthermore, we do not find larger impacts for children that
were younger at the time of the demolition, a finding that is central to the exposure model. While
the evidence suggests a different mechanism than is highlighted in the existing literature, our


53
    While the point estimate is smaller in column 3 (the specification that uses the stratification structure without
covariate adjustment) relative to column 4 (the baseline specification), the estimate would be statistically significant
if the standard error from the main specification were used to conduct the hypothesis test.
54
   Appendix Table A.7 shows that the main results are also robust to using OLS and restricting the sample of control
projects to: 1) projects in the same PHA as a HOPE VI project, or 2) projects that applied for but did not receive HOPE
VI funding. See Appendix B for details.


                                                          24
results do not conflict with the exposure model findings. Our analysis focuses on older children--
between the ages of 10-18 at the time of the demolition--for which prior research has found limited
potential for exposure effect-type mechanisms. Additionally, MTO provided assistance for
households to facilitate moves to lower poverty neighborhoods and explicitly required moves to
lower poverty neighborhoods in the experimental treatment arm. No similar incentives existed for
the households affected by the HOPE VI program. It is possible that we would see exposure effects
for younger cohorts of children, or if the program at study had included more encouragement for
beneficiaries to move to higher quality neighborhoods, as was the case with MTO.
         Changes in the exposure to, or involvement in, criminal activity is another mechanism that
both motivated the creation of the HOPE VI program and has been explored in the literature on
neighborhood effects. While our measures related to crime are admittedly limited, we do not find
any evidence that HOPE VI affected the likelihood of incarceration. Following the methodology
of Andersson et al. (2018a), we link individuals to the 2010 Decennial Census File to determine
whether they reside in an adult correctional facility at the time of the survey. Table A.8 indicates
that the effect of HOPE VI increased the probability of being incarcerated in 2010 by 0.001 and
0.005 in large and small PHAs, respectively. These effects are both economically and statistically
insignificant.55
         Rather than affecting the environment in which the children grew up, HOPE VI could have
affected labor market outcomes by instead influencing where they live as young adults. We
investigate this possibility by studying residential outcomes of the children measured in 2010.56
As a starting point we estimate a number of specifications in which the outcome variable is an
indicator equal to one if the distance between the project and the location of residence in 2010
exceeds some threshold. The results are presented in Figure 3. In both large and small PHAs,
HOPE VI pushed children away from the neighborhoods in which their projects were located, but
the resulting moves were quite local. About one-half of all children lived within five miles of their

55
   In unreported results, we show that this null result also holds when limiting the sample to males, who are at higher
risk of being incarcerated.
56
   We focus on 2010 because we are best able to measure residential location by combining data from both the 2010
Decennial Census and the CPR. The children are between the ages of 19 and 31 in 2010 and thus these measures of
residential location may not correspond exactly to where children are living when we measure their earnings at age
26. However, we do not think this is a major concern because most children will be in their mid-twenties at this time
and, as shown in Figure A.4, the effect of the program in Large PHAs starts at around zero at age 18 but increases to
about 0.2 by age 23, after which point the effects stabilize through age 26. The longitude and latitude from the internal
points of the census tract (the centroid) are from Census Bureau Gazetteer Files for 2010 geography.


                                                          25
project in 2010, and HOPE VI increased the likelihood of moving to a new neighborhood within
a 5-mile radius of the project but had no discernable effect on moving farther away. Thus, while
HOPE VI induced households to move, it did not increase the likelihood that they moved far from
their original locations.
        It is possible that HOPE VI could have affected labor market outcomes by dispersing
residents and breaking apart peer groups. Such disruptions could be either beneficial or
detrimental, depending on the characteristics of the network. To investigate this, we use residential
location in 2010 to measure the distance between adult children and each of their former public
housing co-residents. We create four variables to characterize network dispersion: the average log
distance to all former co-residents and the share of former residents who live within a 1-, 3-, and
5-mile radius. The results, presented in Table A.9, suggest that HOPE VI did not disperse residents
geographically in large PHAs. While these are coarse measures, the results provide no evidence
that HOPE VI improved labor market outcomes by disrupting peer groups formed in public
housing. Note that these results are not inconsistent with those presented in Figure 3 since affected
households could have remained spatially close if they moved to a nearby neighborhood after the
demolition.
        HOPE VI could also have influenced children's subsequent labor supply decisions by
affecting the probability that children live in subsidized housing or with their parents as young
adults. However, the results in column 3 of Table A.8 indicate that HOPE VI had no detectable
effect on the probability of being in subsidized housing in 2010; similarly, columns 4 and 5 show
that the program had no detectable impact on living near or with parents.
        We do find, however, that the program led to a meaningful change in some of the
characteristics of the neighborhoods where the children lived as young adults. We estimate the
effect of HOPE VI on six characteristics of the census tract in which the individual resided in 2010
including poverty rate, employment rate, a measure of labor market networks (observed network
isolation), and three measures of the geographic proximity to jobs (the log of the ratio of jobs to
people, the average commute time and a job proximity index that captures the "the accessibility of
a given neighborhood as a function of its distance to all job locations within a [Core-Based
Statistical Area]").57 The results, presented in Table 7, illustrate that, within large PHAs, HOPE


57
  For a description of the job proximity index see: http://hudgis-hud.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/jobs-proximity-
index. The underlying measure is the same as Shen (1998) and Wang (2007) and is similar to that in Andersson et al.

                                                        26
VI lead to an improvement in the geographic proximity to jobs along all three measures considered.
In contrast, there is no evidence that HOPE VI moved children to better neighborhoods in terms
of poverty, employment rate, or network isolation. In small PHAs, there is no evidence that HOPE
VI improved geographic proximity to jobs, and even some evidence that it led individuals to live
in areas with lower job proximity.
         Were HOPE VI-induced moves substantial enough to plausibly generate the improvements
in job proximity? While these moves tended to be to nearby neighborhoods, moving short distances
could still lead to large improvements in job proximity; the housing projects in the sample were
often located in neighborhoods that were especially geographically isolated from jobs, even
relative to nearby neighborhoods. This can be seen in Figure 4, which presents the average
commute time, poverty rate and population density in 1990 (before all demolitions) for housing
projects by treatment status (HOPE VI and control), PHA size (large and small), and distance to a
sample project (whether HOPE VI or control). In large PHAs, the public housing residents (of both
HOPE VI and control projects) had substantially higher commute times, poverty rates, and
population densities relative to residents of surrounding neighborhoods.58 Thus, it is plausible that
even the local moves induced by HOPE VI could have shifted children into neighborhoods with
better access to jobs.
         HOPE VI neighborhoods were outliers in terms of both job proximity and poverty. An
important question then is how the program could have induced moves to new neighborhoods that
were better in terms of job accessibility but not poverty. One potential explanation is that
neighborhood poverty is more strongly (and negatively) associated with housing prices than job
accessibility. For the households participating in public housing, meaningful housing price
increases are likely to preclude them from moving to a neighborhood. To assess this possibility,
we use publicly available data to identify all counties that contained a HOPE VI project. Within
each of these counties we construct population-weighted percentile ranks of neighborhoods based


(2018b), though it uses distance for the impedance function rather than travel time. The values of this underlying
measure are percentile ranked with values ranging from 0 to 100 and higher values indicates neighborhoods with
better access to jobs. The job proximity index is constructed by HUD using data from LODES (based on LEHD) for
2014. The observed network isolation index measures, for employed residents of a tract, the share of their co-workers
who are also neighbors, where high values of this variable could arise if information on job opportunities disseminate
through local networks (see Hellerstein et al. 2011 and Hellerstein et al. 2019).
58
   The average commute time is the best available measure of job proximity prior to the demolitions. The job proximity
index is not available during this time period since the LEHD data used to construct the measure have limited coverage
years prior to 2000.

                                                         27
on median rent, average commute time, and poverty rate as measured in 1990. Columns 1-2 of
Table A.10 present estimates from bivariate OLS regressions of average commute time on median
rent and neighborhood poverty on median rent. There are two key findings from the estimates.
First, poverty and median rent are strongly negatively correlated; within a city, neighborhoods
with a one percentile higher rank in terms of median rent have a 0.53 and 0.41 percentile lower
poverty rate rank in large and small PHAs, respectively. The R-squared values from these
regressions are 0.18 (in large PHAs) and 0.11 (in small PHAs). In contrast, there is no evidence
that neighborhoods with higher levels of job proximity are more expensive. In large PHAs the R-
squared from a regression of the average commute time rank on the median rent rank is 0.003, and
the point estimate is small, negative (-0.0189), and not statistically distinguishable from zero.59
While the average commute time is an imperfect measure of job proximity, the lack of relationship
between housing costs and job proximity is robust to using the job proximity index constructed by
HUD, which is available only in 2010 (see columns 3-4 of Table A.10). The cross-sectional
associations therefore support the idea that while moves to neighborhoods with better job
accessibility were likely financially feasible for HOPE VI-affected households, higher housing
prices may have made moves to lower poverty neighborhoods more difficult. This is consistent
with evidence from of quasi-experimental (Collinson and Ganong 2018; Andersson et al. 2018a),
experimental (Patterson et al. 2004; Eriksen and Ross 2013; Jacob, Ludwig, and Miller 2013), and
observational (Susin 2002; Carlson et al. 2012) studies on the Voucher program. An important
caveat is that homes with similar rents in more job-accessible neighborhoods may be lower quality
(e.g. smaller), but absolute housing cost may still be the most relevant decision factor for our
sample.
           In addition to forcing people to move to new neighborhoods, HOPE VI could have also
improved job accessibility for households that remained in their original neighborhood or moved
extremely short distances by altering the characteristics of the original neighborhoods themselves.
To explore this possibility, we measure the average job proximity index of census tracts within
half-mile radius bands from zero to five miles around the project. We then attach these
neighborhood-level measures to the child-level dataset and implement the stratification with
regression methodology as before to estimate the effect of HOPE VI on the characteristics of these
neighborhoods. The results for large and small PHAs are presented in Figure 5. We see no

59
     In small PHAs there appears to be evidence that job proximity is negatively related to housing costs.

                                                            28
significant impacts on job proximity in small PHAs at any distance. For large PHAs, HOPE VI
produced substantial improvements in the job proximity index for the census tract in which the
project was located, but these effects dissipate quickly and there appears to be no impact on
neighborhoods located farther than half a mile away.60 That the effects dissipate quickly with
distance is reassuring since we would not expect the demolition of a public housing project to
drastically transform the population or job density in more distant neighborhoods.61
         To investigate the origins of the effect on these neighborhood-level measures of job
proximity, we estimate the effect of HOPE VI on three characteristics of the census tract in which
the project was located: the log of the ratio of jobs to people, the log of the density of jobs, and log
of population density.62 The results, presented in Table A.11, imply that, HOPE VI increased the
ratio of jobs to people in large PHAs by 22%, and that this impact was driven primarily by a
reduction in population density: HOPE VI reduced in population density by 62%, a finding that
is statistically significant at the 1% level. HOPE VI is also associated with a statistically
insignificant 4.5% increase in job density. A reduction in population density will increase job
accessibility by reducing the number of competing searchers in the local labor market (more
competing searchers lower the job proximity index) as long as the number of jobs in the
neighborhood does not also decline. In the case of a public housing demolition, the reduction is
for a population likely to compete for a similar set of jobs (Lens 2014; Lens et al. 2019). In small
PHAs, we find no effect of HOPE VI on job or population density. This is likely due to the fact
that public housing projects typically had far fewer residents in small PHAs, and the demolitions
therefore did not displace as many households or lead to meaningful reductions in population
density.
         The preceding analyses suggest that HOPE VI improved geographic proximity to jobs in
large PHAs both by transforming the neighborhood in which the project was located and by
moving former residents to new neighborhoods with better accessibility. To investigate the


60
   The finding that the neighborhood in which the project was located underwent large changes supports our choice to
include all, and not just partial, demolitions in the analysis. Household in units that were not demolished were still
treated by the program by changes in neighbors and changes in the existing neighborhood.
61
   The fact that HOPE VI affected both the census tract in which the project was located and census tracts within a
half mile radius could reflect the fact that projects may have been located in multiple census tracts though we assign
each project to a unique census tract. Other research on HOPE VI has generally found that spillover effects of the
demolitions dissipate within a mile (e.g. Sandler 2017).
62
   Density is calculated by dividing the number of jobs (or population) by the land area of the census tract, so both
measures use the same land area for normalization. Land area cancels out in the job/population ratio.

                                                         29
quantitative importance of each channel, we estimate specifications that replace the true measure
of job proximity with a counterfactual measure that discards all variation due to changes in the
HOPE VI neighborhoods. In order to calculate this counterfactual measure, we use the
stratification with regression method to estimate the effect of HOPE VI on the job proximity index,
limiting the sample to census tracts within a half-mile radius of the original project; note that these
are the areas where HOPE VI directly impacted job proximity, as shown in Figure 5. We obtain a
predicted value of the job proximity index for HOPE VI neighborhoods in the absence of changes
to the original neighborhood by setting all covariates to their true value except for the HOPE VI
indicator, which is set to zero instead of one. The counterfactual measure of the job proximity
index is equal to this predicted value for all children who resided in HOPE VI projects and still
lived within a half-mile of their project in 2010--i.e. children whose neighborhood job proximity
was directly affected by the demolitions-induced changes--and is set to the true value of the job
proximity index for all other children. Intuitively, we impute the job proximity for individuals
from HOPE VI projects who remained within a half-mile of their original project (and therefore
benefitted from changes in the neighborhood of origin) using the job proximity for individuals
from observably similar control projects. Any estimated improvements using this counterfactual
measure of job proximity will thus be entirely driven by HOPE VI-induced moves to new
neighborhoods. We then estimate the impact of HOPE VI on this counterfactual job proximity
measure for large PHAs. The original estimates, presented in Table 7, indicate that HOPE VI
increased the job proximity index by 2.11. When the counterfactual value of the job proximity
index is used as the outcome variable, this estimated impact falls to 1.16, suggesting that
improvements in the neighborhood in which HOPE VI projects were located explain about 45%
of the total impact on the job proximity index in large PHAs. This back-of-the-envelope calculation
therefore suggests that, within large PHAs, HOPE VI improved access to jobs by moving children
to new neighborhoods and by improving the original neighborhoods that contained the HOPE VI
projects, with both channels being quantitatively important.
       Improvements in job proximity could affect earnings by reducing job search and/or
commuting costs and encouraging individuals on the margin between working and not working to
participate in the labor market. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that an important part of
the earnings gains occurs through an extensive margin labor supply response. Using the estimates
from Table 2, the control means from columns 1 and 4 indicate that the average working child

                                                  30
from the control group earns $3,944 per quarter whereas column 1 indicates that HOPE VI
increased quarters worked by 0.076. Using the effect on quarters worked and average earnings per
quarter in control projects we calculate that the effect on annual earnings would be $300
(3,944*0.076=$300) if the entire effect were driven by an increase in labor force participation.
This is about 57% of the estimated effect in column 3, suggesting that extensive margin labor
supply responses are the main avenue through which the earnings impacts occur.
       As discussed earlier, we find no effect of HOPE VI demolitions on earnings for the heads
of household. Given that many of these heads of household are single mothers who qualify for
public support and have especially high opportunity costs for time supplied in the labor market, a
likely explanation for this discrepancy is that the heads of household have higher reservation
wages. Figure A.7 presents the distribution of earnings for household heads and the adult children.
Consistent with the theory that household heads have a higher reservation wage, there is a
hollowing out of the distribution of labor market earnings for household heads relative to the adult
earnings of the children in our main sample; household heads are more likely to have zero earnings
(48% compared to 35%) and less likely to have low levels of strictly positive earnings (10% of
households heads have earnings in the bottom quartile compared to 18% of the adult children).
       In sum, there are three reasons that support the job accessibility mechanism as an important
driver of our main results. First, we find systematic evidence of improvements in measures of job
proximity within large PHAs, where differences in job proximity should be larger and more
meaningful. Second, the effect on earnings appears to have a substantial extensive margin
component, which is consistent with the hypothesis that HOPE VI primarily affected the costs
associated with finding a job and not the rewards from work. Third, the difference in the effect of
HOPE VI on earnings in large PHAs versus small PHAs is precisely mirrored by the differences
of the effects on the various measures of job accessibility. In the next section we expand upon this
last point and show that even within the large PHAs the impacts on earnings are largest in places
where we would expect job accessibility to be particularly low absent the intervention.
5.5 Reconciling Different Effects in Different Environments
       Why does HOPE VI produce substantial long-run labor market gains for children living in
large but not small PHAs? One possible explanation is that the program interacted in important
ways with local environments. In particular, poor geographic access to jobs might affect labor
market outcomes more in the worst neighborhoods. Figure 6 presents kernel density plots of the

                                                31
average commute time, poverty rate, and population density in 1990 in the census tracts containing
projects in the sample, separately by PHA size (large or small) and HOPE VI treatment status. The
figure illustrates that prior to the demolitions, projects in large PHAs, regardless of whether they
subsequently received a HOPE VI grant, had significantly higher average commute times, poverty
rates, and population densities.63
        Figure 6 also illustrates that there is substantial variation even within the large PHAs in
terms of these baseline characteristics of neighborhoods. We make use of this variation by
estimating three specifications in which we interact the indicator for HOPE VI with pre-demolition
measures of neighborhood average commute time, poverty, and population density. The results for
large PHAs, presented in Table 8, suggest that demolitions had stronger effects for projects in
neighborhoods that were more densely populated, where commutes were longer, and where the
poverty rate was higher in 1990.64 The heterogeneity is economically meaningful. For example,
the results suggest that HOPE VI increased age 26 earnings by 37% for children in neighborhoods
that had baseline poverty rates one standard deviation above the mean poverty rate among HOPE
VI projects. In comparison, children in neighborhoods with poverty rates one standard deviation
below the mean only experienced a 10% increase in earnings.
        Together, the heterogeneity in the effect of HOPE VI both across and within large and
small PHAs suggests that the program produced larger labor market gains for children originally
residing in high-density, high-poverty neighborhoods, with limited job opportunities nearby.
Within these communities, HOPE VI improved labor market outcomes both by shifting children
into neighborhoods with better job accessibility and by improving the job accessibility of the
original neighborhoods. In contrast, the program offered much smaller (or no) benefits to
individuals residing in neighborhoods with better job accessibility prior to the demolition.
        The treatment effect heterogeneity is also informative for interpreting findings from
existing research. As previously discussed, Chyn (2018) and Chetty et al. (2016) both find long-
term labor market benefits from exiting public housing when young. However, only Chyn (2018)
finds that these benefits extend to older children (older than 13). Our results suggest an explanation


63
   Komogorov-Smirnov equality-of-distribution tests confirm that the differences between HOPE VI projects in the
large and small PHAs are statistically significant while the differences between the control and HOPE VI projects
within large and small PHAs are not statistically different from one another.
64
   Table A.11 presents the results for small PHAs. We find no evidence of meaningful interaction effects here, which
is not surprising given that we find no significant effect of HOPE VI in this sample in general.

                                                        32
for this discrepancy: Chyn (2018) notes that the projects in his study were in much higher poverty
neighborhoods than those in MTO. His sample thus included public housing projects that were
much more disadvantaged, located in neighborhoods with limited job accessibility. Thus, moving
older children out of these projects produced more immediate labor market gains, whereas no such
gains occurred for older children in the context of Chetty et al. (2016). Relatedly, while Anderson
et al. (2018a) find that time spent in public and voucher housing when young produces long-term
labor market benefits of similar magnitudes, our paper highlights the fact that these average effects
mask substantial heterogeneity, and that children in the lowest quality public housing projects may
benefit from changes in housing. More broadly, the results from our paper highlight how housing
and neighborhood can affect long-term outcomes through a multitude of channels that vary in
importance with local context.


6.       Conclusion
         This paper uses administrative data on earnings and participation in subsidized housing to
study how the demolition of public housing projects--funded by the HOPE VI demolitions
program--affected the long-run earnings of resident children. We find that, on average, exposure
to a demolition increased earnings at age 26 by 14%. However, the benefits appear to be driven by
children who lived in neighborhoods that were denser, poorer, and farther from jobs prior to the
demolition. In terms of potential mechanisms, we find no evidence that HOPE VI improved the
home or neighborhood environment that children were exposed to while young. We do, however,
find evidence consistent with HOPE VI improving labor market outcomes by increasing the
proximity of job opportunities in the neighborhoods in which the children lived as young adults.
         Over the past thirty years, federal housing policy has sought to move families living in
subsidized housing out of especially disadvantaged neighborhoods. The results in this paper offer
evidence that these moves can generate long-term labor market benefits for children. Interestingly,
we find that these moves need not occur in early childhood to produce improvements in adult labor
market outcomes.65 Instead, our findings highlight the important and immediate impact of reducing
barriers to young adult employment through increasing the accessibility of formal market jobs.


65
  It is important to emphasize that we are not suggesting that these moves are more beneficial than earlier moves to
higher quality neighborhoods. We are not able to investigate this in our study as the youngest children exposed to the
demolitions are not old enough to measure adult labor market outcomes.

                                                         33
Neighborhoods can affect labor market outcomes through multiple channels, and severely
distressed public housing projects can, in some cases, limit job accessibility and discourage labor
force participation by creating densely populated neighborhoods with high rates of poverty and a
limited number of nearby jobs.
       Our results highlight the importance of accounting for the interaction between subsidized
housing policies and local context. Much of the research on assisted housing has taken place in a
limited set of large metropolitan areas. In the case of public housing demolitions, our results
indicate that the long-run labor market benefits found in other work are specific to this setting (at
least for older children), which highlights the possibility that resources may be better spent on
alternative interventions in less urban and disadvantaged environments. Research has convincingly
documented that housing can have important long-run labor market implications but anticipating
the effects of potential interventions requires a more complete understanding of the mechanisms.
Future research should continue to focus on better understanding how the impacts of housing
policies interact with the characteristics of local environments to produce changes in welfare and
contribute to the intergenerational transmission of economic outcomes.




                                                 34
References
Abowd, John, John Haltiwanger, and Julia Lane. 2004. "Integrated Longitudinal Employee -Employer Data for the
   United States." American Economic Review 94(2): 224-229.
Andersson, Fredrik, John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano Palloni, Henry O. Pollakowski, and Daniel H.
   Weinberg. 2018a. "Childhood Housing and Adult Earnings: A Between -Siblings Analysis of Housing Vouchers
   and Public Housing." NBER Working Paper 22721.
Andersson, Fredrik, John Haltiwanger, Mark Kutzbach, Henry Pollakowski, and Daniel Weinberg. 2018b. "J ob
   Displacement and the Duration of Joblessness: The Role of Spatial Mismatch." The Review of Economics and
   Statistics 100(2): 203-218.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. "Alternative Transformations to Handle Extreme Values
   of the Dependent Variable" Journal of the American Statistical Association 83(401): 123-127.
Carlson, Deven, Robert Haveman, Tom Kaplan, and Barbara Wolfe. "Long-term earnings and employment effects of
   housing voucher receipt." Journal of Urban Economics 71, no. 1 (2012): 128-150.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood
   Exposure Effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3): 1107­1162.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. "Where is the land of Opportunity? The
   Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-
   1623.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence Katz. 2016. "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on
   Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment." American Economic Review 106(4): 855-
   902.
Chyn, Eric, 2018. "Moved to opportunity: The long-run effects of public housing demolition on children." American
   Economic Review 108(10): 3028-3056.
Collinson, Robert and Peter Ganong. 2018. "How Do Changes in Housing Voucher Design Affect Rent and
   Neighborhood Quality." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(2): 62-89.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1996. "Small business and job creation: Dissecting the myth and
   reassessing the facts." Small Business Economics 8(4): 297-315.
Eriksen, Michael and Amanda Ross. 2013. "The impact of housing vouchers on mobility and neighborho od
   attributes." Real Estate Economics 41(2): 255-277.
Gallagher, Megan, and Beata Bajaj. 2007. "Moving on: Benefits and challenges of HOPE VI for children." HOPE VI:
   Where do we go from here.
Graham, Matthew, Mark Kutzbach, and Danielle Sandler. 2017. "Dev eloping a Residence Candidate File for Use with
   Employer-Employee Matched Data." U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper 17 -40.
Goetz, E. G. 2010. "Desegregation in 3D: Displacement, dispersal and development in American public hou sing.
   Housing Studies" 25(2): 137-158.
Hellerstein, Judith K., Melissa McInerney, and David Neumark. 2011. "Neighbors and Co -Workers: The Importance
   of Residential Labor Market Networks." Journal of Labor Economics 29(4): 659-695.
Hellerstein, Judith, Mark Kutzbach, and David Neumark. 2019. "Labor market networks and recovery from mass
   layoffs: Evidence from the Great Recession period," Journal of Urban Economics 113.
Imbens G. 2015. "Matching Methods in Practice." Journal of Human Resources 50(2): 373-419.
Imbens, Guido, and Donald Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference in Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences . New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Imbens, Guido W., and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2009. "Recent Developments in the Econometrics of Program
   Evaluation." Journal of Economic Literature 47(1): 5-86.
Jacob, Brian A. 2004. "Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence from Public Housing
   Demolitions in Chicago." American Economic Review 94(1): 233-258.
Jacob, Brian A., Jens Ludwig, and Douglas L. Miller. 2013. "The effects of housing and neighborhood conditions on
   child mortality." Journal of Health Economics 32(1): 195-206.
Jones, Roderick W., and Derek J. Paulsen. 2011. "HOPE VI Resident Displacement: Using HOPE VI Program Goals
   to Evaluate Neighborhood Outcomes." Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research 13(3): 85-102.
Kain, John F. 1968. "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization." Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 82: 32-59.
Kingsley, Thomas G., Jennifer Johnson, and Kathryn Pettit. 2003. "Patterns of Section 8 Relocation in the HOPE VI
   Program." Journal of Urban Affairs 25(4): 427­47.



                                                       35
Lens, Michael. 2014. "Employment Accessibility Among Housing Subsidy Recipients." Housing Policy Debate
    24(4): 671-691.
Lens, Michael, Kirk McClure, and Brent Mast. 2019. "Does Jobs Proximity Matter in the Housing Choice Voucher
    Program?" Cityscape 21(1): 145-162.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Ronald Kessler, Jeffrey Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu.
    2013. "Long-term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families: Evidence from Moving to Opportunity."
    American Economic Review 103(3): 226-231.
McCarty, Maggie. 2005. "HOPE VI: background, funding, and issues. Report No. RL32236, Congressional Research
    Service." The Library of Congress, Washington, DC.
McClure, Kirk. 2018. "Length of Stay in Assisted Housing." Cityscape 20(1): 11-38.
Mills, Gregory, Daniel Gubits, Larry Orr, David Long, Judie Feins, Bulbul Kaul, Michelle Wood, Amy Jones &
    Associates, Cloudburst Consulting, and the QED Group. 2006. The Effects of Housing Vouchers on Welfare
    Families. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development
    and Research.
Murphy, LaShonia. 2012. "The Allocation of Funds with HOPE VI: Applicants and Recipients."
National Commission on Severely Distressed Public Housing (NCSDPH). 1992. The Final Report: A Report to the
    Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Washington D.C. August.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003. "The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 118(4): 1533-1575.
Patterson, Rhiannon, Michelle Wood, Ken Lam, Satyendra Patrabansh, and Gregory Mills. 2004. "Evaluation of the
    Welfare to Work Voucher Program: Report to Congress." Abt Associates Inc. Cambridge, MA.
Popkin, Susan J., Diane K. Levy, Laura E. Harris, Jennifer Comey, Mary K. Cunningham, and Larry F. Buron. 2004.
    "The HOPE VI Program: What about the Residents?" Housing Policy Debate 15: 385-414.
Popkin, Susan J., Diane K. Levy, and Larry F. Buron. 2009. " Has HOPE VI Transformed Residents' Lives? New
    Evidence from the HOPE VI Panel Study". Housing Studies 24(4): 477-502.
Rosenbaum, James E. 1995. "Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding Residential Choice: Lessons
    from the Gautreaux Program." Housing Policy Debate 6(1): 231-269.
Rosenbaum, Paul, and D. Rubin. 1983. "The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Ob servational Studies for Causal
    Effects." Biometrika 70: 41-55.
Rosenbaum, Paul, and D. Rubin. 1984. "Reducing the Bias in Observational Studies Using Subclassification on the
    Propensity Score." Journal of the American Statistical Association 79: 516-524.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS
    USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0.
Sandler, Danielle H. 2017. "Externalities of Public Hou sing: The Effect of Public Housing Demolitions on Local
    Crime." Regional Science and Urban Economics 62: 24-35.
Shen, Qing. 1998. "Location Characteristics of Inner-City Neighborhoods and Employment Accessibility of Low-
    Income Workers," Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 25(3): 345­365.
Smith, Tony E. and Yves Zenou. 2003. "Spatial mismatch, search effort, and urban spatial structure." Journal of
    Urban Economics 54(1): 129-156.
Susin, Scott. 2002. "Rent vouchers and the price of low -income housing." Journal of Public Economics 83(1): 109-
    152.
Turner, Margery Austin, Mark Woolley, G. Thomas Kingsley, Susan J. Popkin, Diane Levy, and Elizabeth Cove.
    2007. "Severely Distressed Public Housing: The Costs of Inaction." Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1997. BLS Handbook of Methods. Office of Publications and Special Studies,
    Washington, DC.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2017. BLS Handbook of Methods. Division of Information Services, Washington,
    DC. Last modified April 14, 2017.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 2007. HOPE VI Program Authority and Funding
    History. https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/DOC_9838. (accessed 19 September 2019).
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO). 2003. Public Housing: HUD's Oversight of HOPE VI Sites Needs to be More
    Consistent. US General Accounting Office.
Vilhuber, Lars. 2018. "LEHD Infrastructure S2014 files in the FSRDC." U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic
    Studies Discussion Papers, CES 18-27r.
Wang, Fahui. 2007. "Job Access in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods in Cleveland, 1980--2000: Implications for Spatial
    Mismatch and Association With Crime Patterns." Cityscape 9(3): 95-121.


                                                        36
7    Figures

               Figure 1: Changes in Project Size Relative to Year of Demolition




    Notes: The figure plots the average DHS growth rate (see Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh 1996) in
    project size between the reference year and x years after the reference year, where x corresponds
    to the value on the horizontal axis. The growth rate in project size between year t (yt ) and year
                             yt -ys
    s (ys ) is defined as: 1 (        . For HOPE VI projects, the reference year is the year of the demoli-
                           2 yt +ys )
    tion, which is defined as the greater of two years prior to the award year and 1997. Averages are
    calculated using the child-year dataset, implying that the averages are weighted by project size.
    Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Depart-
    ment of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.




                                                      37
                           Figure 2: Distribution of Estimated Propensity Score in Matched Sample
                            (A) Large PHAs                                                    (B) Small PHAs




38
     Notes: The figures present the kernel densities of the linearized estimated propensity score for large (panel A) and small (panel B)
     Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) for the matched sample. The estimated propensity score is the predicted value from a logistic
     regression of an indicator for HOPE VI on a vector of observable characteristics. The propensity score is estimated on project-level
     data and the covariates in the model include: average total household income of project residents; natural log of the number of
     occupied units in the project, the proportion of households in the PHA with a majority of income from wages or business income,
     average gross monthly rent in the PHA, and the first and second order terms (interactions terms too) of the proportion of household
     heads in the project that are black non-Hispanic and married. The vertical lines indicate the boundaries of the strata. To pass
     disclosure review requirements, each of the four distributions are Winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. Let     ^ denote the
                                                                                         ^
     estimated propensity score, then the linearzied estimated propensity score is, ln( 1- ^ ).
     Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and Urban
     Development, and Decennial Census files.
                      Figure 3: Effect of HOPE VI on Distance between Project and Residence in 2010
                            (A) Large PHAs                                                     (B) Small PHAs




39
     Notes: Panel A and B present results for large and small PHAs, respectively. The grey series with the circle markers plot the
     proportion of children from control projects for whom the distance between their place of residence in 2010 and the location of their
     project is strictly greater than the number of miles denoted on the horizontal axis (distance is calculated between the centroids of
     the census tracts). We use the stratification with regression estimator to estimate the effect of HOPE VI on living further than a
     given distance. The black series with the diamond markers depicts these results by plotting the control mean plus the estimated
     effect of HOPE VI. The grey lines denote the 95% confidence interval, where standard errors are clustered at the project-level.
     Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and Urban
     Development, and Decennial Census files.
                                        Figure 4: Characteristics of Surrounding Neighborhoods in 1990
            (A) Average Commute Time                                 (B) Poverty Rate                               (C) Population Density




     Notes: Panel A, B and C present the average commute time, poverty rate and log of the population density in the census tracts in 1990, respectively.
     We present characteristics of the neighborhoods surrounding the groups of projects separately by PHA size (large and small) and treatment status




40
     (HOPE VI and control). The bars present the average value of census tract characteristic within that group. The six shaded bars within each group
     summarize this information separately for the census tract in which the project was located as well as surrounding census tracts located within 5
     miles of the project.
     Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
     Decennial Census files.
             Figure 5: Effect of HOPE VI on Surrounding Neighborhoods




Notes: The black line with diamond markers and the grey line with circle markers plot the es-
timated effect of HOPE VI for large and small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), respectively.
Each point corresponds to results from a separate specification estimated via the stratification
with regression methodology. The outcome for the points at the value of zero on the horizontal
axis is the job proximity index (measured in 2010) for the census tract in which the project is
located. The outcome for the remaining points correspond to the average job proximity index for
other census tracts that are within the number of miles denoted on the horizontal axis (exclusive)
and half a mile less than this value (inclusive). All stratum-level regressions are estimated on the
child-year dataset and control for the base year in which the child appears in public housing, the
year in which the child turns 26, and the standard vector of individual- and project- level covari-
ates. Standard errors are clustered at the project level and are 95% confidence interval is depicted
by the dashed light grey lines.
Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.




                                                41
                                                 Figure 6: Characteristics of Census Tracts in 1990
             (A) Average Commute Time                               (B) Poverty Rate                               (C) Population Density




     Notes: Panel A, B and C present kernel density plots of the average commute time, poverty rate and log of the population density in census tracts in
     1990, respectively. Results are presented separately by groups defined by the interaction between PHA size (large and small) and treatment status




42
     (HOPE VI and control). All results are produced from a project-level dataset. To pass disclosure review requirements, each of the distributions
     are Winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles.
     Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
     Decennial Census files.
8      Tables
                        Table 1: Summary Statistics of Baseline Characteristics
                                            HOPE VI             All Non-HOPE VI                           Control
                                               mean          mean       t-stat                 mean        t-stat        
Panel A. Neighborhood
median household income/1,000                   22.0          27.9      -6.68      -0.520       22.9       -0.936     -0.085
                                               [11.1]        [11.5]                            [10.3]
poverty rate                                   0.374         0.247       7.84       0.724       0.346       1.60       0.146
                                               [.206]         [.14]                            [.181]
log(population density)                        0.033         -1.24       11.2       0.703      -0.153       1.43       0.122
                                               [1.42]        [2.13]                            [1.63]

Panel B. Household Head
household income/1,000                          9.00          11.3      -6.93      -0.515       9.65       -1.77      -0.174
                                               [6.63]        [8.63]                            [7.31]
age                                             38.6          39.3      -2.36      -0.167       38.6       -0.096     -0.054
                                               [10.1]        [10.1]                              [10]
female                                         0.904         0.869       2.46       0.409      0.899       0.338       0.044
                                               [.294]        [.338]                            [.301]
married                                        0.078         0.133      -4.52      -0.436      0.081       -0.241     -0.014
                                               [.268]         [.34]                            [.273]
has disability                                 0.113         0.121      -1.64      -0.063      0.111       0.284      -0.003
                                               [.316]        [.326]                            [.314]
number of dependents                            2.76          2.54       4.24       0.454       2.63        2.27       0.273
                                               [1.56]         [1.4]                            [1.46]
white non-Hispanic                             0.064         0.207      -12.0      -0.709      0.079       -1.16      -0.034
                                               [.244]        [.405]                             [.27]
black non-Hispanic                             0.684         0.522       3.67       0.660      0.692       -0.151      0.041
                                               [.465]          [.5]                            [.462]
Hispanic                                       0.161         0.184      -0.575     -0.083      0.152       0.206      -0.056
                                               [.368]        [.387]                            [.359]

Panel C. Children
age                                             13.6          13.6      -2.33      -0.288       13.5       0.300      -0.232
                                               [2.58]        [2.57]                            [2.58]
female                                         0.509         0.507      0.431      -0.137      0.512       -0.631     -0.124
                                                 [.5]          [.5]                              [.5]
has disability                                 0.020         0.027      -2.79      -0.077      0.020       -0.011     -0.020
                                                [.14]        [.161]                             [.14]
    Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the baseline variables listed in the rows. The variables in Panel A, B and
    C are characteristics of: (A) the census tract in which the projects were located measured in 1990, (B) the households or
    head of households and (C) the children. Column 1 presents the mean for the HOPE VI sample. Columns 2-4 (5-7) present
    statistics calculated from a sample that include all non-HOPE VI (control) projects. Columns 2 and 5 present the mean of
    the non-HOPE VI projects. Columns 3 and 6 present the t-statistic from a regression of the baseline variable in the row
    on an indicator for HOPE VI. Standard errors are clustered at the project level. Columns 4 and 7 present the normalized
    difference of the row variable between the HOPE VI and non-HOPE VI observation. Normalized differences are calcualted
    from data collapsed to the project level and are defined as  = (¯ x1 - x¯0 )/( (s2      2
                                                                                       1 + s0 )/2), where x
                                                                                                          ¯d and sd is the sample
    average and variance for HOPE VI (d=1) and non-HOPE VI (d=0) observations, respectively. The standard deviation for
    each sample is presented in brackets below the mean.
    Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and
    Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.




                                                              43
                                   Table 2: Earnings Outcomes
                               qrtrs worked      worked 4 qrtrs      earnings / 1,000      IHS earnings
                                    (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)
Panel A. All PHAs
HOPE VI                          0.057***           0.016***              0.622**             0.142**
                                  (0.021)            (0.006)              (0.282)             (0.056)

control mean                        2.16              0.404                 8.33                6.3
                                   [1.73]            [0.482]                [34]               [4.53]
observations                      258,000            258,000              258,000             258,000

Panel B. Large PHAs
HOPE VI                          0.076***           0.019***              0.529*             0.195***
                                  (0.027)            (0.007)              (0.287)             (0.073)

control mean                        2.14               0.4                  8.44                6.24
                                   [1.73]            [0.481]               [40.5]              [4.55]
observations                      149,000            149,000              149,000             149,000

Panel C. Small PHAs
HOPE VI                            0.022              0.009                0.794               0.045
                                  (0.035)            (0.009)              (0.601)             (0.087)

control mean                         2.2               0.41                 8.12                6.4
                                   [1.72]            [0.483]               [16.4]              [4.48]
observations                      109,000            109,000              109,000             109,000
  Notes: Panels A, B, and C present estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for all,
  large, and small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), respectively. All outcome variables are annual
  labor market outcomes measured in the year in which the child turns 26. In columns 1-4 the outcome
  variables are: the number of quarters worked, an indicator equal to one if the child had positive earnings
  for all four quarters, earnings/1,000 winsorized at the 99th percentile, and the inverse hyperbolic sine
  (IHS) of earnings. All stratum-level regressions control for the base year in which the child appears in
  public housing, the year in which the child turns 26, and the standard vector of individual- and project-
  level covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the project level and are presented in parentheses.
  The mean and standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the outcome for the control group are
  a weighted aggregate of stratum-level statistics, where the weights are proportional to the number of
  treated individuals in a strata.
  Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
  of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
  *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                   44
            Table 3: Heterogeneous Effects by Demographics, for Large PHAs

                                                            IHS of Earnings at Age 26
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
HOPE VI                                         0.189            0.071           -0.194          0.059
                                               (0.119)          (0.085)         (0.236)         (0.085)
HOPE VI×(18-age at demolition)                  0.002
                                               (0.020)
HOPE VI×male                                                   0.254**
                                                               (0.122)
HOPE VI×black                                                                   0.425*
                                                                                (0.252)
HOPE VI×Hispanic                                                                 0.422
                                                                                (0.326)
HOPE VI×other                                                                    0.354
                                                                                (0.295)
HOPE VI×male×non-white                                                                          0.287**
                                                                                                (0.126)

observations                                   149,000         149,000          149,000         149,000
  Notes: The table presents estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large Public
  Housing Authorities (PHAs) only. The outcome variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of annual
  earnings measured in the year the child turns 26. Each column presents results from a seperate regression
  in which the inidcator for HOPE VI is interacted with a different individual-level variable. Note that
  there are four mutually exclusive race/ethnicity categories, including: white (non-Hispanic), black (non-
  Hispanic), Hispanic, and other non-Hispanic. All stratum-level regressions control for the base year in
  which the child appears in public housing, the year in which the child turns 26 and the standard vector
  of individual- and project-level covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the project-level and are
  presented in parentheses.
  Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
  of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
  *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                   45
                          Table 4: Household Head Housing Outcomes
                                               Housing Type                               Moved to New
                          same project    voucher    other public    non-subsidized    county        tract
                              (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)            (5)          (6)
Panel A. Large PHAs
A1. 1 year after
HOPE VI                    -0.115***     0.014***        0.023*        0.077***
                            (0.028)       (0.005)        (0.013)        (0.024)
control mean                 0.754         0.026          0.035          0.185
A2. 3 years after
HOPE VI                    -0.135***     0.085***        0.062***        -0.011        -0.018**    0.085***
                            (0.024)       (0.017)         (0.015)       (0.015)         (0.008)     (0.033)
control mean                 0.479         0.073           0.068         0.379           0.100       0.535
A3. 5 years after
HOPE VI                    -0.150***     0.098***        0.059***        -0.007       -0.029***    0.130***
                            (0.027)       (0.019)         (0.018)       (0.018)        (0.010)      (0.028)
control mean                 0.332         0.099           0.084         0.485          0.142        0.646

observations                 87,000       87,000          87,000        87,000         87,000       87,000

Panel B. Small PHAs
B1. 1 year after
HOPE VI                      -0.019      0.016***        0.017**         -0.014
                            (0.022)       (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.020)
control mean                 0.697         0.027          0.027           0.248
B2. 3 years after
HOPE VI                    -0.207***     0.092***        0.106***        0.009          0.016      0.125***
                            (0.023)       (0.018)         (0.021)       (0.019)        (0.011)      (0.030)
control mean                 0.416         0.071           0.056         0.458          0.134        0.523
B2. 5 years after
HOPE VI                    -0.184***     0.107***        0.090***        -0.013         0.021      0.172***
                            (0.017)       (0.018)         (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.014)      (0.025)
control mean                 0.283         0.101           0.067         0.549          0.171        0.621

observations                 66,000       66,000          66,000        66,000         66,000       66,000

 Notes: Panels A and B present estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large and
 small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), respectively. Outcomes are measured: one year after the
 refernce year in panels A1 and B1, three years after the reference year in panels A2 and B2, and five
 years after the reference year in panels A3 and B3. The outcomes in columns 1-4 are indicator variables
 with a value equal to one if the head of household appears in the same project, other public housing,
 voucher housing, or other housing after the reference year (categories are mutually exclusive). In columns
 5-7 the outcomes are indicators equal to one if the head of household moved to a new state, county,
 and census tract, respectively. Each stratum-level regression contains a fixed effect for the base year in
 which the household appears in public housing as well as the standard set of project- and individual-
 level covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the project-level and are presented in parentheses. The
 mean and standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the outcome for the control group are a weighted
 aggregate of strata-level statistics, where the weights are proportional to the number of treated individuals
 in a strata.
 Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
 of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
 *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                    46
                      Table 5: Household Head Neighborhood Outcomes
                                   school proficiency          poverty rate           share white
                                         index                                       non-Hispanic
                                          (1)                       (2)                   (3)
Panel A. Large PHAs
HOPE VI                                   0.084                    -0.017                0.022
                                         (1.660)                  (0.012)               (0.017)

control mean                              23.900                   0.416                  0.192
                                         [16.900]                 [0.181]                [0.235]
observations                              87,000                  87,000                 87,000

Panel B. Small PHAs
HOPE VI                                   -0.497                   -0.012                0.020
                                         (2.130)                  (0.011)               (0.022)

control mean                              30.500                   0.289                  0.367
                                         [20.200]                 [0.116]                [0.303]
observations                              66,000                  66,000                 66,000
  Notes: Panels A and B present estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large and
  small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), respectively. All outcomes are an average characteristic of
  the census tracts in which the head of household resided in 1-5 years after the reference year. The
  characteristic in column 1 is the school proficiency index, which measures of the quality of the public
  schools in that area. In columns 2 and 3 the characteristics are the share of residents who are below
  the poverty line and white non-Hispanic, respectively. Each stratum-level regression contains a fixed
  effect for the base year in which the household appears in public housing as well as the standard set
  of project- and individual-level covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the project-level and are
  presented in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the outcome for
  the control group are a weighted aggregate of strata-level statistics, where the weights are proportional
  to the number of treated individuals in a strata.
  Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
  of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
  *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                    47
                         Table 6: Household Head Earnings Outcomes

                                          5 Years After                        10 Years After
                                 qrtrs worked       IHS earnings       qrtrs worked       IHS earnings
                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)
Panel A. Large PHAs
HOPE VI                              -0.001              -0.065            -0.043             -0.134
                                    (0.036)             (0.092)           (0.032)            (0.082)

control mean                         1.960               5.650             1.700               4.840
                                    [1.810]             [4.800]           [1.840]             [4.950]
observations                        87,000              87,000            87,000              87,000

Panel B. Small PHAs
HOPE VI                              -0.005              0.011             0.001              0.004
                                    (0.039)             (0.099)           (0.041)            (0.109)

control mean                         2.070               5.880             1.790               5.050
                                    [1.810]             [4.750]           [1.860]             [4.940]
observations                        66,000              66,000            66,000              66,000
  Notes: Panels A and B present estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large and
  small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs), respectively. All outcomes are annual labor market outcomes
  of the head of household measured 5 and 10 years after the reference year for columns 1-2 and 3-4,
  respectively. In odd and even numbered columns the outcome variables are the number of quarters
  worked and the inverse hyperbolic since of annual earnings, respectively. Each stratum-level regression
  contains a fixed effect for the base year in which the household appears in public housing as well as the
  standard vector of project- and individual-level covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the project-
  level and are presented in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the
  outcome for the control group are a weighted aggregate of strata-level statistics, where the weights are
  proportional to the number of treated individuals in a strata.
  Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
  of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
  *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                   48
                                                          Table 7: Neighborhood Outcomes

                                                                       social isolation                                               jobs proximity
                                       poverty       employment             index            log(jobs/pop)       avg. commute              index
                                         (1)             (2)                 (3)                   (4)                 (5)                  (6)
     Panel A. Large PHAs
     HOPE VI                            0.003          -0.011**             -0.013              0.019**             -0.883**              2.110**
                                       (0.007)          (0.006)             (0.03)              (0.009)              (0.388)              (0.859)

     control mean                       0.296            0.516                1.03               0.285                  27                  48.1
     control sd                        [0.179]          [0.122]             [0.951]             [0.347]               [6.51]               [21.2]
     observations                      149,000          149,000             149,000             149,000              149,000              149,000

     Panel B. Small PHAs
     HOPE VI                          -0.021***        0.017***              -0.108                0.01               0.424               -1.180*




49
                                       (0.007)          (0.006)             (0.084)              (0.011)             (0.351)              (0.703)

     control mean                       0.273            0.509                 1.7               0.318                  24                  51.7
     control sd                        [0.148]          [0.112]              [1.35]             [0.317]               [5.55]               [20.2]
     observations                      109,000          109,000             109,000             109,000              109,000              109,000
       Notes: Panels A and B present estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large and small Public Housing Authorities (PHAs),
       respectively. All outcomes are characteristics of the census tracts in which children resided in 2010. In columns 1-7 the outcome variable is:
       poverty rate, employment rate, social isolation index, log of the ratio of jobs to people, average commute time in minutes and the jobs proximity
       index created by HUD. All stratum-level regressions control for the base year in which the child appears in public housing, the year in which the
       child turns 26, and the standard vector of individual- and project-level characteristics Standard errors are clustered at the project level and are
       presented in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the outcome for the control group are a weighted aggregate
       of stratum-level statistics, where the weights are proportional to the number of treated individuals in a strata.
       Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
       Decennial Census files.
       *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.
             Table 8: Heterogeneous Effects by Neighborhood, for Large PHAs

                                                               IHS of Earnings at Age 26
                                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)
HOPE VI                                             0.180**            0.189***            0.233***
                                                     (0.072)            (0.065)             (0.071)
log population density                              -0.110**
                                                     (0.052)
HOPE VI × log population density                    0.192**
                                                     (0.082)
average commute time                                                     0.080
                                                                        (0.079)
HOPE VI × average commute time                                          0.146**
                                                                        (0.073)
poverty rate                                                                                 -0.011
                                                                                            (0.079)
HOPE VI × poverty rate                                                                      0.132**
                                                                                            (0.065)

observations                                        149,000             149,000             149,000
  Notes: The table presents estimates from the stratification with regression estimator for large Public
  Housing Authorities (PHAs) only. The outcome variable in all specifications is the inverse hyperbolic
  sine (IHS) of annual earnings measured at age 26. Columns 1-3 presents esitmates from models in which
  the indicator for HOPE VI is interacted with a characteristic of the census tract in which the project
  is located measured in 1990. For columns 1-3 these characteristics include the log of the popoulation
  density, the average commute time in minutes and the poverty rate, all three of which are normalized
  by substracting by the mean of the control group and dividing by the standard deviation of the control
  group. All stratum-level regressions control for the base year in which the child appears in public housing,
  the year in which the child turns 26, and the standard vector of individual- and project-level covariates.
  Standard errors are clustered at the project-level and are presented in parentheses. The mean and
  standard deviation, presented in brackets, of the outcome for the control group are a weighted aggregate
  of stratum-level statistics, where the weights are proportional to the number of treated individuals in a
  strata.
  Source: Authors' calculations from matched Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, Department
  of Housing and Urban Development, and Decennial Census files.
  *** p0.01, ** p0.05, * p0.10.




                                                    50
